Want to be held accountable by the community or just brag about/celebrate your writing progress over the last week? If so, you're welcome to respond to this weekly writing check-in thread. Feel free to tell us what you accomplished this week, or set goals about what you hope to accomplish before next Wednesday!

**So, who met their goals? Who found themselves tackling something totally unexpected? Who accomplished something (even something small)? What goals have you set for yourself, this week?**

_______________________________________________________________________________

*Note:* **This check-in is open for you to promote your work!** If you have a book/story/blog serial etc. that you want to share, this is the place to do so. You may include links, but be sure to write a few words as well!Do you want to talk with the r/FantasyWriters community about an off-topic subject for the subreddit? If so, welcome to the weekly Open Thread! Here you may open discussions or ask questions unrelated to fantasy writing. Most topics lacking a home elsewhere on the subreddit can find one here. 

Subjects must be kept safe-for-work. Comments will be held to the standard of conduct we enforce elsewhere on the subreddit, those key tenets being:

1. Be respectful.
2. Don’t be rude or hostile.
3. Don’t copy or plagiarize.

It's possible that our automated bots *may* take down comments with links in the thread if they are unauthorized for the rest of the subreddit. Moderation will fix those instances if we see them occur.

This post will stay pinned as a top post until a new Open Thread post replaces it next Monday. Enjoy!So I had the idea of a city that is the travel/trade/cultural hub of the world. The small continent is placed in the center-ish of three larger continents. It's kind of a city of sin where assassinations and thievery are very common. In the story, there is a race of magical beings (they were created to kill magical beasts, it's a long story) that are persecuted, but this city protects them somewhat indirectly. I love this idea and the story I'm writing is super fun. 

But then I read the book Six of Crows. The city is pretty much the same concept. A continent in the middle of larger ones that are used as a pitstop and indirectly protects a type of person that is persecuted. Don't get me wrong, it is easily one of my favorite series, but I'm devastated that someone has already had (and published) the same idea for a city. 

Honestly, I think that the story and other concepts are different enough that they'll pass, but the city is another story. I need this kind of city for the story though. This is the first story in a long time that I genuinely love and want to finish, but our ideas for a cultural/trade hub are the same. I'm so conflicted.I’ve got a high fantasy story written in modern times, only that gunpowder was never invented. So there’s urbanization, skylines, a little steampunk, but there aren’t any advances directly or indirectly from warfare, so everyone still carries a sword and no medicine beyond first aid(except for the mages). 

This confuses people though, because of course you’ve got a modern city, and one random steam-powered car, but the police are carrying swords and crossbows. Is there a name for this sub genre? Is it too confusing in general?

This world isn’t Earth; the characters are humanoid but not human. These are cloud people, made of magic and cloud, who live and have an active, modern-era society on the clouds. All they have are the three phases of water and some magic. They do not eat or get sick(the same way a human does). Nothing they have developed, magic or otherwise, can cause controlled explosions, so no gunpowder in any way.I was thinking about this earlier and became so curious if anyone else focuses on this in their world and/or lore building. 

Do you have a special word/phrase for the concept of a birthday? Like “name day”, “arrival day” or “survival anniversary”, for example. 

Does your world have a system like astrology where the conditions of the time, place, season, etc. have an effect on your characters names, personalities, or abilities? Like a character is hotheaded, passionate, or violent because they were born during the hottest day of the year or your characters have certain powers or talents because of things like that? 

Are there special birth signs or omens that give the family clues about the unborn child? How do they manifest? Say a woman gets pregnant by a vampire but doesn’t know it yet, maybe she would have significant diet changes or to adhere to vampire entry rules due to carrying one. Or maybe a child’s birth mark gives an indication of their powers?I am planning and plotting an epic fantasy series set in 1700s inspired India (I mean a fantasy world where the bulk of the novels take place in a country inspired by India in 1700s or 1800s). This time and setting has never been explored. It is exciting.

But, am I risking losing reader. Most of the readers are non indians as fantasy genre is not big in India (Ik coz Im an Indian).

To tackle this, I am thinking of mixing elements of europeans cultures to this society. Like the dressing or carriages. just to have something to hook onto,

Is it needed or should I trust my readers to enjoy the new setting?  

&#x200B;

PS: Later in the series, the story would also include Victorian Ambiance. so, its not all asian setting.So this is the query letter I plan on getting critiqued at least once more before sending it out. I plan on pitching the book as Dark Fantasy/Dark Romance, but it's most definitely inspired by history. I know YA fantasy is pretty saturated right now, but are agents still wanting Adult Fantasy with heavy romance? Also if there's enemies-to-lovers romance plot, should I add that to the pitch or leave as is? Thank you guys so much! :D

\[Dear Agent\]

Siarlan Rhodanthe’s life began the same way it would end—on a battlefield. But before he was the last king of Caetland’s bloodiest dynasty, he was the boy with the twisted back.

Born and raised while on campaign, Siarlan is taught that the true measure of a man is his loyalty to his cause. And there is no one Siarlan is more loyal to than his brother, Hallen. Even when Hallen callously hews the rival branch of the Rhodanthe family in order to win the crown. But Siarlan knows the only true mistake of that night was leaving one royal alive—The Dowager Queen.

Now leagues away from her homeland, Queen Aelith dreams of the day she may return to seat her son on the throne. But with few allies and fewer friends, she must cultivate a sphere of influence all her own and slowly gather support for her cause. Even if that means going against her own son’s wishes.

Scarletta of Leucothoe is the force that finally drives a wedge between the Rhodanthe brothers, though. As the not-so-noble heiress courts the kingdom with her wealth and beauty, she learns that her place at King Hallen’s side is not as secure as she once thought. Scarletta must now plot against the king’s dark brother, Siarlan Rhodanthe, to maintain her chance at queenhood.

THE THORN KING’S BRIDE is a \[110k\] medieval romantic-fantasy told through three POVs and heavily inspired by the life of England’s most maligned monarch, King Richard III. The dark romance and emphasis on gender in medieval politics would appeal to fans of Matrix by Lauren Groff and The Shadows Between Us by Tricia Levenseller.

(Query Word count: 274)Below is a detailed summary of the entire plot of my first novel. It's a book about a Magic School, maybe a little YA, been in general more lighthearted. It's written with the intention of being heavily inspired by my experience playing magical school rpgs.

Words in italics have an explanatory glossary after the plot summary.

&#x200B;

Maxwell Falcke is a fifteen-year-old arcanist who works as an arcanist specialist for Margot, his adoptive mother and one of Gantrick's five crime bosses. With a sharp tongue and great magical potential, his dream has always been to study at the Lunestier Institute of Arcana in hopes of becoming an Archmage.

&#x200B;

One day his mother approaches him and says she has an important job for him, a job that, to his satisfaction, involves having to enroll in Lunestier and eventually become part of the group known as the *Triad*. To aid him in this task, she presents him with a black wooden wand, containing the magical power and consciousness of an entity who introduces himself as *Kadabra*, an ancient and great mage who was sealed away many centuries ago and seeks his release.

&#x200B;

Maxwell is then placed in the care of Agnes, a mage and Margot's associate who will be the boy's cover mother during his time at school. Days later, he submits himself to the registration tests, demonstrating deep arcane knowledge in the theory exam, while in the practical exam he stands out thanks to his wand that works not only as a  atalyzer , but as an amplifier, which really catches Sebastian's (Vice-Rector of the Institute) attention. A few weeks later, the first day of school arrives, with Maxwell being taken to Arcanist Square with the rest of the students before the opening of the *elevator* that takes them to Lunestier. In between Maxwell, being alone and not dressed in fancy clothes, becomes the target of a bully by a couple of older aristocratic boys, but he is protected by Ethan who uses magic and the fact that he is the son of a professor to intimidate them. Thus begins the friendship between Ethan and Max, with the pair heading to the school and sitting together at the school year ceremony.

&#x200B;

After the ceremony and lunch, the students are released for the day of fraternization. Walking through the school grounds among the various tents of clubs, sports teams and everything else Maxwell is almost hit by a spell cast by Nicole as the girl tries to catch her pet *pseudo-dragon*. She promptly apologizes to the boys and joins them on the way to the dorms, where they encounter several freshmen, most notably Theresa, the archetypal protagonist, being talented, friendly, adamantly adhering to the rules and with noble desires to be a great mage and helping people, though this has caused her to become arrogant in a way, believing that she is some sort of chosen one destined to be everyone's hero. Eventually, as Maxwell begins to surpass her in almost every way and begins to attract attention to himself, she undergoes a slow transformation, first becoming incredulous and then bitter and spiteful.

&#x200B;

Max and Ethan become roommates and, in the following chapters, we follow the first few weeks of class as a regular school year, with the boys getting used to academic life, becoming more intimate with their peers, getting to know the teachers, and learning more about arcana, with Maxwell putting extra effort into hiding his origins in the criminal world, as well as forming a closer relationship with Kadabra who uses various stories and lies to get close to and manipulate the boy into pursuing the mission with great impetuosity.

&#x200B;

During this time, the group begins to hear some rumors that will serve as a forshadowing for the plot of the next books, especially the theft of material from the school's workshops, which will be an important part of the following year's events. After almost half a year, the tests for the student guilds begin, with Max, Ethan and Nicole showing their talents and teamwork, receiving offers from several groups, but choosing to go together to the Phoenix Guild, where they are introduced to Professor Alexander and his peculiar way of teaching.

&#x200B;

Toward the end of the school year, during the Gantrick Summer Festival, Maxwell breaks away from his friends and tries to take advantage of the time outside of school to visit Margot, something she discouraged earlier in the year. He is followed by Theresa who confronts him saying she suspects the boy has been cheating at school, with this visit to the city's underworld only confirming that. Max tries to explain himself, but the discussion is interrupted when they are attacked by a mysterious *swordsman*, being forced to fight together to survive and be able to escape, causing great destruction in the streets and drawing the attention of the local authorities who take them back to Lunestier.

&#x200B;

In Lunestier, Vice Rector Sebastian questions the reasons for being in that part of the city and says he doesn't believe the report that they were attacked, stating that it was nothing more than an excuse created to cover up an illegal duel that got out of control and caused great damage to the property and even even injured civilians, declaring that both will be expelled in disgrace if neither takes the blame. Mathilde and Alexander intervene, arguing that if neither takes the blame, it is possible to face each other in an *arcane duel*, with the loser being found guilty and the winner innocent. Theresa readily accepts the opportunity, glad not only to defeat Maxwell but to expel him from the school, as she still believes she is a hero and he is a villain, while the boy is reluctantly forced to agree, unwilling to abandon his dream and fail the mission.

&#x200B;

Both are given three days to prepare, with Maxwell becoming extremely nervous and consulting with Kadabra who stresses the importance of staying in Lunestier, stating that he will never be able to fulfill his dream if he is expelled, and will fail Margot. Desperate the boy begs for help, with the entity offering some spells that, while risky to use, will surely bring victory. On the big day the rivals face off in a violent duel, where Maxwell uses two of the three spells passed on by Kadabra, seriously injuring Theresa, leaving her on the ground bleeding, crawling and still wanting to fight. Shocked by what he did, he gives up the fight, surrendering and fleeing the arena.

&#x200B;

In his room he has a nervous breakdown, thinking that something is wrong with him. However, this moment is interrupted by unexpected knocks on the door, being a visit from Rector Erastos who reveals that he was impressed by the boy's show of mercy, but wonders why. Maxwell explains everything that happened, that Theresa was not to blame for the attack during the Festival, and that it wouldn't be fair for her to be expelled for simply being in the wrong place at the wrong time. The Dean then says he believes the boy at his word and that he will not be expelled.

&#x200B;

The book ends with the end of the first school year: Max, Ethan and Nicole say goodbye as the summer vacations begin. Maxwell goes to Agnes' house to stay under her protection while Margot waits for the dust to settle, Theresa swears revenge for being humiliated and injured in such a way, and Sebastian is revealed to be one of the leaders of the Order of the Black Flame.

&#x200B;

**Glossary**

**— Triad:** name given to the group of three students placed under the personal tutelage of the Rector of the Lunestier Institute between their sixth and tenth year of studies at the Academy. To become a member of the Triad, there are several requirements that are almost impossible to fulfill, although what makes the position important and so desired is that after graduation, its members will become the new Heralds of Magic, representatives of the Mage Kings. 

**— Kadabra:** was the first and only apprentice of the Three Wise Men who eventually became the first warlock in history until eventually being sealed away by his former teachers. Worshiped by witches and warlocks as a deity, his main objective is to gain access to the Grimoire of the Wise Man that contains the spell necessary for his release. Such a tome can only be freely accessed by the Supreme Mage, though Heralds of Magic have limited access to it and Triad members are close enough to get their hands on.

**— Why was Maxwell chosen for the mission?** Because Margot is a member of the Zalmoxico Circle (a cabal of witchs and warlocks extremely loyal to Kadabra) and because he is the only arcanist under "power" of the group who isn't an initiated warlock or witch (who would easily be discovered and expelled from Lunestier), but he has the right age to begin his studies in 1350, the exact year in which the tests for the triad will begin, something that occurs only every five hundred and ninety-five years.

**— What's a wand for?** Wands are items of a magical nature that serve as both a tool and a status symbol. Functionally they act as an external filter for mana, helping the arcanist to channel the different types of mana in his body; while in the social sphere they serve as a mark to identify arcanists in training, being a rule that they are only allowed to use magic if through their wand. At the graduation ceremony, students break their wands, both as a symbol of liberation from this "binding" and the fact that after reaching maturity at age 23, the body is perfectly capable of channeling and purifying mana, rendering wands functionally useless. .

**— Elevator:** Lunestier is located on a flying island that floats about two kilometers above the city. Because of this, the only way to access it is by flying or by means of a special elevator that descends daily at Praça dos Arcanistas.

**— Pseudodragon:** A very popular pet among arcanists. Created in the lab from altering lizards, these creatures are virtually identical to a real dragon, albeit without the powers at all, with the smallest being the size of a cat and the largest having proportions close to that of oxen. Nicole's pseudo-dragon is important to the story because it has wings, allowing the group to enter and exit the Academy without relying on the elevator, so they can sneak to Gantrick and back.

**— Who is the swordsman?** The swordsman is an enforcer for the Order of the Black Flame, an extremist order of witch hunters that is currently after the Zalmoxico Circle and has tracked them down to the pawnshop that serves as the main front for Margot's business. However, knowing that this could happen, she changed her location many months before, telling Maxwell not to go back there, as she predicted some member of the Order could stay ambush, watching the place for any clues to the wizards' whereabouts.

**— Arcane Dueling:** A method of conflict resolution used by arcanists when guilt or responsibility for an occurrence is uncertain or subjective. It can only be performed in the presence of at least two other mages who serve as witnesses, or an arcane judge who attests to the validity of the confrontation. It is important to note that arcane duels can only be used within the context of arcane laws, not being valid in common justice.I am planning on writing a story in set in a world where people have superpowers, however, I am not sure whether to set it in the real world or not. I really do want to set it in the real world, but I don’t know if that would ruin the idea of a world with super powers! And if I do set it in the real world, which place here? If you want to know more about the plot, please ask! Thank in advance!What kind of impressions does this "prologue" (not sure if I want it to be a prologue yet) give? Is it clear this is a origin mythos (I want this to lay the religious and spiritual foundation for the people of the story). What kind of questions does it leave your with? What do you think of the style and tone? Thanks for any feedback. Happy to look over anything with similar word count as well.

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QGO1e8XH3oRouayogdLXXTYSG8xh8UQCk2AoAVqArFE/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QGO1e8XH3oRouayogdLXXTYSG8xh8UQCk2AoAVqArFE/edit?usp=sharing) 

Hello everyone,

I have finished my 4th rewrite and I am looking for some beta readers. The Price of Dreams is a dark fantasy centered around choice and consequence, love and hatred, friendship and loneliness. It contains some heavy subjects too so be warned about that. The story is adult-centered and focused on growth, thus it is heavily character-driven. Should you choose to check it out, you'll be pulled into Aethela, one of the richest cities in the world. It is a city of opportunity where choices bring fortune and blood equally. You'll follow three different points of view as you figure out why everything is happening.

While it is the fourth time, I'm rewriting the story, it has not yet passed through an editor so there will certainly be some grammar issues here and there, it's inevitable. The book is 77k words (366 pages) For any further information, comment or msg me directly.

Thank you for your time.I need criticism on my theme basically in the world I'm building there are 10 empires, 10 kingdoms and 6 free cities, in addition to several non-human races and several gods and religions.  The important part is all gods are "tribal" humans worship "human" gods and orcs "orc" gods for example, a great war breaks out and in the midst of war a forbidden land is violated releasing the ancient gods of that world that they are of no race but super powerful natural entities that were trapped by the new gods and begin to massacre the mortal source of the new gods' power.

I intend to place throughout the story several heroes of different races and two special heroes a hero who is not of any race of that world and an even younger god who became a god through his conviction and does not give faith of his tribe (in the case he's nicknamed the mad god and is a dragon), but the story's focus is not on saving the world or stopping the old gods but war and its aftermath.

the races are humans, orcs, elves, goblins, dwarves, gnomes, giants, trolls, merfolk, mermaids, birdfolk (aven), arachnes, dragons, beastfolk (various subtribes), fairies, angels, demons, devils, and shapeshifters each one with territories where they are more common and cultures. a  13 year old  girl name Eile James who lost her mother though suicide when she was 9 year old and is still trying to process it. Then one day when she was on a school trip with her best friend Jermany. A magic portal suck him up. A magic blast of lightning hit her in the forehead and the blast was so strong it took  down the town electricity. When she wake up from the hospital she found out that no one remembers Jermany and werid things start to happen in the town that she only see. The town and her dad think she is  crazy expect the town creepiest women, Hecate.The less you tell me about your magic system the better. I want to know practical consequences for the world of it.   

My 2 Examples:   
In my setting some Nobles=Magic users. Can extract information from Commoners=No magic users. They can do it quickly and reliably. Because of this the more powerful the noble is, the less he want Commoners servant to be around him. Since even the most devoted and loyal Commoner servant would spill the beans in less then 5 minutes.  
Fast forward couple centuries, and nobility isolated themself from common people. Only the lower nobility even have servants from Common folk. Tradesmen and Merchant are summon for a task, and leave as quickly as possible.  
This create very dysfunctional situation. Since commoners are order around, never explain the reasons, or goals they master wish to archive. AND they are blame for all the failings.  

Second is fact, that Nobility creates buildings with magic. Temples, Fortresses, Mansions, City walls. This means that stone-masonry and general architecture is very behind in comparison with everything else. Since when creating something with magic, Nobles have to just pay lip service to Physics. 

The story starts with a raven flying over the city and descends onto a pier where two figures cloaked are casting a ritual. A monster starts to appear when they tell the creature to eat in the city. 

The story jumps to Milo is helping in the homeless shelter sees a flash of King Arthur walking across the street. That night he starts having dreams again of famous legends, heroes fighting demons in the courtyard and wakes up but when he goes back to sleep it happens all again. He thinks he must be dreaming or stress so he visits a therapist, Harry, who has seen him for years, and Harry tells him that he is crazy and just to go back to normal. On the way out of the therapist's office, he encounters Arthur fighting a demon just like his dreams. The therapist who walked out in the middle of the fight, Milo tackles him to try to rescue him.  The therapist rolls him off engages in the magical fight. Once the battle finishes, Arthur and Harry start talking like friends and Milo tries to run off,  but Harry catches him and takes him back to his office to explain everything. Harry then reveals himself to be Harry Houdini and that there is a magical war taking place around the world, and that Milo is the next guardian of the magic. Milo starts doubting what is asked of him, so he refuses and goes home. He is met with a raven for the next 2 mornings. 

After talking to Harry, he goes back to the office and finds that Harry is dead and clues are lying around his office. Milo picks up a medal around the therapist's neck and once he touches it, the room starts lighting up with arcane energy.  From this moment he knows that he can not go back to the way it was. The animal appears the next morning but leads Milo to meet with Arthur, who takes him to a "training facility" and starts training him. He explains that imagination, heart, and hard work are what make magic appear and work. His first test is in the form of making a sword and shield appear out of thin air with arcana magic. After learning a little, Milo is confronted with his first attack by magical creatures and is nearly hurt badly before allies, in the form of Achilles and  Mr. Hyde step in. After the trials, Milo meets with the All-Father (Odin) the therapist reported. That is when he was given his first magical item. After this meeting, he is immediately tempted by Dr. Jekyll saying that the Sons of Ragnarok have all the real information and power. Not realizing that Arthur is watching and listening to all of this, Milo turns around and is confronted by him for his betrayal. At this moment, Milo is confronted with the full story of what is going on in the magical world.  

Milo is then tasked with the mission to find the general of a stronghold in the town of the Sons of Ragnarok and stop him.  Once they assault the hideout, they uncover a lead to the missing piece of the prophecy, which is the lost brother of Milo named Matt. The team rescues the magically entombed brother, but once the brother is out, the team realizes that he is put under a curse and fights Milo. After the curse is broken, the brother starts training on how to combine their different forms of magical energy into a parallel magic attack. While training, the hideout is ambushed by Sons of Ragnarok members in retaliation for the death of Javert. Milo notices Dr. Jekyll who had been there during the training session, flees when the Sons attack. The team decides to flee the training facility and go on the run, staying in two different safe houses. The brother decides that they are wasting time and want to take on the real mission of stopping the end of the world. They visit Odin who is being held by Deodessus and demonic forces. After a brief battle, Milo and Matt can hold Deodessus to the ground and interrogate him about what the final plan is. 

The shadow organization sends demons after Milo while he is recovering from the final mission. He fights the demons but realizes that he is greatly overwhelmed with all the demons. Arthur comes out of nowhere to vanish them back to the courtyard where it all started, safe from the oncoming attack. The next day the brothers are walking out to  Niagara Falls when Matt reveals that he is Loki and he is the rightful heir of Asgard. Loki/Matt stabs Milo and kicks him off the falls and he disappears through the mist. 

Epilogue: 

A young man wrapped in cloaks in walking by the shore of the Falls and see a body wash up and runs over to it. He starts poking the body and there is no movement. He reaches down and shakes the body and the eyes flicker open. Book ends.This might be a complicated question, (it for sure is), but I want to improve my understanding on the subject.

Over the years I saved a lot of character art for inspiration, and as it grew it was easier to organize it based on a character’s hair color. 

So arbitrarily, I decided to use that as the sort of “defining” cultural feature of each group.

For some context, the story began as a Dungeons and Dragons game and I’ve since started writing a novel in that setting. It is a low fantasy world  with only human races. Furthermore I read the book guns germs and steel by Jared diamond to try and build the world alongside their proposal of how our world got to where it is today. 

Since reading that book and the years of world building I’ve done since then, I’ve discover Jared diamond’s book is polarizing and not always well received. 

That’s not really what I want to discuss, but the context is perhaps important.

Essentially, my plight is this:

I’ve created a world approaching an age of global travel, so multiple cultures and communities are still in large part “isolated”. Per cultural region there isn’t a lot of global diversity, and based on the arbitrary decision to have people of X culture have red hair, that’s all I’m introducing for large swaths of the story- because that’s the region the characters are in.

How do I / should I expand the diversity of each cultural group while maintaining the integrity of the world’s history?

Thanks in advance. Hi guys, it's a bit of a long read but I will really appreciate those who find the time. Just as a heads up, I went for a slow start (I know some people wouldn’t like that) so this first chapter wouldn't reveal much of the story, but there's some foreshadowing (some more subtle than others).

The aim of the chapter is to introduce Marcella and Camilla and hopefully make the reader like them or at least find them entertaining. It also tries to introduce the bright and fairytale-like world which will then contrast with the nature of people who live in it. I still tried to drop some hints of the darker story to come. And before this chapter there’s a brief prologue with a much darker theme which should suggest to the reader that the bubbly nature of the story is short lived (didn't include that since the word count is too much already).

To clarify, this is aimed at adults, the overall story is somewhat grimdark but this is a rosy start.

Previously I got some excellent and really useful feedback on this sub, so I'm really excited to hear what you guys think.

Feel free to comment on whatever specific part of the chapter you want or share your overall impression. Positive or negative, it doesn't matter. I’m hoping to improve so all feedback is helpful.

Thanks to all who find the time to read this and I hope you enjoy it.

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TA6t8x\_NcROIrKSiYthP20t20wv1j6NJvLM3jjMX6QY/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TA6t8x_NcROIrKSiYthP20t20wv1j6NJvLM3jjMX6QY/edit?usp=sharing)I don’t have a good name for it yet, but a quick run down is that it involves the use of ground rubble and organic matter to grant inanimate objects life. 

Take something like dry wall or driftwood, grind it into a fine powder, cake your hands with it, and use a concentrated exhale to breathe your life into something. The nature of the resulting “automata” depends on the ingredient you used. (calling them that for the time being because I can’t come up with a cooler name) 

Powder made from the rubble of buildings and other artificial creations result in efficient and single-minded automata. Powder made from trees create automata that are cheerful brimming with energy. 

The added use of saliva and other body fluids in these rituals can create particularly advanced automata, but it’s very risky because the they will adopt the temperament of their donor.

I don’t know where to go from here. My first idea was that the magic isn’t used to attack directly at all, but rather the magician commands their band of automata to attack adversaries. 

However the world I’ve built thus far is multi-dimensional, and uses portals to cross into separate realms. The magic system I have right now doesn’t properly explain the existence of those. 

I’m thinking of either removing the portal idea altogether or coming up with a second magic system that involves spatial manipulation or something. My worry is that if I go down that route, I’ll just be adding new shit for the sake of plot convenience.I'm looking for some feedback on my Chapter 1. Over a month ago I posted the first scene, and since then I've finished editing my first chapter. 

Just a heads up, the style may not be to everyone's taste. It's present tense and mostly in 3rd Objective POV, except a passage near the end when it dips into 3rd Subjective. The distant detached narration is very much by design to create atmosphere and also avoid info-dumping and navel-gazing. 

I'm trying to use environmental storytelling for exposition. The inciting incident happens right next page, so I only have this chapter to establish the status quo before the story takes an unexpected turn.

TW: self-harm

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/16rsdyf-cr2I2pTm2zhoF-vBgqPAxoJYO-mTVcLq8IJs/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16rsdyf-cr2I2pTm2zhoF-vBgqPAxoJYO-mTVcLq8IJs/edit?usp=sharing)

For those who may be interested, here are some sketches of characters that appear in this chapter.

[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Mfwv01glrnyPPC-xWfKhzsLx9JEBO2pO?usp=sharing](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Mfwv01glrnyPPC-xWfKhzsLx9JEBO2pO?usp=sharing)I've been fleshing out and working on a novel for a while. what I've written so far are these first two pages.

what do you think? how are my prose? what should I change?

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/18Ieki4WmKey1wGpxkGJCM1Wi0HQwqQyQAKA4Pacda84/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18Ieki4WmKey1wGpxkGJCM1Wi0HQwqQyQAKA4Pacda84/edit?usp=sharing)As an avid reader of not only fantasy books, but also manga I have come across the classic ''good guy gets so strong even if doesn't make sense and beats the experienced bad guy'' trope. 

My question to my fellow writers is; Have you actually used said trope in your work? If not how to you go about ''handling'' the adversary of the story.

As for me I prefer to make the protagonist either outsmart the ''bad guy'' or the ''bad guy'' have some sort of plan that backfires or him sacrificing for his greater cause.To summarize the whole situation: there is a race of insect people who as punishment for some past transgression against the gods, have been irreversibly changed so all newborn members are male. The gods had a way to mutate a male into a female (kind of like what bees do to make one into a full queen) through a substance that they must soak in. the transformation is permanent and this substance was tightly regulated as a way to keep them in line. Eventually the gods are dead and the species as a whole has access to their entire supply of the stuff (While very little is actually used up in the process, they have no idea how to make more. but that's a whole different problem to this one.)

Gender doesnt really mean much to these people and being female is seen more like a career. The process to become one is slow enough where it can't happen by accident and most if not all will undergo the transformation of their own will. (there is one character who became female because they were sick with a disease that was only fatal in males, so it wasn't entirely his choice.) Females are generally treated very well and are highly respected. It's common for them to have several attendants dedicated to aiding the females as they are physically bulkier and sluggish compared to the males.

Whenever someone wants a child to raise, they present some sort of tribute to the female, usually physical goods of sufficient value. If it is accepted, the obvious happens and the guy is eventually presented with an egg. the health of each newborn is recorded to look out for birth defects, stillbirths, and any other complications. Those with a record of very few complications are more sought out. The records also help their offspring avoid inbreeding as that is a potential issue.

generally they have no real connection with their mother, as the father has no real obligation to see the mother once all is said and done. Often the father is actually one half of a couple and this was essentially using a surrogate so they can have a child. Though there is an effort to sway people towards choosing a mother a good distance from where they live, its not uncommon for those who discover they all have the same mother to form a friendship of sorts.One name sends chills down the spines of any person who hears it: Supreme Overlord Horace. A once beloved and respected king turned tyrannical ruler, Horace wants to conquer the infinite realms (other realities), but he’s prevented from doing this by a mysterious group of people called the guardians. The guardians are realm protecting beings who come from the realm between realms, the gateway of all these lands. It is foretold in the prophecy that a guardian born half human half ***** (part of the prophecy that was erased), born on the brightest day, yet the darkest night, will end Horace once and for all. However, on the day this hero was born, Horace struck the realm between realms, destroying it and sending its inhabitants all across the realms, as the heroes family fled to Realm 137: Our Realm. 

16 years later, high school student Jason Hill, with the help of his friends Blake, Matt, Brycen and more, will defeat Horace and save the infinite realm while trying to balance it with ordinary life.

Criticism is welcome, and any questions will be answered!I've been thinking about a writing idea for a while and I'm creating a short comic for it already. The comic itself doesn't have many races or worldbuilding but I the universe I have some races that I'm not sure I can use. 

There is a race that has vibrant colored skin, horns and tail and even though the worldbuilding for them is in no way similar, they look (if dnd has looks for their races in detail specified) like tieflings.

Now I never played dnd but I saw lots of art, comics etc with a race like this and kinda assumed it wasn't anyone's property.

Can I have any race with these characteristics in my work or is the whole design copyrighted?

And are some specific aspects of more used races (like elves) copyrighted?    (only talking about their visual design)I'm trying to come up with a theme for naming my Dark Elemental spirits that dont sound/reference anything too sinister or evil, and work in a male form.

Without getting too deep into it, spirits in my world are beings of pure magic energy, ranging from "Lesser" non-sentient wisps, "Minor" fairy-like humanoid forms, and "Major" full-size humanoid forms. I have the standard 6 magic elements Fire, water, earth, wind, Light and dark.

I have themes for the other elements based on what they represent, but i cant come up with one for darkness.

What i have so far for example:  
Light: Celestial objects, modified into a female form. (Arcturia, or the Erza Sisters = Arcturus and Ursa Major and Minor)  
Fire: Volcanoes or mountains in male forms (Everett = Mt. Everest)  
Water: Rivers or seas in female form ( Nila = Nile River)  
Earth: doubles as nature element so i am going with forests for that one in male form  
Wind: still undecided but i am leaning towards different types of winds in female form like "Gale"  


Darkness and Light arent "evil and good," rather they represent the sources of light and absence of it. Sun, Moon and stars for light, Shadows, void and the unseen for dark. They keep a bit of a Yin Yang relationship with each other that is separate from the other 4 elements.

So that is my dilemma. 

Ideas i have come up with so far, but am not satisfied with are: Mythical creatures, mythological deities of darkness (any mythology), Types of ghosts (Ghosts/necromancers don't exist in my world, so far), Various baby name generators with "Darkness" as their meaning.  


Really only looking for ideas to spark the theme. The actual names i want to work out for myself.
So, quick explanation, in my story there's a third afterlife called Hechi in which if you aren't good enough for Heaven but aren't bad enough for Hell you get sent to Hechi. 
(Similar i guess to Purgatory but Hechi is your forever afterlife.) 

When you die and go to Hechi there's a 50, 50 chance of you getting powers. 
Some may, overtime, change the way you look. 
And depending on how exactly you died you may end up looking..different. 


Oh and also to get around you use portals. 
And there's also, also nine leaders + life and death/grim reaper.

Anyway, you know how in Hell their called demons? And in Heaven their called angels, right? 
Well, i don't know what to call the people in Hechi. I don't even know if there needs to be a name. 
 
So, uhm, some ideas/help would be greatly appreciated! 
(I'm sorry i just don't really know where to look for name ideas and i can't think of one i like.)For context, the immortality essentially adds a new copy of then next to the corpse, it comes from a divine source, but they are heavily involved in the affairs of mortals, to the point where they regularly fight them, how do I make said fights interesting and engaging while still keeping him immortalI'd want to get some criticism on the *first five paragraphs* of my middle-grade fantasy novel. 

I'm looking for feedback on *voice*, *writing style*, whether the story sounds *outdated*, and whether I have *too much* or *too little* of anything. What can I *improve*? What *works*? What *doesn't*?

Thank you. 

**The first five paragraphs:**

1 CHAPTER

*The Poisonous Mushroom*

Thousands of deciduous trees bowed their heads at the same time, causing the forest to darken far too quickly. Not even the persistent rays of the sun penetrated the dense trees as if something unseen ordered the forest to sleep in the middle of the day for no apparent reason.

Joevar and his dear mother walked along the forest path at the time when the chirping birds abruptly stopped singing. Perhaps the forest's silence was intended to deceive the eleven-year-old boy, drawing him deeper into the forest's depths, where not even the darkness of night could pass through.

It was darker and cloudier here than elsewhere in Yiraál, the vast land that had long been home to the six kingdoms. Even Lordôm's strange beasts couldn't compete with the darkness of the forest's depths, or so it seemed to the boy for the time being.

Joevar let go of Kalani's warm hand as he noticed something red and small on the ground that glowed with a dark green light that drew him in. For some reason, his attention was drawn to the fungus, which glowed in such an unusual way that everything else around him faded into the background. Perhaps it wasn't a coincidence, but rather the fate that awaited him.

His mother yelled something at that precise moment, yet all he could hear was his own breathing, which grew louder with each step he took. A single mushroom, hidden among red and orange leaves, rocks, and dirt, completely drew his attention amid the muddy grass - as strange as that sounded.Bio: This second chapter introduces the main character, the March Lord Marcus Julius Hames. He’s currently entertaining two prostitutes at his manor estate. 

What I wanted to do with this chapter was establish the character prior to the inciting incident, by showing some aspects of his life and foreshadowing the journey he undertakes throughout the novel. 

Word count: 3,833 words 

Genre: Low Fantasy 

Criticism I’m looking for: 

Did you enjoy the prose? Did you enjoy the dialogue? Would you read on? Are there things you would like to point out for critique? I’m looking for anything from a thumbs-up to aggressive line-editing, everything is welcome. Thank you for your time.

[You can read the chapter by clicking here!](https://drive.google.com/file/d/185YtRYLDcH8egmuQ9OufVw4uM7rAmUWm/view?usp=drivesdk)This is a micro-fiction writing prompt and challenge. Using a theme of “Accident” and fantasy elements, write a coherent vignette or snippet ***using fifty words or less*** and post it as a comment.

Have fun! The thread is in contest mode so that comments appear in random order with hidden upvotes.I love world building and one of the most fun things I got to do was create a few imaginary races to inhabit one of my fantastical worlds.

My question to fellow writers is; what has been your most ridiculous (and fun to make) creature in your stories?

 For me it has to be a race I called ''sire''. Sire were blessed with  shapeshifting to hide their hideous appearance: jaws filled with sharp  teeth, round eyes, scaled skin, gills, large claws and thin and scrawny  body composition. They are water friendly creatures, cursed to hide  their true selves under the water surface.
Plus the formatting is not that good so the punctuation may be off also please just read the story 


Zuso continued “anyway for some
reason they demand me to speak to
you because of some weird activities
going on earth, something to do withmagic ”Chari exclaimed “ Magic?!
Earth does not have any '' Zuso cut
him off again. He hated when he did
that, he hated a lot of things about
him.
“I know the earth does not have
any magic but look at this chart.
”
Zuso put a serious face on, Chari had
never seen him do that so he knew it
was the uttermost important. Zuso
pulled up a chart of the magical
frequency of earth in 2220 vs 2230.Zuso continued “anyway for some
reason they demand me to speak to
you because of some weird activities
going on earth, something to do withmagic ”Chari exclaimed “ Magic?!
Earth does not have any '' Zuso cut
him off again. He hated when he did
that, he hated a lot of things about
him.
“I know the earth does not have
any magic but look at this chart.
”
Zuso put a serious face on, Chari had
never seen him do that so he knew it
was the uttermost important. Zuso
pulled up a chart of the magical
frequency of earth in 2220 vs 2230.
For 2220 it was normal like it has
been for thousands of years with nomagic.But for 2230 it was shocking, a
high frequency of magic, he had seen,
maybe even higher than the dream
realm.
“ How could this be possible ?”
Chari said his voice was shaking a bit
but not too much to be noticeable.
“
That is why the higher up want you
and your team to figure out,I will
send you more information when I
can, but for now go to these
Coordinators.The chairman expects
great things from you Charlie so you
and your team better not mess up,got it.
” Chari with a serious face
said,
“ Yes sir”
. Zuso then hung up
and his bracelet turned off. Chari just
stood there with a feeling in his chest
that would not go away,I know my question sounds really weird but I'd like to know or learn more about this question, if a famous item gets written about, like one could write about a same item but a completely different way from the other book that uses it, is that applicable?Essentially I have a character who is a cowardly Prince, we are introduced to him and throughout the very early portion of the story where he meets his wife and becomes King. Very shortly after, another country declares War. A big part of his country's culture is being typically quite barbaric and so he is pushed to fight and lead armies at the head, a big problem is that he uses a cane to walk due to his height and is not a great fighter. 

He knows he is going to lose the war so in some way or another I want him to be "suspended" until the main plot. A majority of his plot is the cost of what is cowardice has done to him. FYI, his race lives for hundreds of years. I've gone through a myriad of ideas: 

\- His brother sacrifices himself for him - a soul for a soul - he is resurrected but not without cost a hundred years later  
\-  He goes to a sorceress who suspends him for one hundred years, and an added quest is to perform his end of the bargain he made with her to do so. He asks for his wife to do the same but she refuses and calls him a coward.   
\- He decides he doesn't want to be King and shuns the crown, becoming a hermit for hundreds of years. 

I really don't know what to do. I had a whole other idea with an "astral realm" type thing, but I really hated it. 

Thanks for any help! xSo a group of Northern tribes band together to survive the hard winters in the mountains, they grow what they can but mostly rely on journeying into danger in the unknown forests below their mountain homes.

Eventually a tribe comes into contact with something magical that gives them an extra sense, a sort of hunter’s tracking ability. By the same token, they can now be tracked by the other tribes in The Valley below.

I’m still working on what the conflict will be, maybe the mountain tribes shouldn’t have taken the magic, maybe they were unknown until now by the outsiders.

So, would anyone read something like this?Hi! So I've been working on this high fantasy book for a while, but it's gone through rewrites and redrafts and big changes. This is my first draft in its newest incarnation and I would love thoughts, impressions, critiques, proofreading or anything that can help.

It is inspired by Dungeons and Dragons and the classic sword and sorcery genre, but the first chapter is just the small starting point for a grander story that will take place. It is also an adult book, but there will be fun, not so serious elements (inspired by Terry Pratchett) and there will be cliches/tropes, but if something feels boring/immature/stupid, I welcome that feedback.

A lot of the information I've put in this chapter is what I feel is important (informing stuff about the characters) but that doesn't mean that it will be important to readers, and I value your opinion a lot so if there is anything that needs cutting, let me know too!

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c31vUOvAT7BJvQ7vt7n15qgAWJ9qC4B6cJRYo3dRf2A/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c31vUOvAT7BJvQ7vt7n15qgAWJ9qC4B6cJRYo3dRf2A/edit?usp=sharing)Hi all!

I am writing short stories in a setting where a lot of monsters roam the land. The stories largely follow hunters of these monsters.

I am now approaching a point in the stories where I would like to go into more detail on how the whole monster hunting organization works.

Here is some background. This is also partially integrated into the stories so far.

* All hunters have a specific bloodline that enables them to do their monster hunting job.
* Holders of this bloodline live in large families / communes / clan-like structures. Marriage to outside parties is not really a thing since this weakens the ability of the offspring. They are a demographic that is pretty self-contained.
* The bloodline is prevalent in pretty much every country, but their largest population is in a country named Voergrad in the north, which lies close to the deeper wilderness. This is also the place where they have the most influence.
* This demographic trains hunters in order for them to collect money for monster hunting services (also outside this kingdom) that they then partly return to a guild-like organization. This organization is also a large part of what makes this demographic tick, as well as a source of income and significance for their group.
* The internal management of the families is patriarchal and clan-like. Generally speaking, they are also quite warlike. They churn out not only hunters that are paid for by settlements, lords, kings, etc., but also other muscle for hire, e.g. for military services.

I would now like to develop the military side of things more and also clarify the details of the internal workings (and plausibility) of a structure as described above.

One aspect I would like to incorporate is the rise of military influence in Voergrad, the “home” of our group, after the priorly ruling house is much decimated and fell from grace due to a large-scale monster problem within the country borders. At the same time, the above-mentioned demographic holds increasing sway with the military, constituting the most well-known mercenary troop and in some cases becomes the de facto leaders of large parts of the military. Therefore, they edge ever closer to rule the country itself. This is all happening under the guidance of a larger-than-life figurehead that drives change and is also the highest patriarch of the hunter folks.

This means that, as time goes by, the hunter organization is more and more closely aligned with (1) the ruling caste of Voergrad and (2) the military of Voergrad as a whole.

I am wondering…

* How do you feel about this general setup? Is it plausible? What would I need to take into consideration?
* How does their country-spanning network even function? Are communes with the respective bloodlines relaying information and money? Is it a job post to man guild houses in faraway countries? Is it every man and woman for themselves, never seeing a guild member in ages? But how are the hunters kept under control then?
* Can this organization even be called a guild? What makes a guild a guild? 
* Who runs the hunter organization in the first place? A number of patriarchs of the most important families? Their next of kin or some favored individuals? Is it perhaps a completely other set of individuals that climb the hierarchy of monster hunting to one day be in management when they are too old?
* Does it make sense to have the rise of militaristic influence in their “homeland” spread to the organization of hunters as a whole? Meaning that structures become more hierarchical / rigid, ranks and such start to play a greater role, perhaps even uniforms and standardization come into play, guild houses become barracks, etc.
* Would other countries even tolerate the rising influence of foreign military within their borders? To take into consideration: Perhaps they would if they get rid of the ever-present monster plague (in a mercenary fashion). Voergrad has no border disputes with the neighboring kingdoms at the time of the stories, meaning they would not necessarily feel antagonistic towards them. Hunters are also largely accepted as necessary by most kingdoms, especially those in the farthest north where the story is set.

Please give me your thoughts. Anything that helps me make this whole setup more coherent helps. 😊

Thanks and regards!Hey! I'm writing a parallell story about two siblings that each navigate the world in contrasting ways. One has a more mystical and unexplained magic and the other learns to use a magic that follows very strict rules (magic as science) similar to sympathy in The Kingkiller Chronicles. I have not decided fully what the latter magic can do, but I'm playing around with the concept time manipulation, chronomancy.

First of all; no, not that kind of time-travel magic that is the bane of authors and always seems to break plots. Instead, I thought about the power to alter the state of **objects**, to speed them up, slow them down, or freeze them in time entirely. I also like the idea of an object storing energy when its frozen, which then can be released when its unfrozen, (if you were to kick a frozen object, it wouldn't move until it got out of the frozen state). Do you have any other time-related powers like these? Please share!

Additionally, more skilled Chronomancers can see the past, **but not alter it,** anywhere in the world, making them very wise. There is also a way, although strictly forbidden, to get a glimpse of the future, which one of the main characters eventually figures out. This would create a self-fulfilling prophecy, kind of like in the story of the Oedipus where he tries to run from his fate after hearing his prophecy, which does the opposite and instead fulfills it. 

Any feedback would be appreciated!Hi all,
Since I've gotten a fair amount of rejections from agents already, and I have no one else to turn to, I decided to post my query here, in hopes to find out what's wrong with it. Thank you in advance to everyone who comments! 




Dear [Agent], 
  

16-year-old shapeshifter Aura Firestorm has seen more than a hundred winters. Aura is imprisoned by her witch mother in the Kingdom of Fire, one of the Five Kingdoms in the distant planet of Porphyr. She is one of four residents left in the entire kingdom, after a devastating curse that transformed all the other inhabitants into moths.  

When she reveals her growing feelings toward her childhood friend, the two run away, determined to fight for their forbidden love. But Aura soon falls victim to her mother’s twin sister, Elyso Firestorm, a powerful witch who won’t rest until every single one of the Fire Kingdom’s inhabitants is dead.                                                                                                     

19-year-old Zoe White lives a normal life in future London, until the nightmares begin. A girl in a glowing chamber with neither windows nor a door to escape screams for help almost every night. As the recurring nightmare takes hold of Zoe’s life, Zoe realises that it might not be just a dream after all…                                                                                                   

At her sister’s school anniversary, Zoe meets charismatic Andrew Davis, the music teacher wearing an identical heart locket to the one her mother gave her on the night of her abandonment.                                                                               

As Zoe embarks on a journey to discover the secret behind the heart lockets and uncover her true identity, and Aura fights to be with the one she loves despite all odds being against them, their lives intertwine in the most unimaginable way possible.                                                                                                                                          

All the while, an ancient evil awakes deep into the heart of the Forest of Shadows…                       

My debut novel, THE CHAMBERS OF OUR HEARTS, is an Upper Young Adult Fantasy standalone and the first book in a planned trilogy (Fire and Magic series).  
It started as a Grimm’s Rapunzel fairytale retelling, but over the course of seven years, it evolved into a story of its own.  
The book is approximately 106000 words, and relates to fans of FURYBORN by Claire Legrand, A RIVER OF ROYAL BLOOD by Amanda Joy and KINGDOM OF THE CURSED by Kerri Maniscalco.


[Short Bio]


Thank you for your consideration,

 White WolfIt is still a very rough outline of a magic system so if you have anything to share please do so. 

It was a part of conversation that i wrote so plz bear with me 

In the world the source of everything is called 'mAyin', it is not a being or God (atleast until now) and is said to have created the world order.Things like cold, heat even gravitational force that exist naturally before any being roamed the land are called natural laws and magician is someone who draws power from mAyin and bends these natural laws or write his own law that alters realiy and magician draws power from mAyin (something like mana or chaos from Witcher) for writing laws they first have to study natural laws which are written in a language that anyone can read but not understand and magician write laws in their own language, any language can be used to do magic even the everyday language but its effects its effectiveness and efficiency and over centuries some languages became mainstream some lost in time even now magician make new language everyday personalized to themselves 

Sorry for the chopped up conversation.The story’s idea is that after pushing everyone away to focus on his dreams, he falls into a deep depression after it all ends in failure. Wishing that his life could’ve gone differently and he spent more times with others, his wish is heard by a magic god, but with a catch. He can create timelines to have any desired outcome in his life come true, but it alters everything it has to in the past in order for it to happen. After using his ability irresponsibly for his own amusement, he ends up trapped in an alternate Earth’s timeline where magic and monsters exist in the modern world, and he’s now placed in the middle of an ongoing war.  With the realization of his power’s consequences, he uses his powers to try to restore balance in his new reality since he can’t go back to his previous timelines.

A part of me felt like he should be a teenager, making the story moreso about growing up and to live in the present instead of worrying about what your life could’ve been like. Maybe even making him an adult in the beginning, but reverting him back to a teenager since he never really grew up. Plus I feel like there’s more potential for interesting drama since he and more than likely the people around him are teenagers going through puberty.

Although at the same time I feel like keeping him a young adult because of how mature I can make things without it feeling weird. Sex, Nudity, drugs, being around 21 is young enough to still make stupid decisions and be growing as a person, but mature enough that the characters won’t feel like adults in teen bodies sometimes like some stories do. Maybe it’s because of how difficult it is to make drama, I hardly ever see stories where people are in college. A lot of stuff I see usually has characters as teens, kids, or full on adults

And then there’s him being a kid, makes sense narratively since he’s basically restarting his life with the wish and using his powers irresponsibly would also make sense. Plus there’s the narrative potential of having him be a kid in a serious environment, as the story progresses maybe we slowly see him grow up into an adult making the character development from how his previous life even more rewarding. The main issue is that I feel like having a dark story with a kid MC in it would make it a little too dark. I don’t know if anyone here has seen Made of Abyss, but while it would still be dark if they were older, the fact that screwed up shit was happening to kids made it even darker, same with The Promise Netherland, kids being raised as cattle and sent off to be killed and eaten. I feel like a teen to adult in a fucked up situation would make you go, “oh shit…” while a kid would make you go “OH FUCK”. I wouldn’t mind doing it, but I’d have to add a lot of lighthearted moments or I’d get burnt out from how dark the story is.

One of the biggest things to know is that this magical god gave him that power for their own amusement and wanted him to mess everything up. They didn’t even tell him that every little change he made had major consequences like some people no longer being born, they also didn’t even tell him the rules like how he can’t use it to bring someone back to life because “what’s the fun in that?”. A part of me feels like making it so that the magic god decides what the consequences would be for a timeline creation/manipulation, making the power a last resort option as the reader and MC realize just how evil the magic god really is.

I feel like his age would really change up what the story would be like, it’s hard to decide because of the amount of different ways things can go.Hello, I am planning out an epic fantasy series and I have the characters, setting and some of the plot planned out. The problem is that I usually like fantasy series that deal with more bigger than life concepts like time travel, multiple realities, space, cosmic beings, etc... My story would be set in an analogy of Africa/South America when it comes to terrain, ecosystems and the character's ethnicity. It would follow three main characters: The typical female street urchin, the cliche farm boy and a magic/science student in her middle twenties. My story deals with the dilemma of magic vs science and how they can be one and the same. There's a lot of conflict about whether humanity is going too far with it and the old vs new mentality causes problems during the story. 

At first the story will deal more with the political intrigue and worldbuilding while weaving the real story from behind the scenes, which will be revealed roughly 2/3 into the series. This is the idea that I think might be too silly but I am curious to see what you think. In this world there's a goddess that created the world and every living being within it (kinda.) She is the typical caring mother who loves her creations and wants to see them thrive. The future is not set so she can only see the possible futures kind of like Doctor Strange and she suddenly realized that in the future, at some random point in time, the world just goes black and she can't see beyond it. After investigating this she comes to realize that in the future, the world suddenly dies out through some misterious circumstances and everyone is gone. Kind of like a black hole that swallows the entire universe. (I thought about making it so she sees the cold death of the universe but that might be complicated since it's too far into the future).

 Since she can't stop this black hole and she wants to save her creations no matter the cost, she goes crazy and decides to go through with a desperate plan. She grabs the best leaders of some of the futures she saw and tells them about their imminent fate, insisting that the only way to save humanity is to take their people to the past (our present) and basically invade the world and take it over. That way, that future humanity can live again in this world and prosper till the time comes again when the Black Hole appears and they can do the same with another alternate past. So suddenly, through some means that would be explained, these leaders enter the present and start an invasion. The MC's mission would be to stop this goddess and the invasion even though they are roughly in a colonial era with magic and the invaders have nuclear bombs, plasma rifles, mechas and all that. Would this be too silly and off-putting? I'm open to answering any questions or hear any opinions!The Heartless King

"The Heartless King was simply spoken as a old legend, something to warn man about the dangers of nihilism. This may be small, but for The Heartless King, a simple lack of hope is all that he needs to become stronger, and soon to be real."- Tales of the Heartless King.

Description

The Heartless King has been seen in many stories, from the great deserts to the frozen north. The tales of a being, with a heart made of steel and gears, eyes like that of the sunset with the hints of gleeful sadistic interest. The Heartless King had many forms across the world, though it's has been described as a long blackened serpent with skeletal, yet powerful forearms. A tar like substance running down it's body as the Heartless King is said to be semi-fluid, able to shift it's form as it slithers like a pile of blackened sludge.

The Heartless King's head is, by itself a freak of nature. It's head opened in four ways like a flower, presenting mixed rows of dagger and needle like teeth. The head was attached to a long prehensile neck, that cracked and twisted into odd directions, making terrible sounds of cracking bones. It also had another feature, as upon it's back was a pair of large sickly leather wings, the wings themselves are also a interesting subject. The wings of the Heartless one seemed to switch in purpose based on the way the Heartless King wishes to use them, when landed, the wings would look like a second pair of arms, with long thin fingers to help the the Sickened One move across the ground.

When in flight however, the purpose is changed. The same black sludge that make up most of the Heartless King's body begin to flow between the fingers to create a membrane to help the Fouled Bringer fly like that of a dragon.

Another detail about the Heartless King is it's eyes, which covered it's body, the eyes seemed to appear and be reabsorbed back into the sludge, as if it's own body was fighting for control as the Heartless one has been said to have uncontrollable twitches, as if it's own body protests. The eyes come in colors of orange, red and purple, but the eyes aren't like many others, the eye's shape, the iris and pupils, seemed to be in a strange pattern like shape that the normal sphere look or silted pupils.

To finish of it's appearance is the strange heart like object on it's chest. The heart is said to be made out of the strongest of metals and has clogs and gears to mimic that of a heartbeat. The metal heart was positioned in the Centre of the chest area, surrounded by spine black rocks that encircled the metal heart.

abilities

The Heartless King has been shown to have many abilities, able to vomit up the same sludge against it's opponents, making the targets be stuck in the sludge like tar itself. It's second ability is also related to the sludge, as the Heartless king can summon upon large black spires from the sludge, impaling or pinning it's target. Sometimes these same spires can form into forearms that can grab onto his foes, pinning them down and draining their energy.

However it's most powerful ability is it's power to read the target's most traumatizing thoughts. It's been said that the Heartless King cannot read minds, however he can collect information by reading into his target's fearful memories. The Heartless King been described to be a master manipulator, people say that great schemers are able to pluck at the cords of the mind of others. However for the Heartless King, the mind is a violin, in which he's able to listening to what he wishes to hear, plucking at those same mental cords to make the thoughts of gleeful success or haunting agony.

So, in doing so the Heartless king is able to force others into doing whatever he wants without the victim to realize it, gaslighting them into false safety as day-by-day and inch-by-inch the Heartless King slowly becomes the voice of reason to the poor soul. In doing so the the Heartless king is able to manipulate a individual or even a whole cult-group of these "Heartless touched" people, who follow the commands of the Heartless King in a sort of zealous-like way.

Another ability that the Heartless King can do is extract a soul from any living thing, in which the soul is devoured whole and is stored into the metallic heart on his chest. In which he'll not only grow, and even slowly change into a more draconic like form, but his powers would also grow along side as well. His followers would also grow more powerful as well with each soul siphoned out of a living body.

The least known ability of the Heartless King is it's ability to nullify magical ability's that's not it's own or it's followers. This is due to the black spines that the Heartless King can summon, in which they absorb any magical energy. There are theories of the idea that the Heartless King is the embodiment of nihilism and hopelessness, in which anything you try to do would simply be ignored, as all things simply does not matter to the Heartless King.

The Followers of the Heartless

The few times that the Heartless King is able to communicate with him would slowly grow more and more devoted to him, it would start out as if the Heartless King was a sort of parental figure that the victim never had, in which the Heartless King would take advantage of that weakness and would plant a mental seed into the victims head, stating that the Heartless King is the only person who would accept them and love them for who they are.

Slowly these people would become more closed off and sometimes zealous around other people as paranoia and fear grips their mind, the belief that everyone and everything is out to hurt them and that the only figure to keep them safe is the Heartless King. Not only would the victims mind change but also their physical appearance, their skin would slowly become vantablack as a bone-like mask envelops the persons face. The mask has a sort of mannequin look, as black feminine lips as their mouth would change, the mouth itself would open all they to the cheeks, showing their bone-white teeth and long prehensile black tongue. And their eyes like that of empty sockets, looking into a abyss.

once a person becomes this, their is no going back. The person is forever becomes a "Heartless Servant" a slave to the Heartless King, following their command like a mannequin puppet. They are completely mindless and are more of moving armored soldiers that actual creatures or people. However, their are those who actually knows about the Heartless King's plan, and would even help him. These are known as the "Heartless Devoted"

The Heartless Devoted are far superior than the normal Heartless servants. Physically they are far taller and more stronger than their common allies, they have hinged legs and hand like feet, allowing them to walk on two or fours, and since they are like their commoner brothers and sisters, they are able to move their body into any direction, dislocating their arms to attack people from both in front and behind.. They also wield a pair of long needle like weapons made of the same black spines that the Heartless King can create, in which these weapons, just like the Spines, are able to nullify and absorb any energy or magical attacks.

By far the most interesting part about the Heartless Devoted are that they still have their own mind and personality, since they accepted their new master with open arms, they are rewarded to being able to keep their memories, ideals and many other attributes. So long as they serve the Heartless King with head-strong devoted loyalty, they shall lead and command the Heartless Servants in battle, in the name of their new "benevolent" master.

Short Story

Their is a short story, it's about a boy whos been attacked and antagonized all of his life, who then slipped into the realm of the Heartless King.

Eli opened his eyes, looking up at the pure white sky. Seeing this he imminently sit up properly, looking around his surrounding, pure white landscape, no trees, no rocks, just nothing. A pure void. The hell is this place? Eli thought to himself as he stood up, still amazed by the pure empty white land scape.

Eli begins to walk at a random direction, hoping to be going somewhere in this empty white void, rubbing his left wrist in a anxious motion. Oookay, so I went to bed with no dinner thanks to my parents, now I woke up to a pure white void? jeez, can't wait for things to get worse. Then out of nowhere a sound other than his footsteps echoed though the void .Slosh. Eli immediately stopped, looking around and trying to figure out what the hell that sound was.

What the hell, where did tha- Eli stopped his mind when he saw a large puddle of some sort of black goo, just a few feet away from him. Eli, not being a idiot, straight away decided it was best to turn around and get the hell away from the puddle. but not before he took a step he heard another sloshing sound, looking back at the puddle again it seemed to be...bigger?

Then right before Eli's eyes the puddle grew more and more, making that same horrible and gross sloshing sound, the puddle seemed to be bubbling and gurgling, it was honestly gross. Eli could do nothing but watch as the puddle grew bigger and bigger, though steadily it seemed to slow down, now looking more like a Olympian pool filled with black tar or something. Okay so white empty void and now ever growing black puddles of goo? Okay, I'm now kind of concern about this. Eli just took one step, one step back, and then the puddle erupted.

Eli watched in terror as a large serpentine like neck burst out of the puddle, making a mixed sound of a high-pitched screaming infant and a sick gurgling sound. Eli ran away as far as he can, not wanting to look back at whatever that thing was, his brain screaming at him to run faster and faster, a strange yet haunting feeling behind his neck, as it it was just a few inch's away from his head.

Eli didn't turn back when he soon heard the mix of stomps and a tip-tap sound behind him, as well as a sort of weird wave like sound. But when he took just a quick glance behind him, in which he regretted doing as he saw the things eyes, he dripped. What the hell, how did I tripped in a pure white void?? Eli toppled onto the floor, glancing back seeing a thin black spine slowly sinking back into the pure white ground.

Eli then looked back further down, seeing the large black mass moving towards him, it moved sorted of like a snake with it's lower half, while the upper half used it's arms to drag itself, but what really creeped Eli out was the other pair of arms on it's back, the arms had ridiculously long fingers, and they moved sort of like a centipede.

Eli tried getting back up, but soon a pair of black forearms erupted from the ground, grabbing him and pinning him down. No no no no, please no! Eli screamed in his head, thrashing and trying to break free from the arms, but soon a shadow over casted him, Eli slowly raised his head, seeing 2 pairs of eyes appeared from the black tar, the eyes were sort of bright gold and...sun color? if that's even a word, honestly Eli has no idea. The eyes looked kind of like those weird patterns you see on carpets, a sort of wiggly sphere that's also at the same time silted pupils like a snake? honestly it was hard to describe.

"Okay, if you want to eat me, can you do it in the least painful way? thanks." Eli simply said at the thing, since he's been pinned down and theirs no way of getting away from this thing or breaking away from the arms, he might as well accept his fate. Eli closed his eyes and waited for the end...but nothing happened. "Um, dude. Kind of waiting for my inevitable death over here." Eli simply said, still eyes closed, yet no response.

Then he felt a sort of soft brush on his left wrist, Eli opened his eyes and looked over, seeing that one of the black forearms seems to be rubbing it, in a strange comforting way? "You've been hurt, but not by an other, but by yourself..." Eli froze, then he slowly looked over, looking back at the weird wiggly eyes.

"D-did you just speak?" Eli said hesitantly, not really sure what else to expect from this thing. "Indeed, little one. You seemed scared, though I suppose I'm not a type for...first impression." The thing said, then Eli felt his arms go free as he saw the black forearms slowly sinking back down into the ground. "Who the hell are you?" Eli said, trying not to offend this thing, well not yet, if Eli going to die today, he might as well die by talking down at his killer or something, honestly he has no idea.

"Well, how else do i greet my...visitors. It's hard to come by some folks when you live in a void, yes?" The large dragon looking thing said, sitting up in a sort of cobra stance. "I mean, you did chase me down and didn't really bother saying 'Hey! Don't worry I won't rip your head off as soon as I come near ya' Like really, dude you need to learn some social cues." Eli complained, finally standing up and wow, this thing was huge, honestly Eli was probably compared to a tooth pick next to this thing.

The Black mass chuckled. "You are a funny one, for someone with a...hard start in life I assume?" it said, kind of making Eli uncomfortable as he covered up his left wrist with his shirt. "uhuh, anyways who the hell are you? like I can't really call you 'Mr. Terrifying black blob" Eli said, looking at the things body, noticing some smaller eyes popping in and out of the things body.

"Oh, where are my manners? you may call me...The Heartless King." The thing said, lowering it's head and making a creepy grin, in which Eli noticed that the things head is actually sort of spitted up vertically in 2 ways, making it's mouth open kind of like a flower. "...That is the most creepy and probably edgy name I have ever heard in all of of my life." Eli confessed, like honestly it sounds like some weird 13 year old trying to be creepy.

"You do know that I have got this name by earning it right?" The Heartless King said, in a sort of creepy yet relaxing tone of voice, kind of snake like really. The the Heartless King started to sit up more, revealing something on it's chest, Eli had to squint his eyes to realize it was a metal heart, kind of like a prosthetic.

"Huh, I guess you took your name to the extreme?" Eli said, mostly bizarre at the strange heart. The metallic heart seemed to beat and pulse kind of like a normal heart, but it was un-nerving. "Well, I don't wish to be rude but, I would like to ask how you got those." The Heartless King said, nodding at Eli's wrist. "it's...complicated, and also private." Eli said in a stern tone of voice. "You must really hate your parents, Hm?" The Heartless King said.

"H-ow the hell did you...wait can you read minds!?" Eli shouted at the thing in a sort of demanding way. Eli really hates the idea that his private life is wide open to this thing. "well...yes and no, I can see specific type of memories that I need to see, to understand you...after all, why should you simply let them walk over you in the first place?" The Heartless King said as it begins to slither around Eli, incircle him in a confined space.

"You know...why should you simply follow them when they don't even love you...wouldn't it be so much better to just let it all out, that hate, why not take your vengeance on them?" The Heartless King said to him. Eli didn't really had any idea to respond, it was honestly hard to try though. "I mean, I can't survive on my own, and I can't really leave on the streets...unless your implying something else?" Eli said, looking back at the the thing with unease in his eyes.

The Heartless King simply made a toothy grin. "You mean...discarding those who do not deserve you? Then I suppose it's a option, yes?" The Heartless King said, even in a sort of joyful manner. "Dude, no that's sick and morally wrong, I can't just go around murdering people that's just...no" Eli protested at the thing, which seemed to tick it off. "So your saying that you'll simply stay quiet and let them abuse you? target you and hurt you? That's not living, that's going though hell before getting their." He said.

"Now, I want you to hear me this, why should you put up with them, Hm? You deserve better than this, don't you want a happy life filled with joy, don't you want to run free along side friends and an lover? don't you just want to...be free?" The Heartless King said, it's eyes directly into his, as if he's trying to pluck at his own mind and soul.

All Eli could do is stay silent, he...has no idea what to say. What is he suppose to say as a argument to this? Eli wants to be happy, he wants to be with friends and maybe even get someone he likes, a boy perhaps? But murder? literal murder, that's just wrong. "I...I don't know..." That's all he could say to this thing, and really...he's scared on what it'll do to him next.

But surprisingly, the thing simply nodded. "Then I shall give you a privilege that no other being has given you...a choice, a choice to decide your fate and yours alone. I cannot choose, and your family cannot choose, this is your time to shine." The Heartless King said. Suddenly Eli begins to feel a wave of exhaustion rush though his body, and before he knew it, he was laying on the ground.

"Sleep well little one. You have a big choice to make, I do hope you make the right one...and the one we both get what we want." The heartless King said, and the last thing Eli saw before his eyes closed was the gleaming eyes like that of starts, and a sadistic toothy grin across the Heartless Kings face.The magic within my novel is highly themed around paint. The act of using magic is more or less creating matter by using the paint the gods used to create the world.

That part in my eyes is fine but I’m a bit on the fence about another visual aspect that comes with this.

A quirk of these magic users that I thought might be interesting concept wise is that they have rainbow colored blood. This multicolored blood is a remnant of their ancestors who were blessed with a fraction of one of the god’s powers. This shifted their biology and made them more divine in appearance, bleaching their hair white and giving them this multicolored blood that faintly glows beneath their skin.

I think it’s a rad visual, but I feel like some people might think it’s a bit goofy when someone get’s their head or arm chopped off and it looks like a skittles commercial.I'm building a world at the moment that consists of mana energy (the life blood of the planet and every creature) and natural/elemental energy that helped build all living creatures. My idea is that in the beginning two creatures capable of (only) manipulating elemental energy became so strong they became a kind of 'god' and each started creating creatures as they liked. One made different kind of animals, the other humans.

This resulted in races that either had an elemental core (elemental creatures evolved from creatures like the 'gods'), mana core (humans), and beast cores (other animals). with an elemental core you can manipulate elemental energy, with a mana core the mana particels in the world.

Now the 'god' that created humans saw that other creatures were helping improve their cores and become strong. Fearing someone would become strong enough to challenge them, they planned to seperate the humans from the other races and impair their ability to manipulate mana. For this he planned to get rid of the other creatures and make it so the other 'god' couldn't interfere.

The right moment was when all creatures banded together to stop a parasitic eldritch-like creature that was hibernating until then from consuming mana and killing the planet. As there is less nature, there will also be less elemental energy. With a ceremony they wanted to pull the mana it gathered out of it, get rid of it and give it back to the planet. Except because the 'god' of humans interfered it also targeted other creatures with a lot of mana, in other words the elementals and beasts and a few strong humans, resulting in a tragic event.

At this point I come across 2 snags in my story I would like help with:

\- all living creatures have mana in them as it's the life blood of all living creatures and the planet, but the cores (which I see for now as seperate from the mana in the body) is what allows them to manipulate energy around them. The bigger the core, the better the ability. Now I am wondering why the ceremony would be able to target elementals and beasts (why they would have more mana than humans).

\- The other snag is that this plan of the 'god' is supposed to get rid creatures with strong mana aside from humans and average animals. But the story revolves around the elementals and beasts slowly coming back to claim their place in the world years later and the protagonist investigating the past and conspiracy. Now I am out of ideas of where in the time between their dissapearance and return they would be. for example, would they be spiritual creatures as their souls were left when their bodies perished, or did the world split into two worlds with a barrier because of the sudden influx of mana (more than expected because of all the other creatures's mana) and put surviving elementals and beasts there?I'm looking for some feedback on this scene. It's for my next novel (4th written). I'm trying to gauge what people think of it, if the character is clear, works, and just overall if the POV of this character feels right. For context, I'm going for a crotchety old man vibe, but also a bit of a sense of "glory days" and the sense of waiting for the inevitable in a nursing home.

It would be the first scene of the novel, so I require it to introduce the protag, set the tone, and give a good indication of the classic D&D medieval fantasy setting. If you feel like I missed or didn't quite hit on anything there, that would be great feedback.

I've polished it a bit, but overall I think I might need to slow the pace as well. So a bit of feedback on that would be much appreciated. Generally speaking, my books hit on the 60k word mark and tend to be lean.

&#x200B;

>Rodius Drach glared at his pea soup. From around the tin spoon, mushy globules of green glared back. What was it about pea soup that put him in such a foul mood? Was it the vacant taste? Chewy texture? Or just the fact that it heralded the arrival of Tuesday, which meant only one thing.  
>  
>“Time for games night, Rodius.”   
>  
>Nurse Emerelda swooped through the door with her usual hawkish grace, eyes searching for scurrying prey, mouth pulled back into the veneer of a smile. He knew better than to be taken in by her gentle touch and patient manner. If he’d had minions half as treacherous as she, he’d never have failed in his conquest of the The Three Kingdoms.  
>  
>Light from the small fireplace danced around his prison. The wooden bed, table, and chair crowded the room, forcing Nurse Emerelda to thread through the tight gaps that remained. A light breeze from her passage ruffled his prize possession, a tapestry depicting the height of his power, replete with cowering peasants and bolts of arcane energy.  
>  
>With his arm now caught in her talons, he let her lead him from the safety of his cell, out into the hall. At least the soup would be discarded before she threw him back… Elf bitch.  
>  
>An aroma of wooden teeth and boiled cabbage filled the hallway. Everlasting torches dotted the high stone walls, well out of reach of the residents lest they find alternate uses for the magical flames. White gowned orderlies and nurses brisked by, smiles and kind words dripping in their wake. Did they truly think the great Rodius Drach, Archwizard of the Glaranox Tower, Possessor of the Telusian Eye, could be deceived so easily? Bah! If only he could escape from their meddlesome anti-magic field…  
>  
>“Here we are, Rodius. What game would you like to play?”  
>  
>The common room had been transformed, once again, into a menagerie of boredom and pointlessness. Each of the small tables was adorned with a single game. Checkers there, chess here, cards by the fireplace. But Rodius knew the real game afoot: doing whatever they could to dull his mind, whittle down his resolve.  
>  
>He’d never let them win. No, damn it. Rodius Drach would fight tooth and nail until the bitter end. Time was forever on his side.  
>  
>“Rodius?” Nurse Emerelda tapped his forearm with a claw. “Would you like to have a game of chess with your friend?”  
>  
>Delevar Godson was no friend. Already he laid in wait by the chess board, his grey hair hung limp over his weathered face, his hands hidden in the folds of his cloak. Rodius jerked his arm free of Nurse Emerelda and shoed her away. Even she knew better than to get between he and his nemesis.  
>  
>“Oh, Rodius.” Delevar’s high pitched voice was smoothed by the same infuriating calm that it held for the past thousand years. “Would you like to play a game of chess with me?”  
>  
>“No I would not!” Rodius held his chin high and looked down upon the lesser wizard. “I challenge you to a magic battle!”  
>  
>Fire flared deep behind Delevar’s eyes. So! The old idiot still had a bit of spark left.  
>  
>Rodius took two steps back and held his arms out to the side in readiness. Firelight played in the grout of the flagstone floor, like a powerful magic reaching through the room. Now, with Delevar before him, he could finally slay the man who had brought the Tower down. Revenge!  
>  
>The familiar tingle of magic welled from deep within his blackened soul — a gift from the dark lord — and pooled in his heart. With a weave of his fingers he constructed the spell, spoke the forbidden tongue, and launched his magic.  
>  
>Purple and orange sparks blasted the air and winked out of existence almost as soon as they left his outstretched palms.  
>  
>“Rodius,” Nurse Emerelda chastised. “No magic. You know the rules. Sit down and enjoy your game with your friend.”  
>  
>“No, damn it.” Rodius shuffled around to face her. “I won’t be dismissed so easily, wench! If I had my way you would be nothing but one of my concubines, or discarded into my army of orcs to be their plaything!”  
>  
>A murmur from behind him punctuated a sudden blue light. Delevar! Rodius had turned his back on him! Was this it, the final moment before his body was frayed and the bargain struck with the dark lord had its last clause enacted?  
>  
>Nurse Emerelda wagged a finger. “Delevar, no magic either. Honestly you two, it’s the same every Tuesday. Why don’t you both sit—”  
>  
>“Enough!” Rodius announced. “I demand you release us from this anti-magic field. Become witness to true power the likes of which hasn’t been seen in an age!”  
>  
>“If you two don’t sit down and play nice, I’m going to call in Ferelden.”  
>  
>Rodius shambled back to the table and sat down, casting a frown over his shoulder at the gaoler. Patience. That was what was needed, he must remember. He had all the time in the world to wait this purgatory out.  
>  
>“Queen Pawn to Queen four.” Delevar’s arthritic hand curved into a sickle over the board. He smiled. “Your move.”  
>  
>“Bah!” Rodius sat back and crossed his arms. “Your feeble intellect is no match against mine, Delevar. I won’t debase myself any further than I already have by sitting next to you.”  
>  
>“You’re just scared of Ferelden, that’s all.”  
>  
>“I am not. He is nothing but a brute.” Rodius sniffed and raised his chin higher. “He’d have made an excellent general in my armies.”  
>  
>“Let it go, old man. You haven’t had your armies for two elven ages. It’s all gone. The Tower, the council, the conquest. Half of what we did is legend now, on its way to become myth.”  
>  
>Rodius leaned over the table and hissed. “Exactly you old fool! Soon, the reason for our imprisonment here will be forgotten. They will let down their guard. And then! Then Rodius Drach will command the Armies of Argal once again! Tremble peasants and kings alike!”  
>  
>“Sit down, Rodius. You’re going to get Ferelden sent over.”  
>  
>“Bah!” Rodius straightened his robes and retook his seat. “You’re scared of him too.”  
>  
>“As should every wizard be. Psionics are bad news.”  
>  
>With a grunt, Rodius reached toward an obsidian pawn and made his move. Patience. Let them believe he was a neutered old mage, incapable of free-thought. Time, as always, was on his side.I recently posted the first chapter of my manuscript before and decided to turn that into a second chapter. Instead, I'm starting off here. 

Any and all feedback/suggestions are greatly appreciated!

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z-HoPyoRB67A0cejXc-\_i5LMGMTUQu8jM5QxjUseJ\_M/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Z-HoPyoRB67A0cejXc-_i5LMGMTUQu8jM5QxjUseJ_M/edit) Hello guys,

Second time posting this, since I didn't see that the maximum amount of words was 6k. I cut my story up so that it's within the guidelines. Below is the new link. I hope it complies with the guidelines now. Curious about your opinions. 

After working on 4 short stories in the same universe for over a year (writing, editing, illustrating, editing, translating, editing, editing, editing, translating again), I've finally finished the first one. I hope you love it as much as I do! You can read it for enjoyment, or read it critically. Feel free to leave your feedback. Please don't crush my hopes and dreams.

My friends liked it, so now I'm curious what the internet-stranger's opinion is of the world / lore / characters etc. Is the story interesting enough for you to wanting to see how it ends?

(PS: Non-native English speaker, so I hope everything is grammatically correct and without spelling mistakes) 

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1I9DDG9\_RUi0u\_5HpsZnR7Nj6fatEfJ\_fgwKOTQOxyYg/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1I9DDG9_RUi0u_5HpsZnR7Nj6fatEfJ_fgwKOTQOxyYg/edit?usp=sharing) 

Fading light peered through the open window. Sounds of scratching punctuated the otherwise muffled ambience. Dust particles danced gracefully in the sun beam as he worked. He noticed none of this. Not the bustling street above. Not the hunger he most certainly should have felt after 36 hours of toil. Not even the cramp in his wrist and neck as he sat hunched over the workbench. It was nearly finished. The culmination of months of effort, and the end was in sight. This was to be Amar's first carving. The first of many, he hoped. The first was special, a rite of passage, and these last days had felt longer than the last few months together. As the anticipation grew, it was all his effort not to tremble. The final details were added, and he gasped. Not knowing how long he had been holding his breath, Amar sat up, back cracking like the knuckles of an impatient school yard bully. It was done.

Amar sat staring at his creation, not speaking, just breathing. Deep purposeful sighing, as relief washed over him. It was done, and it was right. The small stone disc, intricately carved with asymmetric patterns, inlaid with precious metals and stones, sat motionless on the bench. It was beautiful, of course, but Amar could not help feeling like there should be something more. This tiny, albeit pretty rock, had cost him all he owned. It had taken years of study and months of carving to produce. It sat there, waiting. He sat there, waiting, with no good reason. There would be no ceremony when he activated his first rune. There would be no graduation, no congratulations from friends, mentors, and proud family members. It would just be him, so why wait?

Amar stood, cleared away his tools and brushed off the work bench. He cleaned a single chisel, his favourite, sharpened it, and set it aside the rune. Two large deep breaths and he took hold of the chisel, raising both hands above the rune. Amar pressed the chisel to his finger, applying just enough pressure to break the skin. A single drop of blood dripped from his fingertip to rune below. As it landed, it immediately sank into the recesses carved with perfection into the stones face. The single drop of blood ran through the valleys in the rock appearing to cover much more than the one drop logically should. As it did, Amar felt the growing change. It was not sudden, not euphoric. It was not a monumental shift in his understanding of the world or himself. The change was subtle, slight and in his core.

The carving had been a task, a means to an end. Amar had understood from his studies how to carve the rune, but now for the first time he felt he truly knew the rune. It was a gentle dawning of clarity. The reason for each recess, for each stone, for each metal. It just, made sense now.

Adrenaline built in Amar as the realisation came that he was now attuned to his rune. He picked it up, stepped back from the bench and closed his eyes. It should be simple enough to work the rune. The hard work after all, was already done. He should just will it, and see it done. "Just try it!" he thought, his curiosity growing understandably impatient. Nervous, but unafraid, Amar raised the rune and channelled his thought, his energy, his essence into the stone. All at once the room blazed with light. His eyes still closed; Amar could see the red of his blood vessels in his eyelids. Slowly he lessened the force with which he compelled the rune, and began to open his eyes. Peering through eyelashes and tears, Amar saw what he already knew to be true. The rune was glowing with a bright white light, and the light was his.

Sweat dripping from his brow, Amar slowly lowered the stone and released his grip on the power it held. It was done. He stepped over to his bed in the corner of this dusty basement abode, lay on top of his only blanket, and slept, still clutching his creation.Does anyone have any tips on writing doppelgangers or "evil" twin plots as one of the main plot points for a story? In the story I'm working on I have a set of sextuplets (6 people born at the same time) who end up getting magically split in half during their birth by a curse from the gods so now there's 12 characters instead of 6. I have it set up where the main conflict doesn't follow the basic "I'm the original" plotline you see in TV. Each character and their counterpart agree that there really isn't an original anymore as that version of them is dead as long as their separated.

 Instead the conflict for them is an intense pull to reclaim their lost power but doing so in a way that they don't outright merge back into the original being. There's also an intense need to prove that they are better than their respective counterpart and also a fight for survival as the way to regain their full power is to kill their counterpart. Another area of conflict is gonna be if these 12 characters are even in control of their actions as they were made by a high level entity to be god killers but once they were cursed by the gods these children ended up mostly forgetting their mission and programming but could be subconsciously doing things that lead to the gods death regardless. There will also be themes of are people inherently bad, or raised to be bad etc.

Anyway I know in most stories or movies that have doppelgangers as a plot only feature for a handful of episodes or so probably because juggling so many characters and making them distinct can be hard so any advice would be great.

For plot reasons I've decided not to go the route of counterparts being the opposite gender or having say a different hair color from each other. But instead I have it where a counterpart is able to modify their hair color to a certain degree. For instance I have a character name Candace who naturally has pink and black hair. Candace is able to to shift the amount of color in her hair to feature more pink or more black. Her hair has to feature some amount of each color. Her counterpart will also have the same colors for her hair but where Candace prefers to have pink be the dominant color in her hair her counterpart prefers black to be the more dominant color in her hair. Each counterpart also has different hairstyles from each other.

Anyway any advice would be greatly appreciated. I hope I've described my question in a way that makes sense but I'll be happy to provide more context to clarify things if needed.All critiques are welcome thanks for the help guys. Super helpful if you could tell me where you stopped 




                          





              Prologue 

                                   The New Age

  “I fear this power will be the end of humanity, but let us revel in its beginning.”    
              
   -The Ashen King, post awakening.


The infant's cries were silenced by the green sphere. Father Gentri used a frail boney finger to help the ball down the babes throat, as it let out muffled gags. The sound made Ezir want to vomit. He knew the importance of the ritual, as it was considered the most important day of one's life, but it had aways disturbed him. “Do the bastards have to be so harsh? Couldn’t they harm the child?” Ezir asked his sister. 

“As humans we are given two gifts, life and power. If you cannot accept both, god deems you not deserving of either”. His sister droned, mimicking the monotone teachings of Father Gentri. “Besides, that child took it far better than some I know. You turned purple and caused mother to faint, and twelve years later she still coddles you like you’ll die any moment”. 

Ezir ignored his sisters chiding, choosing to turn his attention back to Father Gentri, who continued to intone rhetoric from the dusty tome. The boy knew it was from the Salvicon, and had been taught it was the corner stone of the new age of man. It contained the Prophet Kings “teaching”, though he thought the stories more fantasy than a true account. The mostly dry and repetitive texts had been bane of his education. Having been excited about his formal training in the of turning of power only four years prior, wanting to become strong like most of his kin, especially his father. While he had been tutored a great deal on magical weight and the art of exchange, he was equally filled with waxy tales from a time before humans were given the gift. He saw them now as the teachings of primitives, long past able to have bearing on his life. The room hushed as the cleric began into what Eriz knew was the final, passages. 

 “Before our enlightenment, before the writings of Mestoph, before the Prophet King changed the fate of humanity, there was terror.” toned Father Gentri “The first record of ventures into the sea were taken hundreds, if not thousands of years before the awakening. These would be the first accounts of the horrors the abyss held. Hollowed trees banded with wood sailed humans from the shore to better hunt the bounty of food the sea held, only to find you will never return. Early historians wrote these accounts, telling of monstrous titans appearing from the depths, punishing those who were foolish enough to leave the sanctuary of land.”

Ezir moved away from the preacher, who continued his dry mouthed recounting, and the still crying infant he resided over. He thought if he had to choose one for eternity, he’d choose the wailing child over the mind-numbering readings. The tales were taught religiously to all children of the new empire, and if all the texts were suddenly burnt to ashe, Ezir guessed he could write it from memory. “I would have probably been the one to burn them” he chuckled to himself. 

Glancing around the spacious dining room he saw the crowd surrounding the waning ceremony, which consisted of mostly family, invited guests, a few servants, adnored walls that angled into ceiling, and the floor. He decided the floor to be the best background for his minds indlings. Creating a small flame above his finger, that he then danced across his hand. Which his teachers continuously reminded him not make a habit of, citing the tragedy of the Ashen King from their tales. 

 The infant had stopped crying, and was now sleeping in the arms of Ezir's aunt, a new mother. Father Gentri continued to intone the story of the Prophet King and his legacy, though somewhere far off, as his mind was not near. Ezir wondered if his cousin would take to the power like most of the Almacur family. They had a strong bloodline for magic, and had become moderately wealthy because of it. His father had said their lineage could be traced back to the nobles in the days of the awakening. Though after hearing that same line from almost all the noble families, he had his doubts. With most of the Almacur bloodline being at least high in common or emitter rank, and a few nearly elites. His father and uncle being two of them, earning a reputation for their power and service in the military. 

Ezirs gaze continued to wonder, passing over the elderly in the front pews. He noticed there was a hooded figure sitting in the back row who seemed to be looking directly at him. Ezir glanced away in reflex, which snuffed the flame as his concentration wavered. Quickly bolstering himself, another glance showed the man had gone, but the prickle on his spine persisted. He asked his sister if she had seen the strange person, but was brushed off and told the ceremony was almost done.

“Are you here with the family?” The cleric asked suddenly.

All eyes turned to meet who Father Genrit was speaking to. The hooded figure in dark robes only bore a smile as he made his way between the pues towards the small crowd, while drawing a pale sword from his side. The blade made it half way out of its sheeve before a pillar of blazing light formed around the would-be assassin. Ezir found the moments after a blur. Strong hands pulled him back from the inferno as a great heat hit him. He blinked away after visions of a yellow-blue cylinder of flame.

 Towards his left, his uncle and father stood abreast with knees bent, ready to cast another spell if need be. The attendees had moved back to give the brothers room, still weary and searching for danger. The two straightened slightly and lowered their hands as they approached the charred hole in the floor. His uncle lit a flame in his palm as he knelt to inspect the smoldering ring. His father began dousing some of the small fires left from the attack with a small stream of water, as he was known for his specialty in fire, the narrow stream was likely all he could produce. 

“We turned that scum to ash. He must’ve not known the twin flames of the Almacur family would be attending, or he was a fool.” said Ezirs father. 

“Brother... there's no bones”.

“What? That’s impossible.” 

His uncles' eyes widened “Lazril, behind you!”

Ezir saw where less than a second prior, there was nothing but air. Now the hooded figure was suddenly behind his father. “How is this possible?” he wondered “And where is his sword?” but he could now see it was hidden away between his father's ribs. “Father!!” he cried out and threw all his magical weight into a ball of fire, which shot forward from his hands. Though it was pitiful in compare to the last display, the fist sized ball of heat made a small explosion upon hitting its target. 

To his horror, it had not hit the assassin, but his father. He gurgled out a blood choked scream and fell, burning. His uncle's hands were a flame as well, but with a blue hue. Tears like small sapphires followed them to the ground. The assassin had suddenly appeared beside his uncles' outstretched arms, a slice upwards took both of his hands at the wrist, before slicing his throat with one fluid strike. 
 
The boy sank to his knees and looked on in horror as the black robed blur dispatched the priest, then his family. There were only three now. Ezir, the assassin, and his infant cousin, of which the assassin approached. The blood-soaked swaddles screams were barely audible over the flames that now engulfed most of the room, and had likely creeped into the upper floors. 

Kneeling on the cobbled floor, Ezir watched as the assassin plucked his cousin by the ankle, holding him straight limbed to the side before, turning to meet his gaze. Ezir saw then the face of the murderer who had just slaughtered his family, the growing light of the fire dancing a cruel dance up the features. It was... beautiful. 

He couldn’t tell gender, but beautiful it was what he thought. Though the word seemed hollowed in compare to this creature. To say it was male would be an insult, as the skin was smooth, with high and fair cheeks. Perfectly delicate features that would make most princesses of the Eastern union seem like sun dried drunks. But to say it was female wouldn’t portray the strength of the face. Strong muscle and jaw, its eyes held an unblinking gaze of challenge.

 He wanted to summon more flames to burn the demon, but only a candles flame sputtered to his finger, his store of power was empty, his weight used. The flames produced from the earlier spells were now engulfing the half dining room, and was making its way to the rest of the mansion. Still entranced, Ezir saw the beautiful predator turn to the pray. It laid a hand over the infant's stomach with a pale, almost violet hand, and spoke.

“Iss believes ready...” and made a shooshing motion on top of a hungry smile. It’s teeth were.. 

The room was beginning to grown and crack around Ezir, but he barely noticed. He was only focused on the sword the killer drew from it’s back. The blade had come to rest on his cousins abdomin. 

“Nooo!” Ezir screamed as he lunged for them, and was met with darkness..Let me know what you think, I sat down at my desk after work the other day and this just spilled out of me.   


>“Nope, sorry I quit.”  
>  
>The Dark Lord stared at the goblin, his mouth agape.  
>  
>“You can’t do that-”  
>  
>The goblin stroked the little patch of dark hair that sprouted from his chin, “Yes I can, and I do, excuse me.” He squeezed past the Dark Lord, carefully avoiding the long dark cape that pooled around his legs, and nodded politely at the armour clad hero standing in the entrance hall. The Hero wiped green blood from his magic glowing sword and gave the goblin a thumbs up, stepping out of his way as he left through the oversized mahogany chamber doors. As the doors shut behind him, although muffled this time, he once again heard, “Your time is over, Dark Lord!”  
>  
>Pentafrax Molaxis did not get paid enough to stand between his old master and some maniac with a big glowing blade and a hero complex, in fact Pentafrax Molaxis hardly got paid at all, and he was the Ex-Dark Lord’s right hand goblin! He stepped over the torn up remains of an unfortunate pair of orcs and shook his head, *fools!* Before making his way down a dark, steep spiral staircase, carefully avoiding the occasional arm or leg that he happened upon, muttering to himself about inadequate health benefits, and lack of vacation days. When Pentafrax finally reached the entrance to the fortress he had worked himself into quite the rant, he kicked a nearby orc head, and it flew through the rubble of what used to be the front doors, disappearing into the void of the night. Pentafrax followed suit, making his way home, shaking his head and cursing the whole way.  
>  
>“How was work today, son?” Mr Molaxis asked, twiddling his grey moustache, and peering at Pentafrax through half-moon spectacles that carefully balanced on the crooked and green branch of his nose. The goblin barely looked up from his steaming bowl of maggot-in-fish-eye stew, “Oh, I quit.” he said. Mrs Molaxis, who had been carefully preparing finger-sandwiches, dropped the nail clippers and they landed on the counter-top with a *clang*. “Excuse me?” said Mr Molaxis, his voice wavering as he failed to keep his temper. “Some guy walked in carrying a big glowing sword so I just said ‘You know what, I’m done with this place.’ and I left.” Pentafrax said casually, twirling his clawed finger through his soup. Mr Molaxis pinched the bridge of his nose and sighed,   
>  
>“That is not how it works, son, you can’t just quit.”  
>  
>“Yes I can.”  
>  
>“No- you can’t”  
>  
>This was clearly going nowhere, Pentafrax leaned back in his chair and spread his hands out. His father frowned and firmly placed his spoon on the dinner table. “But you had such a good job there at that fortress, you were the right hand goblin!” Pentafrax shook his head, “Dad, the Dark Lord is dead, I mean that guy had a REALLY big sword, there is no job there anymore. Besides- maybe I don’t want to be a hench-goblin anymore, maybe I want to travel. Maybe I want to see the world.” There was a loud crash, fingers and mouldy bread flew through the air, as Mrs Molaxis fainted from the sheer shock of her son’s brazen wish to do anything other than serve an all-powerful Dark Lord. Mr Molaxis sprung to his feet, his chair flying backwards and crashing onto the floor, “Go to bed. Tomorrow I am marching you straight to the nearest fortress and we are getting you a nice new job as a hench-goblin, I will not hear anymore of this nonsense about travelling the world.” Pentafrax knew that he was defeated, and with a sigh slowly got up from his chair, and made his way deeper into the hovel toward his bedroom. He decided that as soon as his parents had gone to bed, he was getting the hell out of there. He crawled through the entrance-hole to his bedroom and began to gather his things, carefully placing them in a burlap sack. Knife? Check. Map? Check. Fresh socks? They were odd. This bothered Pentafrax to the point where he removed them from his sack. He would just buy a fresh pair when he reached town. The goblin paused for a moment, he realised a fatal flaw in his plan: Money. Payday was on Friday, and quite unfortunately, today was Thursday. A weekend of debauchery, followed by two days of take-aways had left him with nothing but a penny to his name. It was impressive, really, how he always managed to save exactly a penny at the end of each week. He sighed and slid the penny into the pocket of his shorts.  
>  
>By the time the clock struck 9pm, Mr Molaxis’s snoring could be heard echoing through the burrow. A shadow emerged from Pentafrax’s bedroom, it silently slid through the hallways, avoiding particularly loud floorboards with automatic ease. The front hole-door creaked open, and for a brief instant the image of Pentafrax Molaxis emerged from the shadows, before fading away into the night.**Context in the comments, curious to hear what you think of the style mostly. The line indicates a chapter break with what comes before being the end of a major arc, and what comes next the beginning of the final arc.**

And they danced. For once they were not hampered by the old irons on their feet, or the rigid march that was their usual dance. Now, without their feet to constrain them, they glided over the ice as the wraiths they were. 

Though. Were they? Did their fine grace not surpass the lifelessness custom to death? Did their movement not remiss of joy and happiness? Did they not become full of life as they danced across the ice as if they were dancing between the stars?

Perhaps they even were, because in the still lake no mirrored arch could be seen. Instead, it seemed that thousands of little flames had come down from the sky, illuminating the fleeting pair from below as they did from above. Yet all were outshone still by the moon, who shown her silver light on the pair and cast all else in a vibrant haze.

From the trees a small breeze arrived, carrying along the sounds of the forest and the songs of the Ents. Quickly the gently breeze became louder, nearly erupting into a storm as the torn lovers picked up their pace. There! There was the song of a nightingale! And there, the lament of an owl! And in between the couple spined and dipped and jumped and became one again.

And when they became tired, they simply glided across the ice, content in their embrace. They were set in place between the sky below and the heavens above. Their time was nearly as endless. And Haskjal whispered that he loved her. And Anja merely said “I know.” 

So they danced, until the first light of day.

\-------------

The rain hit Haskjal in the face as he finally cleared the forest. Although he held up his arm to shield himself from the worst, his coat had become soaked a long time ago already. Yet, for once he did not hate the rain, for this rain was not the icy cold whip of winter but held the soft promise of spring. Strange, he thought, how one night of bliss could make him care enough that he could feel the wetness again.Well, as the title says, I am looking for a reading exchange of short pieces. In my case is a short story, but I have no problem with reading novel fragments.

A few warnings/facts about my piece:

-It is not sword and sorcery or epic fantasy.

-It has practically no action to speak of and a lot of introspection/description.

-It's about a man ascending a sacred mountain.

-It was inspired by The Invention of Morel.

-English second language. One or two sentences may step into the eldritch realm.

This is so you don't find a boring not-my-cup-of-tea situation when you read my story.

As for your piece, I would just ask for no sex scenes (Sequels of reading Nevernight), no poetry, and nothing substantially longer than 4000 words. I am willing to read S&S or epic fantasy (Or any other genre of fantasy, including fantastic, slipstream and magical realism). Novel fragments are fine.

So, comment or send a message if you want to do the exchange. I will try to read your piece first to avoid any misunderstandings too, and i expect that out of the good of your hearts you will fulfill your part of the deal later.

(I will be off for a while after posting this, but not much more than an hour. Feel free to comment or dm me.)

Important: it should go without saying, but I will not share your writing with anyone (unless, of course, you ask otherwise) and I expect the same courtesy on your part.a little backstory before:

This country was created by one of the 2 strongest mages in existence, let's call her X for now, therefore is completely artificial, she made it with all the resources and needs for a nation to live and be completely  independent, she made like that so the people wouldn't need to have relations with another country, since she close the country in a way that is almost impossible to enter unless you know or is related to someone inside, that was the best solution she could find.

along with that country she created countless creatures, all supernatural in nature, most spiritual beings, it's normal for her kind to do that in order to create clans, the only diference is instead of staying in the spiritual plane like most of fairy queens, she decided to stay in the material plane. This clan rules the country nowadays.

The land itself is heavily based on Scandinavia, specifically Norway, Iceland and Scotland, although it's not part of Scandinavia i thought it would make sense considering the local culture that i have in mind, Celtic one. the separation of the land was made in 3 major regions for each country, and smaller regions considering the members of the clans, most takes care of specific regions, or specific aspects of the country as a whole. And that's where the trouble begins.

Since they are immortal per age the clan members rarely change, up to now only 2 new members have ever entered, X's wife, it's basically there by nepotism but everyone likes her so no one really cares, besides she is strong enough to go against X physically if ever needed, that's how they meet, and X's apprentice, that is the only one that really go against X verbally constantly(not in a fight way, more like pointing mistakes and correcting, or just straightforward disobeying, it's complicated but it works), something that per both respect and fear no one else in the clan's council goes, which can be dangerous in the long term, and X knows that someone like that is needed while ruling.

After both proved themselves in conflicts that happened in ages long gone they entered in the clan officially. Now the main characters, their descendants, 4 girls are about to enter the clan as well, two already have plans and roles for them, they will collect magic relics around the world with a special force, the other two, X grand daughter and the apprentice's daughter doesn't really know where to go,  and i will use this as an opportunity to show how the country works, my idea is to make them go in every department around the country to see how it is, while i show some clan's members that wouldn't be showed otherwise. The problem is i don't know what would go inside the clan. They control the country more from the inside than the outside, the citizens still chooses people to represent them, and those people rules as far as they can, making laws, police forces, judges and things like that, but everyone knows that the clan is the one that says the final word, they can and will interfere if they so want, everything works, the country is the most developed in the world (the rest of the world is in medieval setting while this one is far advanced, currently a light steampunk) and there is no injustices or something going on underground, it's just like that. it works. so if most of the things are "controlled" by the people, what would i leave for the clan besides this vague "the control the strings". Up to now what i have is:

*  the science department, where X's daughter works with people outside the clan with research and scientific development
* the internal relationships department, that takes care of relations between the territories inside the country
* the external relationship department, there's only one person from the clan here, they take care of what is needed outside the country, things like spies, control of information to the outside(there's a reason for this closed country thing)
* the golden wings, a group of flying soldiers that goes around the world collecting magical itens that possesses power considered dangerous, where very likely the other 2 girls will be as well, still not sure
* the public house, like i said it's a know fact the clan control everything in the grand scheme, they make sure to make everything as clear and public as possible, things like where your taxes are going to, what's going on in the country, future and ongoing plans, things like that.  It's like a city hall, for both the country and the local cities across the land. (the public house serves to administrate the clan as well)
* the army, X don't want the citizens to be involved in war, and the clan was created to be powerful enough to survive in the age of gods, therefore only the clan is allowed in the army. The police is made by the citizens, it's not really needed but better safe than sorry.

And that's what i have up to now. What else should i add? Also what do you think so far? there's a ton of untold info and i think i told more than necessary, but stillI have a magic sword that contains the soul of a famous warrior. He was, in life, part of an order of warriors who, per the plan of their leader, were to be made immortal so they could continue their fight down the ages, helping future warriors out here and there when things got tough. Unfortunately, only some of the warriors got their immortality before the bad guys destroyed the machine that made it possible. Still wanting to become immortal, but now lacking the means to immortalise his body, he was able to achieve a deficient form of immortality by transferring his consciousness to his own sword.

Later on, the machine is rebuilt, but by then it’s too late because his old body is dead. The warrior still gets the chance to ”fight down the ages”, just not in the way he was hoping; that being in the hands of other warriors. The sword itself is famous “down the ages” for its ability to cut through metal like it was paper, but unfortunately the blade is fickle, only being substantial in the hands of a warrior the sword considers worthy, and worthiness is measured against the sword’s inscrutable code of honour that it held in life; the test is applied to every action of the wielder, so any failing, no matter how small, can cause the blade to disappear, even at the worst possible moment! Despite being inscrutable, such a code of honour has its basis in the codes of honour of other warriors, and in theory another warrior could come to understand it completely. *In theory*.

The sword’s ability to communicate with the outside world is limited; it can sense events around it, but cannot speak or make signs beyond the substantiality of the blade. The warrior inside it is grumpy and disinterested of events outside of combat. When not in use, the warrior retreats into a sort-of mind palace where he relives his favourite memories, drawn from his entire mortal and immortal life so far. Such an artefact is unique, so nobody knows and as yet nobody has guessed that the sword is conscious, meaning so far no attempt to communicate has been made.

Is this good or bad immortality? Is this sword reliable in combat? Any other questions?

Thanks for the answers to my previous question; here is another one. I’ve tried to add more plot this time, as my previous question lacked it.Hello fellow writers! I’m currently stumped with a small aspect of my current project. I realized that I needed to add a magic system into my story that would make sense within the context of the world. Below is my general description of it:

The power to take spoken word and make it a reality. Users of this magic are able to take the words themselves or a person speaks and make them into something real. The words have to have intent and desire behind them. There is a limit to this power. Someone cannot say for example, “I want to blow up this city” and make it real. This magic is used for many services in my story such as making clothes, making materials to build, making weapons to protect the world, making objects to help make jobs easier. It’s very difficult to create living things with this power. Only powerful users of this magic are able to and even then the living thing does not live long. People can be born with this power, it cannot be learned. 

My main issue is that I’m struggling to come up with a name for this type of magic and what the people who use this magic would be called. In my mind, I see these magic users preforming this magic with their hands. When someone speaks and they use their power, they see the words floating in the air in coppery letters. I like to think they then take those words/letters and sort of weave them into existence almost like a sewer/weaver. I’ve played around with the words “weaver, weave, woven, word” etc but I’m not coming up with anything I like. I was wondering if anyone had any ideas or any tips to help me come up with something that sounds nice!

Thank you!This post is primarily meant for critique of the first chapter but if you feel like reading further, there is content some ways into chapter two. 

Any tips, gripes, misunderstandings, miscalculations in prose, or really anything I need to work on as a writer is welcome. Just not grammar please- I'll work on that in editing. The main focus right now is story, and while grammar is crucial to the communication of the story it is not the focus at this stage. 

Here's the link:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1saBQdyQciCPSa2VC_5DINZV_QJq9suVt6ovk0GOlzQs/edit?usp=drivesdk

A super vague synopsis to see if you're interested:

The North is divided from the South as Civil War rages in the Empire of Jvalsa, and the city of Vadesht is caught in the middle. Artillery bombardments leave the ground a wasteland, while the Southern Coalition and Imperial Militia have entrenched themselves. 


Thank you for anyone who reads!While I welcome other crit, I'm mainly concerned with the clarity of my scene changes. This section is smack in the middle of the story. Pertinent information is that Ashling, the POV character, is the child of a divine being imprisoned in a tomb of magical life sapping ice for various crimes. Tons of thanks to anyone who takes the time to look this over!

Sometimes she was awake in the frozen tomb, able to sense light or darkness as the time passed. At first, she counted these cycles. I have been here for three days. I have been here for ten days, for twenty days, for three hundred and twenty-eight days. Eventually, she stopped. Time meant nothing if time existed at all. She lost herself in memories and fantasies until suddenly she would be again inside the ice - entombed. The cold burned and made it hard to think.  


One day she found her eyes open, though her body was too heavy to move. Old frozen blood smeared the walls. Who had been there? Had she moved in her sleep? Was this just another dream? The only thing to do was watch the slow progression of shifting light across the ice and wait. She didn't know what she was waiting for. A sensation like fire tingling across her skin and ice in her bones. Something that could crack the walls of ice and free her. Something that could wake her from the nightmare of darkness and ice, the prison her own father had locked her into.

In the end, there was nothing else to do but sleep. So she did.

"Ashie?"

"Just a minute, Aideen." She muttered, turning another page in the anatomy book. The round eyes of the dead owl stared over her shoulder at her sister, years younger and day to her night. Ashling's fingers, slicked red, probed the bird's innards. She pinched a hard knot above its stomach and forced it up the esophagus. A ball of bone and hair slowly emerged from its mouth. A tiny wide eyed skull fell out of the ball.

Ashling turned to smile at her sister. She rested her gore-stained fingers against the little girl's pale cheek. The white showed around Aideen's blue eyes as they flicked from the tiny skull to meet Ashling's gaze. A single tear cut through the smeared viscera.

"C-can we play a game?"

"Of course, sweeting." Her crimson lips curled. A thousand years later another tear fell as Ashling shifted in her sleep.

(Second Scene)

A murky chill lay over the land as it always did. The ruins of the city and the palace were visible from the shore, from the tomb of glacial ice that never melted.

Nothing stirred in the dark water that swept up to the steps of the tomb, just as nothing stirred in all that long-dead land. Hundreds of years it had rotted until it was a corpse desiccated by time and endless cold. And in her tomb of ice, the princess slept, dreaming of fire and shadow.

Cutting silently through the black water came a ship, dawn following in its wake. It sailed through the mists hid the land and the water that seemed to swallow the light into itself. A shout echoed when the wan morning light sparkled off the tomb of ice. The mist diffused the sound of many voices as easily as it did the gray morning light. Even the splash was muffled as a skiff was lowered and men rowed towards the shore.

A lone man stood tall on the prow of the landing boat, his clothing fine and well cut, his jaw strong and his chin tilted high against the wind. He leaped from the boat as it landed, barely wetting his feet. A look around at the desiccated seagrass, the leafless mangled skeletons of trees stretching up to an unseen sun only made his upper lip curl. He ignored the warning calls of the sailors and proceeded to the tomb pushing the frost-rimed door open and vanishing inside. The Princess dreamed.

"Sister! Father's coming!" A bracing chill filled the hall as Aideen stomped in like a storm front.

Ashling lifted her head from the throat of the serving girl, a red welt blooming on the girl's neck.A chill went down Cailean’s spine as he saw those foretelling first flakes of snow peppering the branches of the deep woods and gathering on the ground before him. Despite that winter came every year didn’t make the turn in powers any less dreadful. He shared a look with Huntmaster Baltair for what had to be the dozenth time on this first winter hunt.

He felt Gregor slide up next to him, pressing his back to his as the two hunters kept their blades at the ready.  An iron sword and board in Cailean’s hands.

“Earlier snow than last turning and that last turning was even earlier still,” Gregor said as he and Cailean alike remembered their training and kept their eyes peeled on the trees, searching for any shifting foliage that would give away their enemy.

“The Seeth-folk shouldn’t come out before the turning,” Cailean said.

“Winter comes when the goddesses say, not when the M’anndra’s give way to the Gorloch’s,” Baltar said, “Fires need wood, we’re the encroacher's,” he raised his iron great-sword, “That they let us have our fill in the spring without bothering us is all the great compact promises, but winter is here, the sun sets earlier, the royal houses will shift,” Baltair’s breath came out in light steam that had seemed to grow thicker the further the party went into the woods.

Cailean looked over the party, keeping his shoulders to Bailtar and Gregor's. He, a humble first year, was among seasoned men, some with five winters of employment as Hunters under their belt. But for every experienced professional, there was a green boy like Cailean with a nerve in his step fearing the horrors he had heard about stalking the deep woods once the winter came. Some were wearing their father’s shields, some using their father’s iron weapons. Many had vanity printings of family crests that Cailean’s shield lacked, strapped to his arm was just a simple buckler with a plane face.

A rustle in the trees, the party froze in place, weapons at the ready.

Cailean looked over the trees, looked for any shifting of brush or bucking of bark. He closed his eyes for a second, just a second. He remembered his training, his study. The Gill’doher was out today, and that meant that people had a choice to make. Let winter come with no fire in their hearths, or incur the wrath of the Gill’doher for cutting down his sacred trees. Sacred trees, every damn tree was sacred to that beast. He lived in all of them, a stray cut of a woodsman’s ax, a woodsman just trying to provide for his family, was all that was needed to incur the monster’s wrath.

“So, the first tangle with the Gill’doher, you up for it?” Gregor asked.

“The Gill’doher? Some studies say theirs more than one, that it’s a common spirit inheriting a tree here or there, not one that owns the whole damn forest,” Cailean said. He had read much about the Gill’doher, many men had many theories as to the way the Seeth-folk worked. There were differing accounts of just how many of them were there. Did they have great courts deep in the unclaimed woods of the forever cold north of the island, or were they just an unorganized band of monsters who just loved death and murder? Every explanation for the ways of monsters was just another theory that men had for the ways of winter and the abomination it brought.

“Whether they’re one or countless, we’ll kill it or as many as we have too,” Gregor said, “You’re a winter hunter now, I know you were an ace when it came to the library and the endless questions of training, but now you’re about to find out the real work of our profession, the dance of combat, dancing with death, this is what a Winter Hunter does,” Gregor held his sword up, “Keep true to your blade, remember your training, be the demons of winter one or a thousand-”

“-We will see the spring is found,” Cailean said, finishing the final quote of the Winter Hunter’s oath.

He felt for a moment how quiet it was when he saw a monster ripping itself from the tree, antlers of a buck, bark for skin, and green leaves trailing down its head and neck. Cailean turned and dove as Baltair took a side step and raised his blade in the air, slashing at it and ripping into the bark as it retreated back into the tree. Cailean dropped his sword and rushed to pick it back up as the monster jumped from tree to tree, leaping out again just as Cailean was able to raise his blade and shield and take a strike at it as he fell back into the close-knit trees. He kept his sword and shield at the ready, he told himself he couldn’t jump again, couldn’t fear.

The monster slid from branch to branch staying in the trees as it emerged out of another trunk and with its hooked wooden claws it ripped the throat from his brother hunter Gregor. Cailean lunged in a desperate attempt to fight the creature he was being paid to kill. He nicked it a bit as the creature dived out of its reach, folding back into the trees. Another hunter took Gregor’s place between Baltair and Cailean.

“Eyes on the trees, stay tight,” Baltar said, raising his weapon, “There!” he lunged, and the Gill’doher took a blade of iron through its chest and screamed an unfathomable scream. Whether it was one of many or just a single creature of legend, it retreated back into the trees. Cailian could see just over his close held shield the bark of trees deeper and deeper in the woods vibrating as the monster retreated from those holy iron weapons that men stronger than him wielded against it.

“Gone, for now, good slash,” Baltair told Cailean. Cailean didn’t hear him, he rushed to Gregor, ripping a bandage from his heavily stocked belt and putting on his brother’s wound.

“You’re wasting good cloth,” Baltar said, “I saw the hit he took, that much throat wounded,” Baltair approached Cailean as he desperately pressed the cloth to his fellow hunter’s neck.

“Gregor, Gregor god damn it,” Cailean wanted to scream. This moment was so close to that most horrible memory. His own brother, his real brother.

You were a coward then, and you were a coward now. At least back then you had the excuse of being young, young and stupid, young and a coward. Get out of my head, Cailian tried to shake off Baltair as he tried to pull him from the dead man he was trying in vain to save.

“It’s not your fault, it’s winter, it happens,” Baltar said, grabbing Cailean’s arm and ripping him away.

“I missed a hit, I wasn’t good enough, it should have been my throat!” Cailean said in protest.

“You can’t think that way, not now, not in winter,” Baltair did not yell, he did not scold, he merely stated fact. “You keep blaming yourself you’re just going to lose more brothers, take the lesson, one of those harsh lessons winter teaches you. You learned well enough in training, you need to keep learning, I’ll make a Winter Hunter of you yet,” Baltar said, his grip still tight on Cailean’s arm.

“I’m not a winter hunter, I’m a fool with a sword he doesn’t deserve and a shield he clings to when he’s not brave enough to strike, I should have struck, I could have struck and got a blow before it ripped my throat out, I could have helped, and left a better hunter then I could ever be alive to defend the spring,” Cailean looked down.

“Look at me, look at me!” Baltar grabbed Cailean’s throat and forced the young hunter to look him dead in the eye, “You think you’re the first of us to see a brother’s death, you think you’re the first of us to dodge when he should slash, it’s you’re first year, not a hunter alive who couldn’t tell you this or that regret, this or that brother dead, now steel yourself. Winter isn’t coming anymore, winter is here, the time for care and study is over. You’ve a sword, and you’ve a shield. That’s all you can count on in this world, in this season of discontent. Now, are you going to use them and do your job, or are you going to waste precious time on those already dead? We can’t help those dead, say the creed,” Baltar, his huntmaster, his teacher, his trainer said.

“I am a winter hunter,” Cailean mumbled.

Baltar slapped him across the face, “Say the damn oath like you mean it,” he commanded.

“I am a Winter Hunter,” Cailean gritted his teeth, “I am the first defense against the scourge of the cold,”

“Now you sound like you have a pair, finally,” Baltair shook him.

“I am the last defense against that horrible darkness, I have sword and shield against threats so old, against threats without names, I defend those with nothing and those with even less, whether those threats be a one or a thousand,” Cailean put his hand on Baltar’s arm, “I will see the spring is found,”

Baltar pushed Cailean to the ground, “See you remember those words, it’s your first winter, soon those words are all you’re going to have,” he said, “Now get up, clean the blood from your hands and help us dig a grave for your brother,”

Dig a grave for your brother. Second time in his life Cailean had been told those words. His cowardice would likely see many brothers killed if that damn voice in his head had anything to do with it.

No.

No one else.

Cailean kept his breath as calm as it could be as he dug along with his fellow hunters. He would not lose his brother again, and he would not lose another brother.

Get used to this you coward. Get used to putting better men than you in the ground. That’s all you’ve ever done.

Cailean refused to hear that voice again. Baltar told him his duty, he was a Winter Hunter. It would not be Couldin’s body there to guard him anymore. It would not be Couldin to take the hits from a rogue monster of winter just so he can keep living his pathetic life. 

You’re burying a better man than you. You know that right?

“Out of my head you damn voice,” Cailean said to himself as he dug his shovel into the ground and struck a rock. He held his tool down, closed his eyes, took a breath, tried to collect himself.

Couldin was supposed to be here. Couldin was supposed to be celebrating a great hunt with his brother Winter Hunter’s. Couldin wouldn’t have to bury one of his brothers on his first Goddess damned hunt.

His father said it wasn’t his fault, his mother said it wasn’t his fault. Cailean could still remember the tears in his mother’s eyes as they put the better son in the ground. He remembered stalking through his house at night, after that terrible night, and finding Couldin’s iron sword. He remembered stalking to the backyard and practicing the few movements of training that Couldin had shown him. The barebones training he took to Hunter’s Hold. It was hardly the training a Winter Hunter needed. He was as green as they came when he submitted himself and his life to the death sentence of being a Winter Hunter.

I have to be good enough, if I’m a tenth of what he could be, that has to be enough, he thought. They say it was a Baobhan that got them. A deadly creature that feigned its prey in with the allure of a beautiful woman. She was so beautiful. That foolish young man’s lust Cailean had being dragged into her web. He was a silly boy, following a beautiful woman in the clutches of darkness and the only person that would, could, defend him was his own brother, his older brother, always looking after him, always protecting him. Couldin got his dream, he got to slay a monster, and all he had to pay for the experience was his own life.

The dream of becoming Winter Hunter, becoming a man who fought for those like the young useless boy he was. That was Couldin’s destiny, not his, but with his death, Cailean accepted the responsibility. He was a Winter Hunter, he was the last defense against that horrible darkness, he had sword and shield against threats so old, against threats without names, he would defend those with nothing and those with even less, whether those threats be one or a thousand, he would see that the spring was found.”Storyline: There was another world entirely different from our own.  A ripple in time opened a portal into a world called Magestia, in this world magic ran in abundance. The people of this world were called Variants, they were a peaceful race until humans and their greed infested their world. The humans were sapping from the Variants Primordial Seed. Slowly killing their planet. The fluid that is inside the Primordial Seed is called Dreamscape.This is what Magestia thrived on, what gave them their magic. Once the Variants realized this they waged war with the humans. The war was brutal and the humans were losing it. That was until a human scientist called Dr. Varkos  came up with the idea to Infuse the Dreamscape they received into young children about 14 and up. These children will become the first Variant/ Human  hybrids called Mages. With these children they could turn the tide of the war. The first 5 kids that were experimented on were: Worran, Tria, Aegis, Thoran, and Mora. 

Title: Dreamscape


   Main Characters:

(Protagonists)


 Name: Worran

Gender: Male 

Backstory: Grew up with 4 other kids who were experimented on to create superhumans for a war. Using a serum called: Dreamscape. 


Abilities: Water Manipulation and Creation 

Magic: Ocean's Wrath 

Skills: Water Constructs: Creates Weapons made from water.

Poseidon's Rage: Turning water into a massive Trident he can summon creatures lost to time called Merfolk to do his bidding. 

Torrential Geyser: Brings water from out of the ground.

Name: Tria 

   Backstory:  Growing up alongside the other kids that were experimented on she was the bravest one of them all. She learned that their lives will be forever changed. 


Gender: Female 

Abilities:  Weapon Shifting: Can turn any part of her body into any weapon she chooses. 

Magic: Affinity Imbuing: Can imbue elemental Magic into the weapons she shifts into. 

 Skills: Ice Swords: Can turn each of her hands into swords with Cryogenic Energy. 

Flame Shield: Can turn her skin into  a Shield that burns her enemies. Water Bow: Shifts Her legs into a bow and stands on her hands to shoot arrows created from water. Encrusted Hammer: Shifts her foot into a giant rock like hammer that makes a shockwave on impact. 


Name: Aegis

   Backstory: In the underground lab where she and 4 others were experimented on, Aegis was always self conscious of her appearance, especially her hair. During one of the experiments they had turned her hair into a head full of enchanted snakes.This did not improve her self consciousness, In fact it worsened it. As time grew on she became more and more  introverted and bitter. 


  Gender: Female 

    Abilities: Snake Creation: She Takes the many snake-like creatures off her head and enlarges them. 

    Magic: Poison Creation: Can create poison and transfer it into her Snakes.

 Skills: Decay Snake: Can cause anything to decay with one bite.  Acid Snake: Shoots acid at opponents. Cloud Snake: Emits a noxious cloud of gas around itself. Corrupted Snake: Releases a poison that corrupts the target, killing them. Cancer Snake: It's venom can cause any organ to become infected with cancer.  Damage Snake: Inflicts multiplied damage 5 seconds after being bitten.



Name: Thoran 


Backstory: Experimented on with 4 other kids, Thoran is very rash and quick to act. This can be a help or a hindrance. He was always angry at the doctors for locking him and the others here to run stupid experiments. He really hates the dark. 


Gender: Male 

Abilities: Light Manipulation Light Constructs 

Magic: Thor's Wrath 

Skills: Storm Cloud: Can summon massive clouds that bring lightning down upon enemies. Light Speed: Manipulating the energy around him he can move as fast as light.  Light Shift: Can momentarily turn himself into lightning. Zeus's Bolt: Creates a massive lightning bolt which can obliterate anything or anyone in its path. Molnijr's Might: Summons a massive lightning infused hammer into his hands increasing his power tenfold.  Lightning Imbuing:Iinfuses lightning into anything he touches.

Name:  Mora

 

Backstory: Kidnapped from her home and sent to an underground laboratory with 4 other kids her age and was experimented on.  

 Mora was a quiet young lady and was very smart. But Mora didn't trust easily. Her only friends were her plants. Because plants couldn’t betray or hurt her.


Gender: Female 

   Abilities: Flora: Plant Manipulation  And Creation. 

   Magic: Nature's Blessing

     Skills: Cactus Thorns: Brings giat thorns  from out of the ground and attacks with them.

Toxic Pollen: Releases pollen from the giant dandelions she creates. Sleep Spores: Can put anyone to sleep with the sleeping mushrooms she creates. Mother Nature's Rage: Turning all plants into man eating creatures to attack opponents. Full Bloom: All nearby allies are healed. World Tree Creation: Yggdrasil: Summons Valkyrie from another dimension.  World Tree Creation: Golden: The Tree of The Ancients: Calls upon heroes from battles past imbued with their original power. 

World Tree Creation: The Mother Tree: birthplace of beings called dryads.Thanks to my old post known as "fairies" I wanted to expand the lore of my story and how not to show it to you, so I can know what you think of it.

So let's talk about one of the most dangerous creatures and possibly the greatest threat to humans in the universe "the curses"  So let's start with these questions 

**What are they?** 

Curses in plain words are corrupted souls of what was once a human being. In order for a curse to be created, certain requirements must be met, the first is a violent death (either murder, suicide or in rare cases the attack of another curse) and the second is that the victim felt a negative emotion at the time of his death. Once these requirements are met, the victim's corpse will begin to mutate, giving life to a monster.

**How did they arise?**

Well, these beings arose thanks to the krosmonite wars, more specifically during the death of Krosmo, one of the major gods and first son of Liatmo. He after his death cursed his blood, this caused that when the 4 primordial races (dwarves, giants, elves and humans) were born they were affected by the curse that Krosmos created. Unfortunately, humans would be the ones who would be most affected. 

**Types of curses, their appearance and characteristics:**

There are 2 kinds of curses, irrational and rational, each one represents a different threat. The irrational as its name says, are those who are totally based on his instincts and the rational ones that are very dangerous, these are curses that can think and act like a human being. 

Curses rational or not, they can be found in 3 types, being these the existing types 

**Beast:**  this one has a very animal appearance; showing horns, claws, wings and a quadrupedal position most of the time 

**Hybrid:** hybrids show both animal and human characteristics 

**Human:**  they are curses that are very similar to a normal human and that could go unnoticed in towns if it were not because they are ruthless beings who want to eat human flesh.

**Weaknesses:**  The weakness of a curse and one that is universal is its heart. But destroying it is not an easy task since their hearts are covered by a blue mineral that can only be destroyed by certain metals and attacks of great magnitude. 

**which are the most important?**

Unfortunately telling their stories would make this post too long so I will only mention their names and then I will do another post talking about them.  
**"Aquel el maldito"**  (I did not translate the name to avoid translation errors) 

 **Raven king** 

 **Empress** 

 **The Shadowless Rider** 

  
So what do you think? be honest this will help me improve the lore of my storyI finally finished outlining the last major arc of my webcomic, so I decided to rewrite my introduction/summary in light of the completed outline! 

I'm trying to figure out which words will create the right promises for the story. Things such as: 

What sort of expectations does it generate? Does it feel like it'll be primarily lighthearted? melancholic? gritty? Do you expect it to take place in one city/country, or does it make you expect a travelogue? Does it seem more like it'll be about high magic and fighting dragons, or more about the dramas of growing up? 

Note: Target audience is age 15-25. 

Any opinions, critiques, or questions are highly appreciated! 

===

INTRODUCTION: 

When every road is paved in darkness, and even the stars are hidden -- point yourself in any direction, and walk forward anyway. 

There *is* light, somewhere. And it's brighter than we could ever dream. Someday, somehow, as long as we never give up, we will find it. 

Follow Hsin-Yu, Kietcharoen, and Ele, on their syncopated journey to find hope for the future, freedom from the past, and the presence of mind to cherish today. 

Tags: Historical Fantasy, Coming-of-Age, Drama, Romance, Trauma Recovery, Philosophical, LGBTQ+

Edit: Applied an edit per spacebarman*Nora, 7:36am**

The waves hitting the facades of the harbor, the neighbors talking downstairs and the clatter of the machines helping the fishermen woke me up. This is the big day, the day I will finally be recognized and appreciated throughout Arcadene, my project is finally finished. Tonight I will present it to the highest people in Arcadene, the Wiffen’s.

The sun is shining in the sky and the breeze from the sea is pleasant. I head to the kitchen where the plates are still on the kitchen table. Julius had promised me that he would put them away but they are still piled up there.

- Hi sweetie!

Grandpa's rough voice startles me and I drop a plate on the floor and it breaks into a thousand pieces.

- I'm really sorry, you scared me...

- Haha! You're always so clumsy! I really wonder how you invented a machine that will supposedly "change the world".

I sigh with discouragement, grandpa's voice in the morning will make me angry, he is always in denial about my project.

- You know, young lady, here in Fisherport the people are more down to earth and don't believe in all that "technological advancement" nonsense.

- Seriously Grandpa... I've told you before: machinery will make the world grow. With machines we will be able to catch fish 20 times faster!

- That's bullshit! There's nothing better than a good old-fashioned fishing rod!

I put my face in my hands and think about all the nonsense he tells me every day. I really don't need to hear all that, especially not today.
I grab my bag and head for the exit.

- See you later old grump, I'm out! Do you know where Julius is?

- He's already at the harbor fishing, because he's a model child and-

I slam the door before he can say another word. The smell of fish hits my face and I pinch my nose for a second.

I look at the horizon to find my brother but the harbor is already filled with many fishermen unloading fish and fishing everywhere.

I walk through the crowd and weave my way through the many sailors, getting hit by fish as I go, boy, was I born in the wrong neighborhood. I finally manage to get out of the horde of fishermen and take a good breath of air with cod and tuna flavor.

- Hey Nora, could you come and help me, this old machine is asleep!

I look up and see Eldon, our neighbor, shaking a Steam Human 4 as if he was a sleepwalker who had gotten lost

- Eldon I told you before that this "old machine" is called a Steam Human and don't shake it like that you might break something.

- It may look like a human but humans don't sleep in the middle of a task, look, it dropped fish everywhere!

I approach the SH4 and open his plate which is located on his chest and I notice immediately the problem and push a sigh

- Eldon, you forgot to fill it with coal yesterday, I already told you that Steam Humans can't work without coal. It's like their food and if you starve it, it will die.

- Oh I see, thanks Nora! Also, if these machines ate sardines like everyone else, it would be much easier!

- I don't doubt it Eldon... have you seen Julius?

- Yes, he's down at the harbor, your brother is a real pro! He catches fish by the bucketful!

Eldon points to me and I immediately see my brother hiding among the fishermen who are squeezing for a place to fish and I run to him.

- Good morning little brother!

Julius doesn't even notice me and sticks his tongue out to get maximum concentration.

- Hey, Julius, I'm talking to you!

Julius finally turns to me with an annoyed look, but quickly changes his expression and puts on a big smile.

- Today's the day, Nora! You're going to rock it out there I'm sure!

- Thanks Jules! I would be even happier if you had done the dishes.

- Sorry, but to become the greatest fisherman in Fisherport you have to fish as much as possible, I have to fish day and night!

- Or you could become the assistant to the greatest machinist in all of Arcadene! It feels weird to be the only one who likes technology here in Fisherport. You're 16, you could start now and I'll tell you all my secrets!

- No, I won't. I'm not interested in all those machines.

Even though I expected it, it still hurts to be the only one in this neighborhood who likes technology and it makes me anxious to go to the Wiffen castle alone.

- Well, shall we go back? You've been fishing for at least two hours and Grandpa can congratulate you on being the perfect grandson.

- Okay... but only because there's no room in my bucket.

Night has fallen faster than I thought and it's almost time to go to the Wiffen's. I've been walking in circles for hours practicing my speech in front of the crowd of people that will be there.

I put on the elegant dress my friend gave me and get ready to leave. Julius and Grandpa are waiting for me sitting around the kitchen table

- So, are you ready sis’?

- Yes, I think I am. I'm still a little stressed but I think I'll be fine.

- Haha! You should be stressed! Wiffen are sneaky and have no empathy for the poor neighborhoods. This is your last chance to give up sweetie!

- No way I'm giving up grandpa. Proving you wrong is my biggest motivation!

Grandpa laughed and pointed at me. He definitely won't give up, so neither will I!

- Take care Nora, I believe in you!

- Thanks Julius, don't worry, you'll be proud of me.

I open the door and turn back to them one last time. My grandfather wipes away those tears of laughter while Jules gives me a thumbs up that is strangely reassuring.

I close the door and take a deep breath. The smell of fish wafts straight up my nose and I lean on the balcony railing to bear the smell.

Direction the Wiffen castle.

I now look at the stars in the sky. Even if there is a lot of smoke hiding the sky because of the chimneys I manage to see the stars well. It's a sign that everything is going well I hope. I lean my head against the window of the carriage to better contemplate them.

- Here you are, madam.

I get out of the carriage and I contemplate the great castle of the Wiffen. Here the air is pure and doesn't smell like a fish corpse.

The big gate opens before me and I find myself in the garden. Here everyone comes from the rich or the elite neighborhood. The women have amazing dresses that make me complex and the men have beautiful tuxedos and some of them even have mechanical arms.

I feel like I'm in a dream, I feel like I belong here and my work is going to be displayed in front of all these elegant people.

-*Would you like a drink, madam?

Suddenly a Steam Human appears in front of me holding a plate with champagne glasses.

- Yes, thank you very much!

Here the SH are well maintained and clean. And people know how to use them properly.

Suddenly, Clifford Wiffen appears on a balcony above our heads with his wife and three children. This is the first time I've seen the mayor of Arcadene in the flesh. He is very elegant and has long white hair that floats in the wind.

- Good morning dear citizens of Arcadene! Today is the great evening of the discoveries of your creations! We invite you to come inside, we will start with dinner! There is a buffet with the best dishes of all Holmesland! Help yourselves and have a great evening!

We all enter the big Wiffen castle and the main room is very big and luxurious in the center of which is a big buffet and all around the tables. I'm going to have a wonderful evening!

I have never eaten so well, it's a change from the food we eat in Fisherport, here everything is good and varied.

- Hi Nora.

I jump and almost choke on the food I had stuffed in my mouth. I hit my chest to swallow better and when there is no more food left in my mouth I raise my head.

To my surprise it was Vincent, Vincent Wriffen, the eldest child of the Wiffen family

- So Nora, the project we have accomplished will soon be exposed.

- Yes, I can't wait Vince, what are you doing here?

- Well I came to see my partner, I just wanted to talk to you to see if you were still feeling well.

- Yeah I'm fine, don't worry about me. You know we're not supposed to be seen together, a girl from Fisherport and the mayor's son. Everyone's going to notice you with your white hair.

- Fine, I'll go if you're not happy to see me. But meet me at this door at 9:00 sharp.

Vince shows me a door that looks like a closet, near the front door. I want to ask him some questions about why he wanted to meet me there at 9pm but I want him to leave as soon as possible.

- Okay. I'll meet you there.

Vince gets up and heads upstairs where he's going to meet his entire family. He wants to talk to me as the introductions begin. He must have a good reason to ruin the show.

It's time, I get up from my seat where I was installed to watch the presentations and head towards the exit discreetly.

The room which was previously filled with tables and chairs is now almost empty and three SH are busy tidying up. I suddenly see Vincent who is leaning against the door he was telling me about, I hurry towards him to know the answers of this appointment.

- Nora, I warn you, what you will see behind this door will change your vision of the world.

Before I even stop running towards him, he says this sentence which leaves me perplexed. I have difficulty understanding but this sentence makes me excited all the same.

- Really? What's behind that door?

- Follow me and you'll discover the best experience of your life.

He leaves me speechless and I follow him through that door to find out what he says will be the best experience of my life.

**Julius 9:11 PM

I look out of my window looking at the Wiffen castle with a spyglass in my hands, imagining my sister in front of a crowd of people cheering and throwing flowers at her. Just imagining my joyful sister makes me smile

Suddenly, I hear a muffled but discreet noise coming from in front of me. And I see an orange light hiding the Wiffen castle. I adjust my spyglass to get a closer look and I see the horror.

Flames everywhere cover the castle. The fire was spreading at an incredible speed and at that moment I knew that my sister was in danger.

I rush out and slide down the stairs and finally land on the road and start running as fast as I can.

The faster I run the bigger and redder the flames seem to me. Suddenly I slip on a rock and fall to the ground. At the same time, I hear hooves banging against the stone floor. A horse-drawn carriage is heading towards me at full speed.

The driver shakes and the carriage falls on its side, but it's not enough to stop it, it heads straight for me and before I know it, it hits me. My eyes start to close and I suddenly lose consciousness.It's a bit rough around the edges, but I'm mostly concerned about the overall story rather than any grammatical issues. 3326 words
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nyx6RaWRggB8FLoR-R_ExE4gDcbMhwr4ac3ZokpxEWQ/edit?usp=sharing(Before I begin, this is my first post on this subreddit. If there is some rule I am ignorant of. Do contact me and hopefully it can be sorted so as to not get into any trouble.)

This is the first chapter in a short story I am writing called Zokon. **Be aware, this chapter has a lot of clunky dialogue, spelling mistakes, and confusing sentences. Formatting is also all over the place thanks to Reddit messing them up. Also, there are probably plenty of "telling, not showing" moments throughout. Do not expect anything creative. I am not calling this Chapter One of a NOVEL, because my writing puts a stain on anything with actual story. This is just a time-waster I wrote. Plus, I like things shorter.** 

What I do want is more storytelling concerns. How are the characters? How are the interactions? How well is the small chunk of combat? Is this chapter bad enough to have to force yourself to keep reading? Where do I succeed and where do I fail? I am aware of some my faults here, but I still want a second opinion from someone other than myself. **Also, keep in mind all things are subject to change and revision (especially the ending, which I feel is a bit quick.)** 

I'm saying these things as a foreword because I know there are lots of flaws, but I want some critical feedback. There is always something to learn. 

Enjoy reading! 

\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A tremor pulsed through the ground; it was a rhythmic upward-downward motion that introduced itself in very sharp intervals. A figure stepped into the clearing. He leaned down and placed his hand on the dirt and closed his eyes. A major vibration echoed from his hand and into his mind; he felt as if he was near a fire that would burn him up should he take another step. A small creature, aware of the interim, scampered into its hole deep underground before another earth-shaking tremor made itself noticeable. The leaves on even the tallest trees began to fall with each ever-increasing shake. He was getting closer.* 

*The figure stepped into an open hill; he looked down upon the grasslands that stretched a great distance. His eyes pierced through the forest line down below like a dagger. Another shake caused his body to jolt noticeably. He placed his hand back down onto the dirt, getting on one knee for better leverage, pressing his palm hard against the soil for confirmation as the vibrations ebbed and flowed. This was not normal.*

*“Indeed we are close, Julius,” came a voice from the clearing, “I could sense the foul stench from anywhere.”*    

 *He shifted his head slowly toward the voice in acknowledgment, “Yes, Zokon, I'm just trying to see it with my own eyes.”* 

 *The woods below lay still as the trees from afar did not shake or move, the birds did not scatter into the sky, and the wind calmly flowed solace. It was as if nothing was there, but the aura still made itself present. It was calling to them like a moth to a flame. Then, in a sudden burst, all the creatures of the world looked upon the great calamity in stupefaction; the great beast was here – and with it wrought judgment.*  

*Both men eyed the creature as it smashed through the trees and into the open; behind the forest it made its presence felt. Julius got back on his two feet and gripped his staff in his right hand harder.  Zokon began his trek down the hill and to eventually get onto level ground with the creature. His pace was quick and a sly smile was evident. “We do not wish to injure this creature,” Julius reminded, “we are just here to displace it to a more... 'appropriate setting'.”* 

*Zokon stopped in his tracks, turned back to Julius as if to reply, but quickly stopped his lips from chatter and continued his journey down. Julius could see Zokon slamming his staff into the ground as he walked and his free hand was clenched into a fist. Julius sighed at this observation and soon caught up with him down the hill.*

*Both of them had walked down to equal footing and could clearly identify what IT was... its wings fluttered, lifting itself into the sky, its teeth dripping blood, and its fur golden... it was an Aslon; a lion of great stature between its kin – an Alpha of the hordes – and it contained the fire of God's judgment and the wings of a drake positioned on its back; all below it consumed by fear as the natural order of nature dictates.*   

*“A lion fused with a Dragon,” Zokon declared, “as if I wasn't surprised.”* 

*The two, now grasping equal footing, stood 300 feet away from the Aslon.  “Its back is toward us,” Julius whispered to his comrade, “we just need to use our stealth and--”*  

 *The taller man walked forward and swirled his staff in a steady circular motion. His rotation increased and reached a crescendo and with the epoch an invisible force flew out from the propelling staff; it reached speeds far beyond the natural and collided with the beast in mere seconds. The impact knocked the beast back and it tumbled across the dirt like a rag doll. Zokon stopped his movement and with one final rotation slammed the foot of his staff back on the ground in defiance.*   

 *The beast quickly got back on its four feet and looked directly at Zokon and let out an ear-piercing roar – one that menaced with cruelty and contempt – which gave off a noise of lion and serpent. It put one paw closer to the man and observed him in an animalistic fashion; thinking what body part should it rip first and devour. Fueled by instinct, it then chose to be the aggressor and charged at Zokon from some 400 feet away – closing the distance quickly even with the knock back from seconds ago.* 

*Julius' mouth would have been wide open if he had the time to effectively process his emotion, but the situation required fast thinking. His companion had chosen the daring and quick approach instead of the calculated strategy envisioned. Julius stepped forward some feet ahead of Zokon who had now taken up a defensive stance – with his staff outstretched like a spear and his feet firmly planted against the grass – giving him a wide range of flexibility should prompt movements be called upon. Moving ahead, Julius briefly closed his eyes and stood firm; he called upon ancient elements through mind communication; he felt his free outstretched hand soon grasp a liquid, upon feeling the sensation he opened his eyes and shot what floated in his hand across the land into the beast's eyes – of whom stood now just 100 feet and closing – but the splash did not deter its resolve, it only drove it closer to its decision for extermination. It quickened its already mounting stride; paws slamming against the sod, claws digging into the dirt and briskly withdrawing – leaving its mark on the ground – and Julius could envision quite vividly the mutilation that would be forthcoming on flesh if he did not take abrasive measures.*

 *As the attention of the Aslon turned for Julius, he quickly enacted his form of self-protection: his side-step to the right turned rapidly into a side-flip as his whole body rotated in a swift three hundred and sixty degree motion; he glided in the air for around five seconds as his body position shifted and he landed deftly on his feet some ten feet away from his original bearings – his black, leather boots skidded and dragged against the terrain as he came to a slow and deliberate halt. His vision solely focused on the animal as it stopped in its tracks bewildered at the expeditious maneuver.* 

 *“Your feeble attack sure did wonders,” Zokon declared as he shifted his position toward the side of the creature, “perhaps your apple-sized water ball could be used for disobedient children!”*  

*Julius lifted the brim of his pointed hat upward to grant himself better view after the swift movement and furrowed his brow, “Yes, your wind onslaught truly stunned this brute!”*

*The creature turned posthaste to Zokon; with no consternation it stood up on its hind legs for a lunge, as well it extended its red wings out to hypnotize briefly and appear to be a larger threat. Zokon had sensed this course of action and rose his staff up toward its chest – of whom the creature's body section stood seven feet off the ground – and the orb at the head of the staff glowed a white light that tore the Aslon's eyes and its vision was plunged into darkness; following the eternal darkness, the orb unleashed a shock wave that struck the bestial terror on its back after it flew for two hundred feet. The illumination swiftly died down and then ceased; it was over as soon as it began. His staff quickly withdrew from the thrust. Zokon swept imaginary dirt off his red robe and pointed hat, a conspicuous grin soon descended upon his face.* 

 *The beast lay completely still – its rhythmic breath only shallow – as its defeated outcome was all but clear. Its once-mighty wings lay limp, its once piercing optical perception now eroded into obscurity, and its golden image forever tainted. Zokon, the red-robed practitioner, idly proceeded to the beast – one hand to his back and his posture straight as an arrow. He looked down upon this creature and rested his boot on the chest of the mythical animal – his silence turned to chuckle, and then cackle. “Who is I that have swayed and defended against aggressors, O' Creator?” he exulted, quoting a piece of scripture found in the religious texts he studied fervently, “We are serving you well – our destiny as a species will be obtained – and this abomination will be stricken!” His boot shifted – as he spoke – from the chest to its neck and he began to apply pressure.* 

*“Zokon!” came a low-pitched voice from behind, “We were to carefully transport this specimen to a safer dwelling far outside our civilization! We did not engage it to render it murdered and to make manifestos on its corpse!”*   

*Zokon took his foot off of the Aslon's neck and slammed his boot down on fair terrain; shifted his figure toward the lecturing Julius for better perspective, “So, when were you this bastion of 'morality'?”*  

 *Julius, having caught up apace to the situation, halted himself near man and beast, “It is our commitment to bring peace, not savagery – to resolve squabbles through diplomacy, not total war –” he brought his discourse to respectability to make the conclusion palatable, “... to spare a creature whose mind was just enacting the basic instincts of survival. Nothing more, nothing less.”*  

*Zokon began to pace back and forth leisurely; onlooking Julius by an occasional side glance, each rotation giving a grimace. “We are not The King's Party giving out tidbits of solace to the ravaged population while they dine on the skins of the depleted child laborers! Our duty was to eliminate threats – to serve the world and forge in the fires of violence a new – more prosperous – age; one not gilded but golden!” the staff of  the speaker pointed toward the animal, “This horror leads an example of what is to become of us if we do not interfere and destroy: more will follow!”*

 *“You may be correct, but our doctrine states non-interventionism in the affairs or mortals and high-mortals regarding the finality of death or judgment – this section relates to your action here!”*

 *Zokon halted his steps, turned to give his full attention as his eyes-narrowed to meet Julius' own eyes for a brief second; he then gripped his opposite, formerly unused hand on the hazel-tree staff and rotated it horizontally, then with a jump-step rotated and with lance-like fashion, lunged his rod at the beast; a myriad of various color flames ejected from the head and inflicted upon the unconscious animal a burning resolution – swiftly pulling back his armament once emitted like the recoil of a bow. The beast snapped back to the living as the flames ate it alive. It shook, quivered, and cried in a purely reactionary manner, only to quickly meet final oblivion.*   

 *Julius' stepped forward abruptly and outstretched his hand toward the burning carcass and closed his mortal vision and forcefully concentrated on the element again; calling for a liquid of water, his hand gripped the forming liquid as if he was holding a circular object –*   

*“There is no use, my friend,” Zokon approached, the multicolored flames elucidating his darkened, hazed front as smoke filled the air surrounding the scene, “A great terror has finally been silenced – what use would it have been to release a blinded, defeated creature?”* 

*The liquid which had levitated itself in circular form quickly met gravity and the water fell from his hand and landed on the greenery below. Julius' head looked downward after the last embers of life were snuffed out, “It wasn't the correct course of action.”*

*Zokon placed his hand on Julius' shoulder, “Show strength. Our resolution is to bring about our ideals.” Proceeding his line, he lifted his hand and walked past the somber man; biding his time as he walked up the hill they both descended down from. Julius gave the creature one last glance and turned back to follow his fellow practitioner.* 

*Julius saw quite a bit more wildlife peeping their heads across the greenwood following the destruction. Julius stopped his movements and spied a pair of rabbits thriving in the underbrush – only to be reminded by Zokon to not be so easily distracted and to not lose sight of the task at hand. The two continued their walk south until finding themselves on public roads. They stepped across muddied roads as the bustle of the population made itself felt; both, in due course, arrived at a hamlet. The noise of horses clamping against the terrain, men shouting at each other, and bells ringing in the distance all came to be quite an annoyance to an outsider. However, Julius was content to visit this hamlet – he spied new faces, some of which not human, and took observation at some of the trading outposts near the center of the small village.*  

 *“Immigration,” Zokon said up ahead, “for it appears even a small hamlet cannot be purely human... it must be 'diversified'!” He spit after concluding: ridding himself of the foul taste the words left behind.*   

*Julius stopped following and walked up to a man in a trading outpost, “Hello, good sir, I have wished to –”*  

*“You are one of them wizards, aren't you?” the man said, walking out of his stand, supporting himself fully on a cane.*  

*“I did not come to cause harm,” he stammered, “I was just wanting to –”* 

 *“You folk need to keep your slimy paws off of our settlements!” the old man's dialect, mannerisms, and voice gave Julius difficulty discerning the correct method of response, “You are ruining...”*  

 *Julius began to give the old man less attention as he spied Zokon up ahead conversing with a young woman, then the wizard suddenly gave her a back-handed slap across the face that sent her tumbling back; her back hit a wooden wall behind her and the vegetables she was holding in her arms spilled out onto the road below. As her feet struggled to gain balance, this course of action sent her to her knees. Zokon domineered over her, his 6 foot muscular frame easily over matching the shorter woman; she looked up at him like a frightened puppy and Zokon was her master. He then pointed at her saying a line Julius believed was “Know your place!”, but he wasn't precisely confident as he lacked lip-reading adroitness. The crowd simply carried on with their day.* 

 *“... and your persistent drivel is the reason our Kingdom has gone to the dogs!” the old man concluded, but Julius had begun walking to Zokon. Zokon had turned away and continued walking down the path; Julius caught up to him.*  

*“What were you doing? Bringing forth one of your power plays yet again?” Julius briskly walked next to Zokon on the crowded street.*  

  *“These women,” he muttered, shaking his head, “they need to know their place in society and in nature. You study animals and creation, don't you? You shouldn't be so ignorant of that!” He then sped off across the street. Julius took a deep breath and proceeded down the same route that his fellow man took.*

 *Even with these dramatics prevalent throughout, seeing a busy section of commerce and activity was an enjoyable change for Julius, however, he reminded himself who he was to report to after the beast-slaying mission was completed. He kept his brisk steps behind his peer as they both walked to a cottage further away from the main bustle of the hamlet-life.* 

  *As their boots hit tall-grass in the open foliage, Zokon stopped his venture toward the house and told Julius to get the job done. He slowly nodded and finished his way toward the door – perhaps it was paranoia, but there was an uneasy languor in the atmosphere. He saw multiple fallen trees... fresh from their roots being unearthed. Seeing that no one was outside, he gave a loud bang a multitude of times on the door. After waiting only a short second, an older man – possibly of middle-age – opened.*  

*“Wizard... please tell me you –”*  

*“Don't fret,” Julius smiled, “the beast has been... 'taken care of'.”*  

 *“Thank the heavens!” the old man raised his arms toward the sky to reflect his line, “how could we possibly repay you?”*  

  *“No repayment! Don't sacrifice your coin over this...”* 

 *As they discussed these affairs, Zokon paced a distance away from the front door. Impatiently, his boots trampled on the ground – fists clenched yet again from built-up tension.*  

 *“Daddy... who are these robed men?” came a child's voice from deeper into the house.*   

 *“I told you, boy! To not interfere with my business! These men don't like –” he turned away from the wizard, shouting turned to a more muffled tone.* 

 *“Now, now there...” the reassuring Julius remarked, “bring him out. Let me see him.”*   

*The boy stepped forward into the sun's rays – he was no older than five. His eyes had a very fine glow to them... Julius also spied pointed ears on his head. He wore rags which were all that seemed to be available. After making this observation, he got down on one knee and said, “We are wizards, lad. We helped your... Father... out with a problem. We practice magical arts. You'll know about that when you are older...”*  

 *“Do you have a... 'father'... too?”*

*“I used to... yes,” Julius chuckled at the oddities of the question, “now I have a master – the one who teaches the values –”*  

*“Do not indulge yourself over these elves!” came Zokon's familiar strict tone, “Now part your ways and let this discussion be over!”* 

*Julius turned to give a side-glance to Zokon and swiftly got on his feet as his vision turned for the older man, “We must be on our way. Take care and do not let others... intimidate you.”* 

*The father looked at Zokon still pacing in the back, nodded, and slammed the door. It was an ironclad will that the blue-robed wizard did not tell what exactly happened to that Aslon, he perhaps still feared he betrayed himself in not letting the creature live.* 

 *Julius stepped back from the door and walked to rejoin Zokon, “You didn't have to interrupt me – I was building a great network and improving relations –”*  

*“Not here you are not!” he slammed his staff into the ground quite noticeably, not in the rhythmic tone before, “It is of the time we go back to our tower...”*  

 *“Zokon... I perhaps thought we could wander here idly and catch up on the commoners and their way of life... possibly begin to slowly fade into society and keep watch –”*

 *“Do you play jokes?” he spun and gave a glare as he stopped walking, “Let us not be associated with this rabble of scoundrels and petty folk – let us not lax our responsibilities quite yet! There is always something to learn in this world and I expect to learn them all!”* 

*After a brief awkward standstill, the two men continued their walk and stepped back onto public roads. Julius was left with his thoughts, his mind slowly sailing back onto predictable waters... time in isolation awaited, no doubt, as with every adventure one must finally reach the conclusion of it. Nevertheless, this complicated scheme of events continue forth. The sun above begins to set after the day's toils have finally come to conclude. Then begin the next.*Hi! I've been working on this story for a while (somewhere between two and twelve years after various complete overhauls) but I've begun to worry that in its latest iteration, it doesn't really have much of a hook, or really any stakes at all.

In short, the setting is what I might call "magicpunk" - think fantasy races living in modern-esque urban cities, skyscrapers carved into giant floating crystals, hovering trains powered by magic, and people using mass-produced handheld "magic mirrors" to access to the "aetherweb". Humans (or the equivalent, which aren't actually called humans) generally don't have the ability to manipulate magic themselves and instead have to use technology to harness it. Certain other races do, though, and there is nation of human witches who inherited the power and tradition of natural magic from a race of beings that they protected from the crossfire of a big ol' human civil war centuries ago.

The story is primarily a character-driven adventure. The main character, Rin, is a young witch who hasn't yet been able to tap into his magic properly. He's bored of his life in the small town he grew up in and he's making no headway at school since he simply can't use magic like his classmates, who mostly found their powers in their early teens. What he wants more than anything is to get out of town to explore the world and discover who he is - both literally (what type of witch is he?) and philosophically (what kind of person is he?)

After a festival for a once-a-decade eclipse, he bumps into a woman. He's never seen her before, yet he somehow knows her name, Nairo, and she has the strange sense that she recognises him too. She explains that, along with a small group, she is tracking down creatures and people that have been transformed into powerful monsters by somehow absorbing corrupted Faena, spirits of the sun. The monsters need to be defeated and the spirits released before they wreak destruction across the world. Rin decides to tag along on the journey as a way of getting out and seeing the world.

I have two main issues:

1. ...So what? I worry that readers simply won't really care or be engaged, since there isn't really much at stake here. Rin isn't personally affected by the situation with the Faena; his motivation is just to see the world, so he's basically just just tagging along for the ride. I absolutely don't want to go down the cliché route of "*the monsters kill his family/destroy his hometown!*" but I'm struggling to think of how to make it actually interesting for readers without tearing it all down and starting again. There is the mystery of how Rin and Nairo feel like they know each other despite never having met, but I don't think that's enough of a hook.
2. The mission is essentially "find a Faena, defeat it, find the next one, defeat it". There are obviously other events and sub-plots that get intertwined, but I'm concerned that this central thread will get pretty repetitive. I've realised it almost works more like the plot to a game (with a series of "boss monsters") than a book, which isn't really what I want to aim for.

Basically, do you agree with my worries about the plot, or am I overthinking things? Any input (or general critique on the outline above) would be wonderful!My name is Jaye '' he said softly "my name is Jaye '' he said again as if trying not to forget, his name was all he had left for there was nothing else left to take. He was tired and weariness filled his every movement, He saw himself reflected in the small puddle of water that collected on the floor
 "  who even am I anymore?" He thought to himself barely recognizing the reflection.

 Although only at the age of fourteen the boy's eyes were sunken, pale green eyes glimmered dimly through the dark Veil that was permanently cast on his face. 
" Maybe we're already dead" Jaye said to the ghostly visage looking back at him
"Maybe we are " said the pale imagine back to him 

Jaye quickly splashed the water " what the fuck?  I have enough issues I shouldn't be talking to puddles' 

 time had lost its meaning; day turned to night and back to day but not like that meant anything to him. For two weeks jaye had been chained to the walls of his father's basement retreating inwards, losing more and more of himself each day . All he could do is look back on the past; it had been a few years since the passing of his mother, Jaye still didn't know what happened to her; he was young when it happened and she had died. Jaye played that night over in his head a hundred times, the only memory he had was watching the shadows dancing under the door.  The thought of his mother made his throat tighten, with out his normal distractions there was nothing to occupy his mind; the thought of losing her was stuck there burdening loss. In an attempt to occupy his mind he studied the room drinking in his surroundings, attempting to day dream of a life of freedom. Books filled the room, the entire west wall book of subjects his father deemed as important to the life he would plan for the boy was stacked up the entire length of the wall and nearly up to the ceiling. " Useless all of it" Jaye said his eyes continues to wander

The walls of the basement were crumbling into rubble each being in worse shape than the previous despite the condition each wall was veined unbroken with emerald rivers of moss which trailed to the black mold covering the floor.
 "It was pretty, in a pathetic sort of way" he thought 

 A small wooden desk Jaye could sit and read and do his work
  A lifetime of his father's "lessons'' the memories came back to him, the painful echo's of a past he wished to forget.
 "Forget" Jaye said to himself in a dazed tone "I suppose I will be forgetting those lessons soon" 

His situation wasn't lost to him; he knew what was coming, it was nearly two weeks since his father had come to unchain him two weeks without food. His thin fingers followed the iron collar around his neck and the padlock which bounded his collar to the wall. There was no escaping if there was a way he would have found it, 
Nothing would have brought him more happiness, to be free unbounded from his father's will like the black and grey birds with the funny yellow crown that teased him at the window sill. Those birds had been the only companionship he had known, Jaye loved the songs he would hear in the dim morning hours. Although he didn't know the type of bird they truly; in his mind they were J-birds and a symbol of freedom, something now he knew he would never know. 


He tried to accept death but the fear still lingered inside of him. Acceptance seemed to be always just out of his reach, Jaye wanted to die he hated this existence he was living out  But he knew it was coming he could feel it.

His tunnel vision and shaking breath would attest to that, his final days showing him no more kindness than the days of his life leading to his moment. He expected at least to use some of his father's lessons in his life but he didn't use any besides mopping the beads of condensation off the walls now; but where was the justification in all the beatings, in being starved, deprived of sleep, the weekly bleedings there was no point for the suffering 
His life amounted to nothing but pain for the sake of pain. The end was here now he could feel it: the devil's hand gripped his Adams apple as tears welled up in his eyes, as he drifted into a ceaseless sea of emptiness.Hey friends! I thought I'd go ahead and post a bit of my own work to discuss with you all.

This is a chapter from the first Act of my very first novel, and my very first attempt ever at writing from a female POV! I really enjoy this character a lot, and this has been my personal favorite chapter so far.

to give you story context, a claimant king has just been assassinated on his way to take his crown in the capital after years of bloody conquest. No one at this particular point in the history of the story can recall or has found recorded history detailing that the people of this country have ever been beholden to one king, and the guile of an old enemy has led to the tragic downfall of this heroic, would be ruler. This chapter in particular is written from the POV of one of his twin daughters, following their flight from the ambush where he fell. I hope you enjoy it as much as I do, and please let me know what you think in the comments!

**Chapter Nine**

**Songs of Memory**

Kàra stumbled through the brush, still dumbfounded in her grief. She heard her father’s roar long after he was gone from her sight. There was nothing more she wanted than to stand next to him, to fight, to die in battle beside him. Kindra had howled and clawed at Cynric when they first fled, and it took both the One-Eye and Jarl Aelfred to hold her. Now the king’s final song had been cut short, and Kàra knew he had fallen. What she wanted now was different. To run back to the road, and tear the throats of every man left standing with her bare hands. Dread Wolf damn them all, and never mind whether she lived or died sending him as many as she could.

She had wandered ahead of the group on her own, and heard a rustling behind her. “Go away, Aelfric. I’m not in the mood to put your arse on the ground right now.”

“Your sister has that well in hand, I think.” It was Alaric.

She wanted to tell him to bugger off too, but stopped herself. There was something in his tone, the pain of their shared loss made evident. He was exceptionally good at masking what he felt, and always said very little. And then there was the fact that she had actually heard him approach. Alaric never made his presence known unless he intended to be noticed. She had seen enough pranks pulled on Aelfric and been blamed for them herself that she knew his skills in the avoidance of being seen or heard.

“There’s nothing you or your nursemaid can say to make me less angry. I want all their heads.” she said after some thought, thinking he had come to soothe her rage, making peace as he always tried to do. Ever eager he was to follow his father’s example.

“I know. I just want him back. There were things I needed to say, ask him about.” the grief was still swelling in his voice.

She had seen his father's famous sword rise and fall as they fled from the battle, heard his horn rallying the last of her father's army to their grim an glorious end. Truly, the North had lost two of the greatest warriors it had ever known.

She didn’t say anything then. She knew there was nothing to be said, and so they walked a while together in silence under the shade of the trees. Though she did not tell him, she was glad in her heart that he had come; and his presence *did* soothe her anger. She still wanted the tinge of iron and the rush of a fight, still wanted to butcher the men who’d taken her father. But Alaric being near helped her to focus that rage.

Then there was a strange song a distance away, like that of a bird she did not recognize. Alaric did not turn or react, he simply cupped his hands together and mimicked the call, perfectly. After several breaths, the rest of their party appeared between the trees behind them, Cynric at the fore and Aelfred behind. Kàra stood still, facing the One-Eye with her arms crossed. “We need to turn around. We are the daughters of the king, and I for one, am going back for my father’s body, and for vengeance if the War-Father wills it.”

“The War-Father doesn’t care about your vengeance.” Aelfric spoke the words with almost no hesitation.

Alaric grabbed her arm to try to stop her from doing what he must know she was about to, but Kàra wrenched herself free, and launched at Aelfric, her vision blurred red. She pinned him to the forest floor, her fists rising and falling as the hapless boy covered his stupid face to fend off her assault. She felt strong hands grasping at the back of her tunic, lifting her off of him. Then she was in the air, and then sprawling on the ground. Cynric stood between her and Aelfric. She lunged at the One-Eye now, still blind in her fury. He did not flinch, and then she was on the ground again, reeling from the backhand that Cynric had just dealt her.

“How dare you lay a hand on me! You disgrace your fallen lord and king!” she made to get up, but Alaric placed a booted foot on her sternum, pinning her. There was pain, and cold anger in his deep blue eyes. He said nothing, just shook his head at her. She knew then that her words had wounded him. She made it known that she would fight no more, and he gave his hand to help her to her feet.

“You will go nowhere but where I lead.” Cynric’s voice was void of all patience, the demeanor of a cheerful and kind man worn away to show the broken heart of one who’d lost his closest friend and failed his lord.

“Your father, the king, is dead. And you, impudent little brat, are a girl who has never spilled blood or tasted the horror of the shieldwall before this morning. His last command to me was to ensure that you and your friends are safe from those that slew him. I will NOT insult his memory by leading you into their hands - and do not think for a single breath that you are alone in your thirst for blood or vengeance. We will scour this wood, rally what remains of the king’s army if any yet live. You, Lord Gunnrulf’s children, must be kept safe. You are a symbol of your father’s legacy, and a beacon for that vengeance.”

Kàra felt the sting of his words but held her tongue; she knew the truth in them and it humbled her greatly.

“Aye, Cynric is right.” Aelfred spoke now, ever the calm and rational voice of reason and peace. “We must gather who we may, and make for Caer Eagthil with all haste. We have no king now to crown when we arrive, and the Council of Jarls must exact justice upon the perpetrators. The question will stand as to who will take charge of the Jarl’s hall in the king’s stead. I will plead guardianship until the four of you are of age to wed, and we will hold the West again, as one family, three Clans unified in tragedy.”

Kindra was glowing, and she fawned at Aelfric, offering a soft smile. He smiled awkwardly back at her, for he was too stupid to notice the meaning in her eyes. but Kàra knew her sister’s mind, and could read her better than anyone. She looked to Alaric, but he was staring off into nothing, as he was given to do often - even before the skirmish in the woods. She decided then that if she were ever to marry anyone, that it would be on her terms, and no one else’s. Her father had told her just days ago that she was being used as a bargaining chip to secure the Marsh under his rule. That would not happen now, but the thought of it still stoked her ire. She questioned her father’s advisor on the matter. “Who says we’re to marry? The only betrothal my father’s ever spoken of is impossible now.”

Aelfred just laughed at her in his infuriating good-natured manner. *How could he laugh at a time like this*? “Poor ignorant child. That was always your father’s - and our design; the decision was set the day that the boys were born. There were only two times besides their birthday that I saw your father so happy.”

She was still offended, but her grief conquered her rage and she longed to know as much as she could. “Tell me? Please, lord Godfrey.”

He held her by the shoulders then, and kissed her forehead, much the same as her father used to do. “When he was wed to your mother.”

“And the second?” Kindra asked from a few paces away.

Aelfred held Kàra’s gaze as he answered her sister. “The moment that she brought the two of you into this world.”

She could say nothing, and didn’t dare let any of them see her tears. So she threw her arms around him, and hugged tightly. “Thank you, lord.”

Alaric spoke then. “Uncle… Why were none of us told sooner?”

“The queen, as she’d have been, little Wolf. she lingered in fever for long weeks after the twins.” he looked between the girls. “She made us swear an oath, all three: *not* to tell you, that you might be bound in the love of friendship by your own virtue just as we your fathers had done before you. She believed in you, in all of you. In what you would accomplish, who you may become. Something tells me your mother had seen and knew a great deal more than any of us. Especially her husband.”

Kàra couldn’t help but laugh then, some of the tears of her loss betraying her. She was grateful beyond the measure of words, for she had nothing of her mother’s but a faint memory of her voice, and the praise of all who knew her that her beauty had passed chiefly unto Kàra. It was one of few things that she could claim over Kindra, as vain as it made her sound. Her mother had sung to her when she was born, and weak and feverish though she was, the clarity and beauty of her voice sank deep into the recesses of Kàra’s mind where it would remain, her mother fierce and living in memory for as long as she drew breath. Her father often tried to sing the same lullaby when they were young and frightened or sickly. Though Gunnrulf was not a poor singer, he was no equal for her mother.

The boys had gone with Cynric to hunt, and scout for remnants of the king’s host. They made camp atop a small wooded hillock a ways into the forest from the winding road. The trees were thick enough that they were hidden well, but the elevation of their position meant that keen eyes could now watch from the hillock's height over a broad swathe of the forest to the southeast. Aelfred had bidden the girls to scavenge for dried wood to burn, and Kindra had been all too happy to oblige him. Before long, she had forsaken the task altogether, her true intent unmasked when she harried Kàra’s steps with a spindly length of birchwood. Kindra hefted it like she would have done a practice sword, her wicked smile betraying a longing for good-natured violence.

After an arduous afternoon spent contending with her sister’s incessant assault, Kàra finally found herself back near the campsite. Kindra came close behind, carrying little more firewood besides her new weapon. Aelfred was knelt on the earth arranging small stones in a semicircle around one large, flat stone, and there was a pile of dried grass and twigs beside him. Kàra thought it looked almost like some sort of shrine.

“What are you doing, lord?” she questioned him as he toiled away.

“Oh, just a little trick that Jarl Aedain taught me when we were much younger.” the pain of grief-filled memory painted his voice, and Kàra felt that she had wronged him by prompting it.

“I’m sorry, Lord Godfrey. Would - would you teach me?” she squatted beside him.

He offered her his signature warm smile, and proceeded to explain. “Fire is a living thing, my dear,” she puzzled at Aelfred when he said it. *How could fire be alive?* He just chuckled and continued his instruction. “Not like you or I of course, but you see, the same way that we draw breath from the air, so too does a burning flame. That is why when you start one, it is common that you blow softly upon it, give unto the fire a little bit of your breath - your life.”

She was still confused. “But why the rocks? And you’ve got grass and twigs, wouldn’t branches do better?”

Aelfred tapped his temple. “Ah, but I have you two to gather wood for me, and the fuel doesn't matter much as long as it is dry. As for the stones, well… those cowards that slew your father will be prowling this whole forest to find us. A circle of stones will trap the smoke, making it harder for them to find us. Now let’s see what you’ve brought.”

The girls piled their bounty of wood for Aelfred to pick through, and to Kàra’s dismay he found precious little dry enough to use. He did, however, narrow his eyes at the sight of Kindra’s spindly new sword, and politely demanded it from her. Kindra reluctantly surrendered her armament, and Kàra smirked in satisfaction as he took it and promptly snapped it over his bended knee. He showed them how to pile the dried twigs and heather at the bottom of a little hole he had dug into the earth, and put the larger branches on top under the shadow of his stone ring. When the fire was lit, both Kàra and her sister gasped slightly when they saw indeed, it gave almost no smoke at all. She looked to Aelfred then, who was too busy admiring the little flicker of light he had just created.

“Forgive me lord… you look proud as though you didn’t think that would work.”

“Silly child! Of course I didn't. I’d only ever seen the Raven Lord or his huntsmen build a fire like that.” Kindra giggled at that, covering her mouth.

“Now go, both of you, gather more wood! Stay close, and remember: only the driest will do!”

They spent the rest of the afternoon trekking to and fro between the surrounding woods and the campsite with handfuls of dry wood and leaves. It was nigh on sunset when they heard hushed voices in the trees around their hilltop haven. Kàra tensed, drawing near to Aelfred. All the calm and kindness drained from him, and his hand held tight to the sword at his side. He drew a seax and a small axe from his belt and gave them to Kàra and Kindra. She knew from the graveness in his tired eyes that he did not intend the blades as  weapons for defense, but as a final resort. The voices grew louder and closer, and Kàra thought she would go mad in the waiting. Half of her was frozen stiff and silent with fear, the other burned to launch herself screaming into the trees for vengeance.

Just then, she heard an owl hoot from the direction of the voices. Aelfred sighed and smiled with relief as he cupped his hands to his mouth and answered the bird with a mimicked call. Kàra felt her shoulders drop and thought she might collapse. Cynric emerged from the woods first, then Alaric, soft and silent as ever and only he could be. Aelfric stumbled out next, tripping over a twisted root that protruded from the earth and Kindra laughed as he hurled curses quietly into the ground. Then  warriors began to emerge, one by one until there were fifty or more, all bearing the marks of a hard road through untamed woods and the many grim badges of a bloody battle.

Kàra knew not what to make of these vagabonds until a few of them trudged up the hill and stooped low before her. They knelt, and one of them produced a bundle of tattered fabric, deep red and caked with dried blood and dirt. As the warrior unfurled it, she beheld a white bear upon it. These were her father’s banner-men. A few of Jarl Aedain’s rear-guard were mingled in their midst, perhaps twenty to Gunnrulf’s thirty. Kàra saw Alaric beaming with pride at the sight of them when they knelt in the same fashion before him, presenting a swooping black raven on a deep blue field. She knew that it was the craft of these men alone that brought them all close enough for Cynric to find them, for the Raven Lord was a master of the woods, and trained all his best warriors to know them well.. The warriors took all the mundane duties of establishing patrols and foraging supplies upon themselves and the children gathered around Aelfred’s modest fire, and he regaled them with tales of his youth with their parents, Cynric keeping watch a few paces from them.

As they drew close beneath their cloaks to share a  meager meal of rabbit and squirrel under the light of the new-risen moon, Kàra’s mind lingered again on her mother’s song. She didn’t realize she was humming the tune until Alaric asked her,

“That melody - I feel I've heard it before. Where did you learn it?”

Aelfred reassured her with a smile, and she knew that he knew exactly where she’d learned it. The fondness of memory in his eyes told her that it soothed his grief much the same as had soothed her own.

“Our mother sang it over us before she died. It’s the only piece of her that I have to remember.”

“Are there any words?” Aelfric asked, his father still offering the comfort and reassurance of his smile; as though he were urging her forward out of love for her family’s memory. Kàra looked away, banishing the tears of longing and distant memory that threatened to betray her brokenness.

“No, I don’t remember.”

Kindra looked up and her gaze drifted off, the same longing clearly painted upon her face but somehow different, deeper. “I don’t remember her. Not her face, her voice…and father never liked it much when I asked about her. I think it hurt him to remember her.”

Aelfred spoke softly, a balm for the weary heart on his lips.

“Do not blame yourself for that, child. Too many high lords in this world make no claim to have such love in their unions as your father and mother shared. They were a fire that could not be quenched by the mightiest rain. Your mother was every part of her a warrior and a worthy queen, ten times over the match for your father’s fury. When she gave herself to bring you to him… You and your sister were all that gave him peace. In that regard, the whole kingdom owes you a debt. If Gunnrulf had marched to unite the Clans without you to fight for? I think we may well live under the heel of a bitter tyrant.”

“Aye,” Cynric added. “I heard him say once that Lady Eldrid had passed the strength of her spirit to you, for it could be the only way she’d not have charmed or beaten the Dread Wolf himself.” the girls and Aelfred all regarded him with questioning stares, none of them had ever heard the king say such a thing. “It was after a raid to the south… He was quite drunk,” Cynric added in answer. Laughter surrounded the campfire.

Kàra pondered all that had been spoken for a short while. She could picture in her mind the image of her mother and father, laughing, dancing, singing and rejoicing together at last in the everlasting feast and melee at Krighalla. It was only the smallest of comforts, but for now it was enough. She looked again to her sister, hugging her knees on the ground as she stared into the heart of the campfire. They fought and bickered every single day, but now she knew pity and pain for Kindra’s sake. She thought how lost and how much more bitter and angry she would be if she had no memory of their mother. Oftentimes, that old sad song was the only thing that brought her out of the haze.

Ever so faintly, Kàra began to sing. And as she did, all the others joined or hummed along, warriors of all three houses adding their voices to the melody; and Kindra softly wept by the light of the fire.

*Sleep softly, little fawn*

*Gone away is the Hunter,*

*And he’ll not return till Dawn.*

*He’s marching off to war soon,*

*The battle-line is drawn.*

*His shield shall surely splinter*

*His spear shall surely break*

*He may well be gone through winter,*

*And many lives he well may take*

*Fear not for his coming,*

*The Wolf prowls for his blood,*

*His thirst for souls to slake.*

*Fear not the hunter, fawn:*

*The Wolf shall take his place*

*Hunter of all hunters,*

*All Men know his face.*

*Fear not the foe-man son,*

*The Wolf shall take his place.*

*Slayer among slayers,*

*All Men know his face.*

*Fear not the tyrant king*

*The Wolf shall take his place.*

*Lord of moonlit silver fields:*

*All Men see his face,*

*All Men know Death's face.*

A solemn, thoughtful silence fell about the huddled party as the final stanzas were sung. It lingered for several breaths until Aelfric spoke.

“Your mother really sang you a song about the god of death when we were babies? As a lullaby?”

Kàra regarded him with a challenging stare, daring him with her eyes to say something foolhardy. Of course, he did so, for he was in fact a very foolish boy.

“That explains a lot.” He nudged Alaric as he said it, a callow attempt to elicit laughter from his friend. Alaric looked at him then like Aelfric was the stupidest creature he’d ever seen, and Kàra thought the raven-haired boy might slap his best friend. But Kindra beat him to it, a pebble whizzing past Aelfric’s face from her direction. Kàra gave her sister a predatory smile, and Alaric used the confusion it caused to slap the back of Aelfric’s head. The two boys tumbled into the brush, grunting and wrestling like empty-headed boys so often did; and Cynric One-Eye spat his drink in the fire, no longer able to contain his laughter. Aelfred just sat staring thoughtfully into the dwindling flame, the ghosts of soft tears streaking his tired face. A hand gripped Kàra’s own, and  looked to her sister, who smiled gently in silent thanks for the gift she’d been given.Venn and the Gray Fjord



Prologue:

Beyond the iron mountains, past the Gray Fjord in the far north of the forest lands lies a cabin. A very small cabin. Not the kind of cabin with a fireplace, cozy bed and a spot for the beautiful dog to lay and be warm. But instead wolves lay there with no fireplace and only to bundle with each other and their loving human.
But she was pregnant. The wolves comforted her as she gave birth. The night was stormy and her screams barely echoed in the forest through the heavy rainfall and thunder crashing. And at last the child was born, and the mother had passed away… 
The wolves were devastated by this but knew they must care for the child. They stayed there with the child often and made it their den. Slowly over time the roof caved in and walls broke. Overrun by weeds and critters, plants and tree branches looked like a nice wilderness fantasy home with three male wolves, two females, several pups and one human boy. 
The boy was raised by the wolves and had very few man made items that were left in the cabin. And the cabin was very far out, days travel away from any settlements or other cabins. The boy grew up knowing nobody and never seeing anyone at all. He only knew wolves and the ways of wolves. He had a bundled up long poncho he made from scraps of torn sheets and robes his mother had left behind so he could make something to keep warm since he had no fur like his siblings.
He and the wolves didn't know it but their cabin and whole world and life they knew would be turned upside down…


Chapter 1


Venn and his 3 brothers and 2 sisters were running through the woods chasing after squirrels and having a good time. 
As they ran the one by the name Hati, a young girl wolf suddenly stopped raising it's ears for what sound she heard. 
The eldest male pup by the name of Sköll saw his sister being watchful and he did the same. As Venn and the other pups played suddenly a horse dashed right over their heads. Trampling 2 of the pups and dashing through the forest not even noticing them. One getting badly injured the other was dead by the time they got to him. Venn picked up the injured sister and they ran back to their den. They got back to their den to see the elder wolves cornering the horse, as their next meal. Venn who could carry the wolf pup because she was no bigger than 50lb so far and Venn being a strong young boy because he grew up with wolves, this was no problem. The mother wolf Edda. Edda licked the wounds of her pup and comforted her. 
The other pups watched as the grown wolves took down the horse and Finn, the strongest wolf, snapped the horse's neck as it leaped from a rock to the grown stallion.
As they feast outside the cabin that was so overgrown Venn didn't even know what a cabin was, so he made himself a fire to cook his meat. Whenever he ate meat raw it would make him sick, so he learned to cook it one day long ago when lightning struck a tree and the blaze burnt their meat making the smells spread through the woods.
Their delicious dinner was interrupted when Finn suddenly looked up with blood dripping off his fangs. He scanned the forest with his impeccable vision and by the time he widened his eyes, before he could give off any other emotions a arrow flew through the air stabbing him right between the eyes. A clean shot. The other wolves were shocked and jumped at the sound of the arrow piercing the boldest strongest wolf Finn's skull and the yelp he gave off as he was so aggressively taken.
The older Wolves saw the hunters who did so. Edda looked into the man's eyes as he lowered his crossbow a bit to see the rise he had just killed. The smile on his face made Edda fear for her pups and Venn. As she saw the smile grow on his face his eyes shifted to the human boy. He had a moment of confusion on his face but it was soon replaced with an even worse smile. One that could only mean he wanted Venn's head on his wall. A half boy half man prize on his wall. A beast. Something for him to brag about to his horrible minded friends who also would like to kill and have the head of a wolf boy.
Edda quickly jumped to Venn as he stood up fast seeing such a powerful wolf impaled. She latched onto his arm and dragged him while giving a growling glance at her other pups to follow while the grown wolves all attacked the hunters.
As they ran away Venn looked back seeing his injured pup sister get slit by an evil man's knife. As they heard the last of the wolf yelps knowing that their family had just died. They couldn't bear to look back...
They heard cheers of evil laughter from the hunters. 
This being the first time Venn had seen another human. When they got up a hill where the cabin was barely in view he locked eyes with the hunter who was the most decorated and polished looking. The man who had taken Finn from them. The man who looked back at him and with the evilest grin, he nodded his hat on his head. Knowing very well this man would try to find Venn, it scared him to his core. This man would not stop till he had every last fur pelt skinned from his siblings… and him…




Info:
The Gray Fjord is a series of short stories. Each one about a different character's take on the events that unfold. I hope you all enjoy this fictional world with monsters, creatures, action, adventure, love, betrayal, heroes, villains and all in-between! There are many more short stories to come and keep an eye out as I release them on my Instagram at EddySketch and Wattpad at EddySketch. 
Feedback is greatly appreciated! And tell your friends!Would anyone be interested in reading an Urban-Fantasy type book set in the near future (mostly the same earth with a few major differences) with high stakes and a relatable main cast? 

I’ve been building a fantasy world like this in my mind for years now, and I’ve just started mapping out the characters and general plot. Not sure if I want to actually take the time to write it though. 

The premise is basically that during early human civilization, an alien race arrived on earth (they were fleeing the destruction of their planet, which is important to the main plot of the story). These aliens were capable of “awakening” which allowed them to convert and control their soul energy into a unique power.  (Although they were capable, it was still a rarity among them, as certain conditions had to be met in order to be awakened and most of them are unable to be reproduced)

Eventually it became too dangerous for them to live among humans so they fled and created a secret society in the depths of the ocean (their advanced technology allowed them to do this). But they had already left their mark on earth, leaving behind relics and even ancient organisms from their home planet that they brought with them. 

Fast forward to present day (2104) and the earth is in crisis. The divide between the rich and poor classes of 1st world countries is growing wider, and social issues are only getting worse. The climate crisis has begun to devestate the planet and the non-rich suffer while the rich and powerful trick the masses into continuously believing that they are going to save them, but of course nothing changes. 

For the past 100 years, leaders in science have been secretly researching the qualities of “soul energy” or “quintessence”. A researcher name Dr. (working name) discovered ancient artifacts left behind by the alien race including ancient texts detailing their history and customs. Present day, a secret lab is constructed underwater which specializes in the study and research of the uses of soul energy, the “awakening”, the history and other technology of the alien race, and most importantly, the attempt to make humans capable of utilizing an awakening. 

~100 people ages 19-20 and 11-12 (yes there is a reason for these age ranges) are abducted by the organization (the government funds the project and doesn’t care about sacrificing its citizens) in order to try and produce an awakening. 

There’s a lot more context but my phone is lagging so I’ll end it here.I just want some advice on my prologue. It's for a modern fantasy novel, and it's written in the form of a newspaper article but that's not really my strongsuit and I struggled a bit with using the right words. It's also very short.

# FIVE YEAR OLD BOY RECEIVES SUPERPOWERS?

>Rumours have circulated about a baby born with a life-threatening illness receiving supernatural powers after an experimental surgery was done that saved his life. The wealthy family have denied all knowledge of this and claim the surgery was an overwhelming success. Contrary to their statement however, journalists claim to have seen strange happenings around the household, such as a ‘floating child’s toy’ and a tree they swear they saw on their approach but was gone when they left. The child himself, named Calvin, seems to be a normal and now healthy five-year-old, even having an endearing curiosity for the writers. The question is did the surgery work well, or too well?

*Underneath this would then be my imagined picture of Calvin as a child (Calvin is one of the two protagonists of this novel)*
Alright, so in my first post, I asked if people would read about the plot I had in mind. Thank you everyone for your opinions by the way.

Well, for this post, I’ll be presenting my idea of the relationship of my twin MCs, about their family and how they view each other. I want some feedback on my ideas, if it’s interesting enough for someone to want to read it. 

First of all, to understand their relationship, I’ll need to explain how they were raised by their family and how it affects them. 


The Adahera Family 

Even after the monarchy was abolished hundreds of years before, the Adahera family is one of the three remaining families that descended from the ancient royalty, which in turn makes them one of the most powerful and prestigious nobles in the country.

So bearing the name of the Adahera Family is hard. Well, hard is just an understatement.

From the moment they get their own understanding about life, children of this family already know they are special. They are already told their position and responsibilities as the children of the Adahera family from a really young age. Obviously, being part of this family always gives them all the good things their wealth can provide— The best instructors for their studies, the finest things they needed, and the best school for their education.

But being an Adahera doesn’t mean one can do whatever they want. In every wrong doings they commit, a severe punishment will soon follow. Actions are also limited. Children are not allowed to play that much because they needs to focus more to their trainings and studies. They are also not allowed to make even the smallest mistake in front of the people. Everyone in the higher society is looking and observing every move. Even if they, no one will soothe them to stop them from crying. Instead, they will scold them saying that they’re just disgracing their family name for showing a petty weakness like that. As members of the Adahera family, they should always be presentable to everyone, with a strong dignity that is always attached to the name.

The children of the Adahera family are like a “porcelain doll in a glass box”. Just like that doll, they are caged inside the box created by those people who expects a lot coming from them and are powerless to let themselves out of that box. This is the reality the twins always need to face every single day. For them, bearing the name of the Adahera family is a cruel punishment. A punishment they think they don’t deserve, yet fate still gave it to them without a second thought.

But they still someone, the only person who’s willing to be with them not because they’re special, but because they simply wants to spend time with them. That person who wants to play with them not because they wanted something, but simply because they like their company. They still had their twin, they still had each other. However, that started to change the older they got. All the different expectations forced onto them was what made them grow distant. Not only that, but the way they were treated differently became very apparent, which played a huge part on how the twins view each other in the present moment, and the reason why they’re relationship is so complicated. 

It is clear that their parents planed to have an only child, so Dawn’s existence (as the younger twin) was never wanted. Dusk was the older twin and, in their family’s eyes, the most talented one, and obviously the favourite child. While Dusk was being groomed to lead the family one day and had all the attention, Dawn was always viewed as a nuisance that they have to keep alive at worst or Dusk’s spare at best. Because Dawn was always seen as “weaker” than his brother, he hardly got any praise from his family and was always pressured to do more to get their approval, because it was never good enough. And Dusk was really pressured since a young age to fulfil his fate of carrying his family’s pride on his shoulders, and eventually, he was so busy that he didn’t spend almost any time with his brother.



Now then, it’s time I explain how the relationship dynamic of these twins work and more or less how it turned out that way. 


The Twins Relationship 

First, let’s start off with what Dawn means to Dusk. Dusk loves Dawn very much, and he’s very vocal about it. This may seem kinda strange for most other people that work with him everyday, since Dusk is rarely so open with his affection, but with Dawn he has no reservations. It could be said that for Dusk, Dawn is home. 

When we talk about home, we usually think of a place where we belong, where we’re welcomed and where we’re loved. In his childhood, Dusk had lived in Anahera family’s house, but that was never his home because his true, authentic self was never welcomed there. As he was taught at a young age that he had to always put up a perfect front, no matter how he felt, it caused him to disregard feelings and only focus on his goals. However, it’s different with Dawn. Dusk felt strong whenever he’s with his brother. Both were bullied in their youth and basically only had each other. Now, Dusk didn’t have the strength to fight back at first, but when Dawn came into the picture, he begged the bullies to focus on him instead, and managed to protect his brother. And after a long time of being bullied and never being about to do anything about it, knowing that he was able to protect someone else was a huge affirmation. It shows to him that he is at least strong enough to protect the people important to him, and that’s all he needs.

But, because of this, even after years, Dusk still views Dawn as someone who needs to be protected, which Dawn absolutely hates. Dusk is unable to see that Dawn has grown beyond his protection now, and any mention of that makes him angry because he feels that his value as a protector is diminished. After all, the whole reason he strived to be a good soldier was to be able to protect his brother better. It has become a part of his identity as the older twin, and he refuses to let it be taken away from him.

So it can be said that Dawn is Dusk’s home….But Dusk isn’t Dawn’s home. Not anymore. 
When Dusk became focused on his training, Dawn lost his home and had to search for a new one. He joined the  Lunar Army, and that was his attempt at finding another home. The Lunar Army, of course, was kind and welcoming, but he still struggles with feelings of not belonging because it’s not his original home. And he resents Dusk for not making him feel safe anymore. Dawn felt that Dusk had betrayed him by “abandoning” him, and that perception makes it impossible for him to relax in Dusk’s presence.

With that said, I would also like to add that Dusk actually has a HUGE influence on Dawn. The whole reason why Dawn fought to make a place for himself in the Lunar Army is to feel useful, and Dusk coddled him so much that he never felt important enough. Dusk was the one to take the bullying, and Dawn was powerless to stop it from happening. Although Dusk had the best intentions, he focused so much on Dawn’s physical wellbeing that he neglected his emotional wellbeing. Again, I would like to make the point that Dawn was raised to believe that feelings are a sign of weakness, so he never really cared about how others felt.

Dawn also struggles with strong feelings of inferiority. Dusk only really shows the perfect side of himself and always tries to conceal what he considers as weak. And this is especially true when he’s with the people he cares about. But to Dawn, this made him feel as though he could never surpass his brother. And the reason that she wants to surpass him is because Dusk is important. He’s the Lieutenant General, which makes him the second most powerful person in the Solar territory, while Dawn was just the spare. Dawn desperately wants to feel needed, and in order to do that, he has to be better than his brother, because he believes that when Dusk is around, no one would ever notice him. Obviously, that’s not true. Dawn shines in his own way, but he just can’t see his own value because their society (much like the real world), usually prefers Dusk’s extraversion to Dawn’s introversion. 

But that’s not all of what makes their relationship complicated. Since Dawn joined the Lunar Army, Dusk has been trying everything he can to convince him to “come back home.” Because he still views Dawn as a child, he thinks that him joining the Lunar Army is him going through a “rebellious phase” and that his brother will eventually come around, listen to the voice of reason and come back to him. However, this is just making Dawn grow further away from him. Like I said before, Dawn hates that Dusk still views him as a child and doesn’t take him and his feelings seriously, and he avoids his brother whenever he can. The way he talks about Dusk with so much resentment and bitterness could make anyone think that Dawn hates his brother.

The sad truth is that they still care about each other, and they still love each other deeply…but all that resentment, bitterness and the fact that they can’t understand each other like they used to makes their relationship deteriorate more and more. Only when when Dawn realizes his own worth and agrees to actually talk with his brother, and Dusk starts thinking about how others are feeling, that their relationship will improve and maybe go back a little to how they were before. However, this is a challenging task for both, not only because Dawn avoids Dusk, but also because they are technically enemies being in opposing armies. How can they mend their relationship when they are now fighting each other?


Alright, that’s all for now and sorry for the long post.I was looking through short story competitions, and some allow you to just submit the first 50 pages or so of an unpublished manuscript. I'm sitting on two completed, standalone fantasy novels, so I thought I might give it a try. But I need to choose between them. Below are the first 1000-ish words of each story. Which of these are, in your opinion, more attention-grabbing and interesting?

(not asking anyone to read the full 2000 words, just enough to form an opinion)

&#x200B;

**THE MARK**

Azibal woke to the sound of a death scream.

It bolted her out of dreams and up into a sitting position. She drew on Power and focused her will against the darkness. Her cabin lit up with a dim, sourceless light. The door and window shutters were closed, and the only other person was Ida on her little servant’s cot.

For a moment it seemed like she might have been dreaming, but another scream sounded. It was accompanied by stomping feet, grunts, and the clash of metal. And after shaking away the worst of the confusion she realised it was coming from above. There was fighting on the main deck.

The family was in danger.

She threw her blanket away and rose. Ida was awake, and let out some exclamation in her native tongue as she sat up. Shouts penetrated the wooden planks from various directions, and feet rushed towards the cabin. Azibal readied her Power, but restrained herself as the door was flung open.

It was one of the junior house guards, clad in a liveried gambeson and armed with a spear. He stopped in the doorway and gave her a rushed salute even as he spoke.

“Lady, we have been boarded!” he shouted. “They have-”

She turned at the sound of splintering wood. One of her window shutters was hit a second time, and yielded like grain before a scythe. A figure stepped in from the sill outside. It held a large-bladed, long-handled axe, and hopped nimbly down onto the floor.

Azibal released her Power in its rawest form: No trickery, no shaping, just a blast of crackling force. It hit the intruder with a loud hissing noise that almost drowned out the man’s scream. He fell, and the blast hit the one behind him, and tore up the remains of the shutter and its frame.

A third man came in from behind the surviving panel. He had a light spear, and rushed her with an air of do-or-die desperation. She reflexively darted away from the incoming tip, and the guard rushed in to defend her with a thrust of his own. The guard’s spear hit home on the intruder’s torso, but he neither screamed nor fell.

He *did* shift his focus to the guard, and that was all the opening Azibal needed. She drew on Power again, but Ida and the guard were both too close for another raw blast. Instead she pitted her will against the enemy’s spear; against its integrity.

The shaft, mere wood that it was, shattered into splinters. The house guard thrust again, and now hit the man in the neck. That did the trick. The intruder fell up against the wall, then backwards towards Ida’s cot. The woman shot out of the way like a startled cat, and he landed on his back.

Azibal now noticed his breastplate, and the palm-sized, faintly glowing mark in the centre of it.

“They have empowered equipment, Lady!” the guard told her.

He snatched up the fallen axe, and she now noticed the mark on the head of it. Small wonder her panel had been annihilated like that.

The guard ran for the window. Azibal ran for the door. Ida simply pressed herself up against a wall, as if hoping she might meld with it.

A single light globe shone dully in this part of the lower deck. It sufficed to show the fighting on the ladder. The attackers were trying to push down from the main deck. Their opposition was a chaotic band of house guards, armed and armoured with whatever they’d been able to grab as they got up.

A shield splintered beneath an axe like the one she’d just encountered, and the guard holding it retreated, yielding ground. One guard went beneath the ladder and thrust a spear up between the steps. The tip went into a man’s calf. He fell, but the downward push continued.

Cousin Tanit poked her head out of a neighbouring cabin, and Azibal heard frightened voices from the others.

She turned and ran back into her own cabin. The guard seemed to have assured himself that no more attackers were coming through the window. He opened his mouth to say something, but Azibal just ran past him and drew on Power. She leapt out into the night and focused her will against gravity.

Levitating wasn’t her greatest skill, and this was a very rough way of doing it, but she still rose instead of falling.

The Power took her up to the quarterdeck, then above, then higher above still as she struggled to move horizontally. Once she managed to position and let go the drop was significant, and she landed with a hard shock that knocked most of the air out of her lungs.

She used what remained to rush to the handrail and look down. The night lantern illuminated the fallen bodies of the night guards, and the small crowd of assailants by the main hatch.

An alarm bell was now ringing on one of the other ships, and sounds of fighting carried from two other directions. But she focused on the mess before her, and unleashed the Power again.

Raw energy was never an elegant weapon, and the distance gave her blast some time to spread out. The planks around the hatch splintered and burst, but the men took most of the damage. Two fell, and one staggered on his feet. Azibal vaulted rather clumsily over the handrail, and her lungs took another battering as she landed on the main deck.

The injured man had a spear and a small shield, and as she raised a hand towards him he nimbly shifted his grip on the weapon and threw it. Azibal shifted the Power she’d readied, and applied it against injury. The man’s aim was true, but the spear bounced off her chest, leaving behind only a sting.

The man switched to a dagger and tried to cross the distance between them. But his bleeding, smoking wounds weighed him down, and he’d only taken three steps before she got off another blast. This one hit him completely focused and undiluted, and ripped his chest open.

One of the attackers emerged from the hatch, followed by a death scream from down below. He had a larger shield than his destroyed comrade, and a mark of endurance shone in its centre. He also had one of the empowered axes, and rushed at her with it held in an awkward, one-handed grip.

She reflexively sent yet another blast at him, and was now feeling the drain. He held the marked shield up before him, and although the mark was inferior to her raw Power it did allow the shield to just barely hold together.

She had no weapon, no time to make for the steps up the quarterdeck, and no space to make it past him without being struck by an empowered axe. So she focused her will at the deck’s planks, and pitted herself against their integrity.

The planks burst apart right in front of his feet, and his momentum carried him into the sudden hole. The axe hooked itself on the edge close to Azibal’s toes, and stayed there as the man lost his grip on it. He plummeted down to the lower deck and landed in an awkward heap.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

**THE LONG NIGHT**

The green explosion poked over the rooftops like a bizarre sunrise, illuminating dark brick.

Myra grabbed the crank handle next to her and spun it furiously, lowering the automobile’s window. Even accounting for the cranking and sputtering of the engine there was the conspicuous absence of a boom.

“That’s him!” she said. “That’s the Green Bomber!”

“Sure looks it,” Brown said from the passenger seat.

She quickly consulted her memory of this part of the city, then drove up onto the sidewalk.

“I think there’s a phone booth not far from here,” Brown said and pointed into the gloom up ahead. “To the right.”

“No time,” Myra said as she wrenched the wheel to the left, steering the auto into a U-turn on a street only barely wide enough to allow. “He’s slippery.”

It was a narrow thing, and she heard an uncomfortable metallic screech as the vehicle finished the shift. The right side had taken a bit of a hit, and boy would that not sit well with some people. But arresting this bastard would make anything worth it.

“So, just you and me?” Brown said.

“If all goes well,” Myra replied absent-mindedly, focused on her invisible map. “If he doesn’t have hostages we just hit him fast and hard.”

“When you say ‘hit’...” Brown said, bringing his revolver out from under his coat. “What do you mean?”

He swung out the cylinder, a habit of his she’d never quite understood, and closed it again.

“That’s up to him,” she replied, aware of the hard, heavy weight against her own chest as she gripped the wheel a bit tighter. “Whatever happens, it’s up to him.”

“What’s his body count at again?” he asked meaningfully, and scratched his large, ever-stubbly jaw.

“Mine is at zero,” she said. “Let’s *try* to do things the right way.”

“If you say so.”

“I *do* say so. Now let me focus.”

The problem with Black Bend was that it seemed to have been built with no damn plan at all. There was little in the way of long, straight streets, and one’s view was usually blocked by cheap tenements. This was all a bit of a gamble, dependent on reading that map right, but this was the time for gambles.

The lot they’d passed earlier was still desolate and empty, shrouded in steam as warm air blew out into the cold night from various sources. She swerved as sharply as she dared, wishing to keep as much momentum as possible no matter how much the auto groaned.

Before them towered two gloomy tenements and the steam bank, glowing in the headlights.

“Myra...” Brown said as she pushed the gas pedal back further down, with the mild stiffness that was his version of showing alarm.

“I got this,” she said, keeping her nerves on hair-trigger alert as she ploughed the vehicle into the glowing white.

Her memory served, and it took only a mild twitch of the wheel to deliver them safely into the alley between the two buildings. The possibility of vagrants only occurred to her by the time it was too late, but thankfully there were no suspicious bumps before they emerged on the street on the other side.

The headlights cast an even bleaker picture than they’d left behind. They were fully in the Jungle now; the streets were messy, the buildings crumbling and only a few of the street lights worked. Myra followed her instincts and continued moving east, until they saw it.

It was a blocky, ugly six-storey, probably an old factory, and its only notable feature was the gaping, smoking hole in the side of the top floor. It looked easily big enough for a person to step through.

She slammed the brake pedal, not trusting the headlights to warn her of debris in time. The auto came to a stop by a corner, and just barely enough light made it from a miraculously intact street lamp to show a fire escape far off in the gloom.

Myra opened the door and practically leapt out. She could see electric lights glowing on the top floor and thought she heard voices.

*What IS his body count at now?*

“He’s not getting away,” she decided firmly. “Take the fire escape, I’ll go in through the front.”

“If you say so,” Brown said as he shut the passenger door.

“You have no personality.”

“If you say so.”

They split up without any further exchanges. Myra brought out her own revolver and ran, her coat flapping about as she went. There was screaming up above and the sound of splintering rock, accompanied by another green flash. Myra didn’t look up. She just leapt to press up against the wall a moment before more debris rained down on the street and sidewalk. Some absurd instinct made her hold onto the brim of her fedora as if she were braving a blast of wind.

As the deadly hail passed she continued on, faster than before. The front door was a sturdy double feature made of thick wood, which had nonetheless been smashed open. She wasn’t worried about ambushes as she entered the darkness within; the Green Bomber operated alone.

Whatever production had gone on here was long since vanished, as was seemingly every bit of furniture and machinery that was worth anything. She jogged through a dark underworld, passing by a support pillar she’d only seen a second earlier, towards the sole source of light.

A simple lamp stood low in a flight of steps, connected to a cord that lay upwards. The broken light in the ceiling explained all this, but Myra was simply happy to be able to see where she was going as she went up. The lamps were spaced widely apart and had no covering for the bulb. They were also mismatched, as one last show of sharply limited funds.

She started hearing the voices again as she started for the third floor. The echo and her own footsteps drowned out any possible coherence, but if the reports were anything to go by there would be little of that anyway.

“**No! No!**” was the first that she could make out as she reached the fourth floor, just before her foot went through the wooden step with a loud crack. She scraped her shin, and wedged as it was against her momentum her leg nearly broke. Still, she escaped with some loose skin beneath the pants leg and a brief certainty that anyone above would have heard her. But the frenzied male voice continued, becoming clearer with each painful step. For a certain definition of clarity.

“**No!**” it shouted again. “**All is false! Who are you?! Are you anything or are you nothing?! Shall I cast you aside or save you?!**”

She hoped Brown was in place, or near enough. She hoped everyone up there was still alive. Because by now she was passing up the final flight and it was time.

There was evidence of a recent effort to tidy up. Loose wallpaper had been torn down, replaced by tapestries and hanging blankets that had a distinctly donated look to them. The landing Myra stepped onto thankfully was also covered by a long, worn rug, softening her footsteps as she followed the sounds of the confused monologue, made eerie and booming by the hallway walls.

“**I want... I need... what are you?! It is all false! Shall I save you?**”

She reached a doorway, flanked by two large potted plants which prevented her from hugging the wall. The door was open and swayed in the gust through the freshly blasted holes in the exterior. Within she thought she heard softer voices, trying to reach through the nonsense, and rapidly shifting feet on creaky floorboards.

Myra flicked the safety off, moved around the damn pot on her side, and stepped into the doorway.

They sing their Songs of Iron,
Spin their tales of glory and gold.
They worship war; 
Dwell all their years on spilling blood and battles of old.
In all their fervor, death is their sire; 
The Dread Wolf they’ve made their lord.
Their Iron shall rust, be ever sundered,
Smote hard upon cold mountain stone.
Gold and glory will fall tattered, worn;
Void of all their shine and luster.
Their sinews tire, and soon shall slacken;
Blood will dry and in time blacken;
Even as they thirst, ever for more.
Frail is their ravenous hunger,
Before that Hunter of all Hunters;
The Black Wolf gnaws on all their bones.

Id love some feedback or questions, I’m woefully lacking in people to share my project with! Comment or message me directly!Basically, my MC is a little dude named Kane who wants revenge on the four knights who killed his brother, Hunter (he was known as the azure Knight, one of the five demon knights of Vatra who was branded a traitor for disobeying an order & to be killed so that they could retrieve the demon soul he had that boosted his blue flames). A man named Jabari saves Kane from his death but is opposed by another called Kazic who tries to kill Kane because he was brought back to the village on a thunderstorm which is a bad omen. Kazic tries to kill Kane but Jabari stops him, scars him & exiles him. 


Jabari teaches Kane, over four years, how to ride a horse, to use a sword & to use red flames. He begs Kane not to go, as revenge will lead him down a path of darkness & misery & Kane responds by telling him that he doesn't understand his pain, having lived a nomadic life with no regrets. They end on kinda bad terms & Kane arrives in Vatra, the kingdom that killed his brother, however, his quarrel is only with the four that burned his brother alive. He goes to a tavern & hears of the prince's upcoming 14th name day (which means that his training will commence shortly after) & realizes that he's only 2 years older than the prince.


Kane uses it as an opportunity, he attends the prince's name day (his name is Connor) by sneaking in & he asks the Queen to let him train Connor, who's her grandson & next in line for the throne. She refuses at first as it would be an insult to allow a nameless foreigner with no lands or titles to train her grandson & so Kane says he'll challenge any man who was thinking of training Connor. Several people accept & Kane wins against all of them, albeit just barely. While the Queen is thinking, Connor asks how old Kane is & after hearing the answer, he decides he wants to be taught by him, as he can view him as an equal. The Queen agrees & so from that point on, Kane becomes Connors teacher, but more importantly, his ally. 


Kane initially used his new position as a way of finding out more about the knights he wants revenge on but quickly becomes fond of Connor. He learns that one of the knights became a priestess & is also Connors's aunt. While he doesn't want to hurt Connor, his inner anger prevails & so he follows her after she excuses herself from the queen's 60th name day and as he's about to kill her while she's in her chambers, he hears her saying something, accompanied by a whipping sound. Upon listening closer, he realizes she's repenting. She's saying the name 'Hunter' & crying at the same time. Kane realizes she's repenting for her part in killing Hunter. Kane starts to feel sick & backs away before he can be discovered. He contemplates everything & realizes that she isn't the monster he pictured her to be for all those years & he starts to feel sick at the thought of having nearly killed her. However, he reasons that the others must be the monsters he's imagined as they're still knights unlike the priestess & he continues to plot their demise.


When Connor turns 17, he, Kane & another noble are forced to go on a simple mission of dealing with petty brigands & bandits & are assessed to see if they're worthy of being fire Knights. However, the exam was ambushed & Kane reasons that someone leaked their position to the brigands & probably aided them financially to kill Connor, as a way of removing the royal competition so that they can take the throne for themself. Anyhoo, they fight & they're about to die until the crimson Knight appears (one of the three remaining knights on Kane's list) & saves them but he expends himself so much, he passes out. Kane tells the nobleman to ride back to the Palace with Connor while he deals with the stragglers. They go & Kane picks up one of the brigand's swords to make it seem like the Knight was killed by the enemy. Except he can't do it. He lacks to conviction to kill a man in his sleep. Or so that's what he tells himself, but in reality, he's incapable of killing him, regardless of whether or not he's unconscious. So he walks away & the Knight lives.


It's at this point that Kane realizes he just doesn't have the capacity to kill those who wronged him. He wants revenge, he wants closure, he wants something but he finally heeds his master's words & decides to put it all behind him, it had been seven years since Hunter's death anyway. So Kane asks that he be relinquished from Connors service & when he's asked why he says he wishes to see his family & she agrees. As he's about to leave, he says goodbye to Connor with the promise that he'll return one day. Kane arrives at his master's door & as he's about to knock, it opens & Kane says that he was right about the revenge & he's glad it didn't consume him. As he's about to say "I'm so sorry" he gets cut off & his master hugs him & Kane starts to cry.


That night, the small village is ablaze & bandits have circled it. Kane is told to deal with the bandits on the Southside, while his teacher deals with the bandits on the Northside. Once Jabari (the teacher) deals with his end, a Knight in azure armor steps forward & Jabari realizes that another man must have fought for the blue demon soul & taken up the mantle of the azure knight since Hunter's death. They fight & it looks like Jabari's gonna win, but out of nowhere, the azure Knight utilizes the demon soul's power & uses its flames to kill Jabari. Kane sees this & chases him but sticks with Jabari in his dying moments while the azure Knight rides off on his horse back to Vatra, due to his diminished strength. Kane clutches Jabari in his hands & his lust for revenge gets reignited but for real this time.


How's the story so far? I intend to go a lot further with it but this is what I have set in stone as of rn. I'd appreciate any & all feedback :D"You- I dreamt of you. I dreamt of you a strange dream, where the mists whispered of you... you are the one the nameless dead of tomorrow cursingly praised a clueless great mind, you are the water-born burning...
Yes, I dreamt of you, foolish fisherman, do not act like this was an o so unexpectable revelation... Why else would I have known to call you here? 
 I dreamt your tale... I dreamt that you strive to find the one in red robe, the one you don't remember.
The one whose mirror the one who will tame the flames to come came from and went aflame.
I felt it, you crave the one who lies deep in the shattered heart of the things that were... The stranger who is your friend there, he knows the place, he knows the time, but he must not, cannot bear it much longer... he fears and eagerly awaits the overshadowed truths to come back to you. 
You will see the place again, the place with the pillars.
I saw it, there, how you and him and the three in the red and the man in the black robes saw it, before the mist arose within your mind and soul.
The old wyrm, Skurga, the son of the first ones, the father of all the flames to come, let himself extinguish at the hands of the glassen robed, because he believed he could stand against the things to come... but the truth is, no one can. 
When his children hear, the fire will come for the third and last time, such it whispers from the forgotten ones who spin fate's threads beyond the mists.
I saw you in the flames, and I saw who commanded them... Be watchful.
But, these are distant days... 
Other things you will do and see before, many other things.
You will travel to this place where the pillars are, but be wary. There, the men lie still and the trees are roaming, equal in mindlessness. 
I heard the voices calling its name, and I do not understand it, but it fears and confuses me... 
It is the place where fire freezes in stonen flesh.
I do not have more to tell you, for I do not understand more, but... be careful, fisherman. I saw much fire."It was a stampede. The panicked masses stormed through the streets, paying no mind to what or who was caught beneath their feet. Boots and heels dug into Magnus’ back. He put his hands over his head in a desperate attempt to minimize the damage. Just how many of them were there? Magnus rolled to the side, eventually escaping the hurricane of legs. His body screamed out in pain as he attempted to stand up. That bastard. For a second Magnus’ anger made him forget why he was running, but the sound of shuffling armor made him remember.
    He didn’t have time to look back. He quickly dashed in between two buildings. Magnus was battered and out of breath working on adrenaline alone. A large group of orcs passed the alleyway Magnus hoped that they would continue chasing the crowd and ignore him. His heart pounded as he watched green bodies pass by the alleyway. The orcs were armed to the teeth with swords and axes. The sharp steel was coated in crimson red. Quietly, Magnus retreated further into the alleyway, his eyes never leaving the entrance.
    He was halfway down the alley when a rat ran out from under a pile of garbage and startled Magnus. He stumbled. Desperate to catch his balance he reached out blindly but it was too late. He came crashing down into the garbage letting out a sharp cry of pain.
    “Did you hear that?” the voice came from the street.
    “Hear what?” a deeper voice replied.
    “A shout. It came from the alley,”
    “Yeah, I heard it too.” a third voice added.
    “It was probably just a cat digging through the trash looking for its next meal.”
    “No, it was too loud to be a cat. I’m going to check it out.” The first voice announced.
    It’s over. Magnus thought to himself as he heard the orc approach the alleyway. He couldn’t just sit there and wait for his killer to find him. He ran, not caring about how much noise he made.
    “We got ourselves a runner!” The orc shouted. 
    There’s a gate at the end of this alley. Magnus thought. If I can make it there and climb fast enough I could escape. He could hear his pursuers closing the distance, they had begun to taunt Magnus like he was the opposing team in some sadistic sport.
 Once Magnus reached the gate the only thing he could command his body to do was climb. He was halfway up when the orcs reached him. There’s no way they can reach me from down there. The thought had comforted Magnus for a split second, but his heart sank as the gate shook. The orcs, not willing to let their prey escape them, had begun to slam their bodies against the gate. Magnus staggered but his grip didn’t waver. If I fall I die. The orcs struck again. Magnus’s hand slipped. Holding on with only one hand Magnus looked down. Even though they had chased him down the alley the three orcs didn’t seem the least bit tired. Magnus read the faces of his pursuers; they seemed to enjoy watching him struggle. They look delighted. Magnus didn’t have time to process this thought before something else caught his eye. Three orcs were bad enough now I’m done for. Magnus thought as he observed a fourth figure approaching the gate.
    “Just let go.” shouted one of the orcs. “We promise to make it quick.”
    “Don’t lie to the boy.” another orc added. “We’ll enjoy taking our time with-”
    The orc’s words were cut off by an unpleasant tearing noise. A sword had found its way into the chest of the unsuspecting orc. Magnus and the two remaining orcs stared in disbelief as the recently deceased fell to the ground. Silence filled the air as nobody made a move.
    “What are you doing just dangling there? Climb!” Arild shouted. At the sound of his uncle’s voice, Magnus resumed climbing. The other two orcs had regained their senses and began their counter-attack. One lunged at Arild axe in hand. Sparks flew as Arild caught the axe with his sword. Magnus tried to ignore the sound of the battle behind him as he climbed. He nearly twisted his ankle as he fell on the other side of the gate. Is Uncle Arild alright? Magnus thought as he turned to spectate the ongoing battle. Arild was an experienced warrior more than capable of holding his own against two orcs, however, something was wrong. Arild looked tired. He staggered with every strike he blocked. This wasn’t the first battle he’s been in tonight. 
 
    Arild’s knees buckled as he bled from older wounds. An overhead strike sent his sword crashing to the ground. The last remaining orc stood above him; and in his last act of defiance, Arild spat on the ground near his feet. Magnus stared at the orc’s face. There was no malice or vitriol, instead, the orc wore an expression one would use to address a fellow warrior. The orc raised his axe.
Arild’s severed head rolled onto the ground leaving a red trail in the newly fallen snow. 

The alarms blared with a deafening rage, *Someone raided the lab-- and they were here for one thing:* Aether. It was the prize that many planets coveted, a weapon of mass destruction: all condensed into a cube. It was to be developed in secret, but ‘coincidentally’, right when R&D finished, the lab was attacked, by none other than the Drole empire-- the most ambitious force in the galaxy.

“The-they, they can’t have this Veerz, you have to keep this out of their hands at any cost!”

A dishevelled scientist handed Veerz a sizable capsule with a misty crimson cube inside. 

“I leave it to you. Now GO!”

The scientist shoved Veerz out of the door, locking it behind him. Veerz made a beeline, trying to ignore the gunshots behind him. Veerz cursed to himself silently, about the lab, the Droleans, and the Aether. After all, what’s the point of it anyway? It only took whispers of its existence to cause so many issues any--

BANG!

A massive explosion tripped Veerz over, dropping the Aether and causing it to violently react. The Droleans were getting too close to him-- Veerz had no intention of letting this go to anyone.

“Court martial me for all I care! This thing needs to go!” Veerz thought to himself.

Lost in thought, Veerz hadn’t realized he had made it to his goal already: The Hangar. The enemies weren’t far behind, Veerz hurriedly strapped himself and the Aether into a cruiser, taking off immediately. Veerz piloted the ship with dangerous speed, he’d have to head to Arbario, the only safe way to dispose of stupid cu--

BANG!

They caught him. He thought he was in the clear, but he was hit; it was a critical shot as well, the vessel wouldn’t last much longer. With resignation, Veerz inserted the Aether capsule into the escape pod terminal on the other side of the cockpit. 

“I can only hope you fall into a black hole. For the sake over everything…”

Veerz activated the emergency wormhole launch; and as clockwork, the Aether escaped into deep space, just as Veerz’s ship crashed into an asteroid.

\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“Was the Aether destroyed?! I gave specific orders not to wreck the ship.” The Droelean Emperor bellowed.

“No sir, there’s a Heran cadaver here, but no traces of Aether here.” A Droelean Commander replied, surveying the wreckage.

“So the informant was a lie then?”

“Not necessarily, the black box in the ship states that an escape with a wormhole command was made shortly before the crash.”

“Is its destination included?”

“Impossible, the time between the cruiser launch and the crash was far too short to punch in a destination. It was a random shot in the dark.”

“I see… I will allocate resources into finding it. It must be ours!”

“Yes, My Emperor!”

“Oh, and another thing, purge the lab and everything in it. We have no reason to keep this liability any longer.”

“It shall be done, my emperor.”Opening paragraph:

"In our seaside valley I’ve seen many of these kinds of celebrations, and this one is no different. It is a celebration of the changing of the seasons. The wind relentlessly brushes along the trees and rock and sturdy plants that hold together the earth, but the wind is less harsh today. That’s what marks the day that the celebrations start. We watch and wait until the ribbons of the wind turbines on the tops of the steeples no longer remind oneself of chaos but remind oneself of lazy drift on the sea itself. The ribbons are muted purples pinks and golds that have been faded by the sun. The winds are a constant accompaniment that define several aspects of the lives in this valley."

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zMRfP6aY1OLaaagkF6VwxNM\_cUZLIDXBjZrjUnAo4Ns/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zMRfP6aY1OLaaagkF6VwxNM_cUZLIDXBjZrjUnAo4Ns/edit?usp=sharing)

&#x200B;

Is the ending strong enough and make sense as a scene?

Does the amount of dialogue keep the reader's interest?

Does the world get properly built or is it too heavy on prose?

What do you think of the MC name?

Thanks for reading!!! This is the second short story Ive written, I'll hear any feedback/critique if something is on your mindSo I just saw another guy asking for this and honestly, I'm curious about your opinion!

In my Grimdark Fantasy Novels (I'm writing a trilogy and currently at the beginning of the third book) Magic and anything related to that is a pretty obsucre and rare thing. Even the idea of casting or using any kind of sorcery is a great deal and most of people are not able to do so, no matter what.

Every single one of those people who are able to cast magic, have totally different kind of sorceries, most of them are pretty over-complicated and very situational, but there are a few controversal, easier spells that almost any mage can cast.

Basically, what determines which spells and sorceries you can cast, is your own nature, your soul and world view, and lastly your will and determination to "actually  use the magic" In the last two, depends the strenght of the spell.

Most of the mages and sorcerers in my novels have completely unique skills and magic, only used by them, because those are the creations of his soul. Noone can "learn" these individual sorceries, because their mindset is different.

I go in much deeper to this on my books, plus the whole "magic" system has a complex, cool lore, which I am very proud of. So what do you think? Is it any good?Hi y'all
I've been creating my fantasy world for a while now, and finally started to actually think about the magic system and yea... it's a mess. So I'm looking for critique and what could I change or do to make it better. (In advance, sorry for possible mistakes, english isn't my native language).

The magic system is based of wishes (kinda like with genies/djinns) but I don't want it to be too overpowered and now I'm struggling a bit... 

There are these people called "wishmakers" who hold the magic and are able to use it but it's controlled by the government and wishmakers can use their magic only surrounded by special guards/priests. I've also thought that their magic would be controlled with some objects (crystals etc, I'm not sure yet). 

Also, wishmakers can use their magic only few times in a year, in special magic seremonies and festivities, where people come and ask wishes. The wishmakers cannot grant wishes for themselves (I mean they can, but it's forbidden), only for others. 

Wishes also have a cost. It's like an eye for an eye. You need to "sacrifice" something to get something. For an example, if you want to wake somebody from the death, you need to die or you need to kill someone, otherwise the magic user dies.I recently had an idea for a book, and I was wondering if people would be interesteed in reading it. So in this post I'm going to explain the idea, and based on your replies I'll decide what do with it. Here's the blurb:

The protagonist is a powerful reptilian wizard. His powers were taken ad he was exiled from the Empire after his scandalous affair with a nobleman was revealed. The magic system is based o a mysterious energy which is found in people's souls since birth, or in veins that run deep beneath the surface of the land. Salazaar (the mage) encounters various eccentric friends (among which his former lover) and enemies in his search for a magic vein to restore his powers, he learns the meaning of life without magic or money, and accidentally stumbles  upon an undead witch plotting the destruction of his beloved homeland. It was a cold night, such as Blackstone had never seen. Thick flakes of snow fell gloomy staining each roof, door and window with a white blanket, revealing the beauty of the night; because despite the suffocating darkness that enveloped every corner, the sky struggled to maintain its characteristic brightness. Now beautiful auroras shone to the beat of the long candles, instantly devouring the darkness that always appears unabashed. 

Advancing towards the horrible dark stone walls that guard the secrets of ancient kings, it was possible to observe the opposite of the tranquility present in the streets, because shadows danced on their walls that fed on the anguish in the air. On the walkways were found the owners of those shadows, men covered in coppery armor and bearded vulture masks patiently awaiting the arrival of an impossible event. 

 "War" a word that jumped from mouth to mouth, fueled by small rumors of famous troubadours, who prophesied the advance of an "inhuman" army to forbidden lands. Sowing deep fear in the villagers, who helplessly roared for a quick solution. 

 A loud explosion shook the night, covering the city in a sea of ​​dust and pebbles that shattered everything in its path. The immense wall, an ancient shield raised by Aren, now lay fractured giving way to a true nightmare. Inhumans began to emerge from that enormous crack; beasts clad in pearl-black armor, as dark as night itself; an army as old as the world beneath their feet, all eager to claim revenge. 

 The song of metal was beginning to echo across the battlefield, gloriously joining the chorus of screams lashing out at innocent lives, dyeing the darkness red, and from deep within it rose a slim, robed figure. White. The moonlight was beginning to descend on the rubble of the city, bathing the slim figure in a silvery glow, revealing a youthful appearance. 

 It was mutala skin with a scar that arose from his neck and advanced to cover much of his face eating away at his left eye, giving a dead appearance to his cruel gaze. He advanced steadily shouting orders in an incomprehensible language ignoring the looks of his next slaves and in his hands he carried a heavy hammer made of dragon steel, as bright as silver itself. Each step made the snow crunch under his feet and brought him closer to his only goal, to free what was hidden under the pillars of his past, opening the way to a new era.

 In front of him loomed a colossal steel gate, his family crest "two horned foxes intertwining their antlers" etched into the icy metal. It was the reason for everything, the only thing he needed to change the destiny of his decadent kingdom was at his feet and still he hesitated. A wave of memories began to cloud her mind, memories of her childhood, beautiful experiences; long before his father ruined his life with the bitter taste of alcohol and that only fueled the hatred that grew inside him. This was the last barrier.This is a micro-fiction writing prompt and challenge. Using a theme of “Quit” and fantasy elements, write a coherent vignette or snippet ***using fifty words or less*** and post it as a comment.

Have fun! The thread is in contest mode so that comments appear in random order with hidden upvotes.Hi there!

TL;DR at the bottom!

I have been having an issue coming up with a creative solution to a magic system I am developing. I would appreciate any help, advice or ideas!

To give context, the universe is permeated by Ether, which is the matter that conscious spirits are made of. It is also what sorcerers channel in order to cast spells. It's kind of like the force but with variations. Your spirit is made of Ether, as well as literally everything else in the universe. Ether itself has some degree of intelligence in order to be able to respond to your commands, but it is not conscious itself, kind of like a plant. It is alive but not necessarily thinking. This makes the universe a sea of living intelligence.

When you cast magic, you are channeling the Ether around you, similar to static electricity in the air. You aren't drawing the Ether from physical or living things (though I suppose you could). Ether can be completely exhausted from an area of space, but it will naturally replenish at a constant universal rate. I haven't yet decided what quantity of Ether fills up any given area of space yet, but it is going to be a lot. 

The issue I am having is that anyone capable of casting Ether can use it to conjure anything they want according to their will. That is the nature of Ether, that it can be manipulated to do anything, which is how the gods created the universe to begin with.

I want to have categories of magic, like necromancy, pyromancy, illusion magic, druidic magic, etc. I need something added to the nature of Ether that would restrain someone from being able to do whatever was according to their will, and forcing them to mostly specialize in a certain category of magic, at least at first. Mortals can reach a god-like point but definitely not immediately.

There will be colleges and universities studying magic through a scientific lens in my story that will teach the different categories of magic, which is another reason why I need an excuse to restrict what mortals can do with Ether and make them specialize. This will also prevent sorcerers from becoming OP. 

Some of the limitations include body fatigue, going into a coma or dying as a result of not being practiced enough in sorcery or overdoing a spell. Your mental concentration can help to make the output of the spell more precise and focused, or the lack thereof will make the effect more chaotic. Your emotional state can also inhibit your ability to cast certain spells or make them more potent. For example, if you want to kill someone, hating them will make a malicious spell aimed at them stronger. Some spells require confidence to cast, so a fearful coward is very unlikely to successfully pull off the spell. 

TL;DR - Ether permeates the universe as a source of magic and is the energy that makes up all things. A sorcerer could use Ether to do whatever they wanted according to their ability to cast it. I need restraints that force sorcerers to specialize into certain forms and categories of magic. Any creative help would be greatly appreciated!This story is meant for be similar other Chosen One stories such as Harry Potter or Percy Jackson, except with one twist.

(By the way I won’t be using the term Chosen One in the story, I’m just doing using it here so people understand what I’m going for). 

“One day, while on his way back home, Robin walked himself right into the middle of the climatic battle between an ancient evil named Keres and the chosen one named Drake. Robin accidentally distracted Drake, allowing Keres to kill him and escape. 

After the battle, Robin puts two and two together and realizes what he just did. Panicking, Robin quickly grabs Drake’s weapon, an enchanted War Hammer, and runs home. 

Robin begins to try and think of a way to fix this mess, and decides that in order to make up for his mistake, he’ll take the place of Drake and become the new Chosen One. 

In order not to be instantly killed, Robin heads to the Citadel, the place where Drake trained, to gain the skills he needs in order to defeat Keres. But he won’t be on this journey alone, as Drake’s soul ended up getting trapped inside the hammer when he was killed.” 

And that’s the overall concept for the story. I left out a few minor details, but this everything you need to know. 

Constructive criticism is appreciated!(I need reviews on how I pulled it off, not the idea of the prologue itself. This is *my* vision, help me realize it.)

#Blightburn’s Hail

**Book 1: Squabbles for Fools**

**Chapter 0: The Long Drought**

It was a warm summer in the high peaks of Penygader, much like always. The ground burnt like cinders as Uuledyr made her way to the bar. She was used to it though. For she was born under the sun’s curse, as all had since history began. Like her mother, her grandfather, his father, and so on.

What she was not used to however was that a wild wind came and claimed her cloak, forcing her to pace on shadeless under the Sun’s eternal reign. The manse was higher up on the city hills, dwarfed only by the cobblestone castle behind it. She had never been in these parts, thus the winds shocked her high. And it helped not that she was still armoured in bronze on her way.

It’s majesty never seized to beckon her near. It always called to her, with all it’s cheery people’s and high songs, begging for her to join. A cry father than anything she had ever experienced, and now she finally can. “Spend it well. One day you’ll be a knight, so cheer on!” the Lord of the city’s watch told her true and pure of heart. She hugged him in the broad light for all to see after that. Tears poured and thanks given.

Crowds chattered front the manse, kids played by the trees’ blessings, and wolves howled for leftovers. And soon enough She had joined them all.

Her lungs begged an end, sweat came and poured by the buckets, and her arms ached from spear spars just minutes prior, yet even still she made it just in time. Finally, Uuledyr can have relief.

It was a large place. Larger than any other manse in the city, and rightfully so. Sandstone so fine that it’s second only to the castle above. Hundreds flock here to quench their throats and make bellies bloat every hour. And so good and true it’s lords are that the wolf and dragon banners of House Wynn hanged on every pillar.

She made her way down the counter and bought some tea and bread. They were stored under domed huts filled with ice, and they quenched her pain perfectly. Tea brewed with honey made her mouth water into calm and her face turned into a sweet eyes-shut smile. It was beautiful. Deliciously cool, reminding her of grandfather’s brew. It was all the money she’d ever earned, and it was worth it. Each and every copper. 

There was a game boarded centre of the table too. Small piles of clay dyed either gold or red. Uuledyr looked ‘round the crowd for would be players, yet none came. She knew none of them. And even if she did, most of them were higher up in society either ways. 

She took a good look at her cup, and gulped it empty. Though this time it wasn’t quite so sweet.
Before she could refill however,— as those were free, thank the gods —, a man came up the front. He had a stool in one hand, and a long necked instrument on the other. ‘A traveller? Maybe far yonder south?’ she thought to herself. The man looked queer. Lighter in skin and thicker in clothes, with an accent Uuledyr had never heard of.

But before she could ponder any further, he sat down the stool, strummed the cords by the gut, and sang an ancient song. A song first sung millennia ago...
All voices hushed, and each eyes turned to the traveller. Games, drinks, and chatters were all but forgotten as the man took the people of Cummanlocht back to ancient times.

*“Before those days, far before those ancient days*

*Before the last of all nights, before it shattered for all to fright.*

*Before those years when the Sun was not so bright*

*Before those ancient days when all was set in stone*

*In those ancient times when all were given form*

*Before the bread were once more tasted in our sacred halls*

*Before the ovens were first been lighted once again*

*When the heavens had first departed*

*And the Earth had done so too*

*When mankind had fourth established the law of lords and kings*

*There had been a dragon red as blood*

*And it’s brother bright as gold*

*Against a neighbour white as cold*

*They fought and fought*

*Married and fought*

*Married and fought and fought*

*Claw to claw*

*Jaw to maw*

*Fire and fire and fire again*

*From day to night and day again*

*From summer to winter and summer again*

*They fought and married and fought again*

*Till all was lost and gone...”*I’ve never written in first person before, and I want to give my character his own voice that will match with his personality and speech. He doesn’t use a lot of big words when he speaks, so I’m trying to minimize those without losing meaning or becoming incoherent. Any criticism is appreciated.



>I don’t like when people say “It all started when…” because that’s almost never when it “all started.” The most important decisions you make are built on a bunch of smaller decisions, and not all of them are yours. From the miserable “mandatory counseling” I had to endure at the Law School, I learned that you can trace plenty of those decisions back to the things that happened when you were younger that you try not to think about, and why you acted the way you did goes back to your upbringing and personality, which are also connected. I know I’ve never heard someone start their account with “it all started when I was born,” even though that’s probably the minimum place where it “all started.” Instead, I’ll say “this part of my life started” when I was sitting by my campfire nearly a day's walk from Mount Leyad.
>
>I’d spent most of the morning stomping down Mount Leyad, or as close to stomping as you can when going downhill. It had taken me more than two days of walking through the Kidron valley to get to that mountain, and I’d spent another two days near its peak because I’d gotten a faulty bit of information, and wasting that much time can leave me in a bad mood. It’s not that I’m impatient, you can’t do my job if you’re impatient, I just hated being stopped from doing my real job for so long. You become a Wandering Judge because you want to hunt down bad people and destroy them, not follow up on information about a possible lost Spirit Well, even though that’s also in the job description. You might be able to say it had only been a two-day diversion; I hadn’t planned where I was going next before I got that faulty information, so wandering along the only road that ran through that huge valley wasn’t bad. I did find what I was always hunting for, and I might have missed out if I’d walked straight through without my two-day diversion.I'm having a problem in worldbuilding and I already read a bunch of diversity threads to no avail, so if someone could help, that would be wonderful. 

My fantasy world is what could be called post racial (a choice I did on purpose, so I could have POC characters everywhere and, I mean, it's a fantasy world, so I could give them a break). All regions have people of all colors (due to worldbuilding reasons), so there's not ethnic-based xenophobia either. It's a planet settled by humans from Earth, so that's why all nations are diverse, but it was so long ago they have no memory of it.

However, when it comes to naming the characters, I fell into a dilemma. I knew I wanted to use names from many different cultures in the first place (I think could add a touch of freshness to the worldbuilding, and I'm not a big fan of the traditional Northern European/Medieval setting anyway, and I like to research names too). But then I realized I would need to shuffle them around, since I couldn't tie, for example, a Japanese name to someone who looked Japanese because that wouldn't have a plausible explanation because of the way the world is set (and it could look like a stereotype). 

So I knew I should shuffle the names around, but then I also couldn't put a Thai name on an Indian character, or it would look like I think they are all the same (or a Yoruba name on an Italian-looking character, even worse). If I chose European names for all characters, that would have bad imperialistic undertones as well. 

My main country is VERY loosely inspired by a few Middle-Eastern/South European countries in the Late Middle Ages/Renaissance, so I thought I could name all of them with a mix of names coming from the Middle East and Europe, but I still don't feel totally safe. Would that have unfortunate implications as well? Would it be offensive to mix Arabic, Persian, Jewish, Latin, and Greek names while having a very diverse-looking set of characters? I'm Latina, so it sounds alright to me since I grew up in a country where there are names from everywhere, but I'm still unsure if it would be ok to go down this route, so all help is welcome! :DIn my story that I am currently planning out I have six magical species. 

Dwarf which has mineral/earth magic which allows them to find and use other ores which most species wouldn’t know how to use as well as being able to forge/create things incredibly well. 

Next are Elves or light elves in the story, within the story they are the dominant faction and are heavily warmongering. They have similar attributes to the basic elf however there magical ability is of the elements such as lighting and fire, the way they were able to become the dominant faction. 

Then there is the Dark elves who are similar to elves but live shorter lives and have purpleish skin. There magical abilities are to do with the soul/the astral realm, meaning that they can gaze into one’s soul and see who they are and the strongest had the ability to temporarily change a persons personality.

Lastly there are humans which are just basic humans however there magical ability is beast taming. There will be magical creatures in this realm that humans would be able to tame. In the past humans had the potential to control the minds of other beings(light elves being the hardest) and after many genocides that the elves did seeing the humans are inferior. This power got diluted down till only a few select people have a water down version of this power that allows them to basically brand a being to your will however it is not complete control.

As of right now I can’t think of much to add for my next two species which are Lycaons(no they can’t turn people into werewolves they are merely wolf people) and Goblins(which I don’t plan to have as the normal road thieving monsters in most stuff, although some will do that. But rather more simple race that just does things normally) The only thoughts I’ve had for them is that the Lycaon should have some sort of hunting magic but the rest of that is free game. Any help would be appreciated thank you, any other details about the world I’d be happy to supplyHello!  I am looking for feedback on the first chapters of my dark fantasy novel.  The story features Soran, a wrongly-convicted prisoner with a knack for hunting dark spirits.  

I am looking for mostly developmental feedback on the plot, setting, and characters.  I'd also like to know if anything is confusing or needs to be tweaked, as well as what you enjoyed so I know what to keep.  Thank you!

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KrK7Fi5NgnJqMty5tOKOHLY5uR3o0NxxeJACPV-wj5k/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KrK7Fi5NgnJqMty5tOKOHLY5uR3o0NxxeJACPV-wj5k/edit?usp=sharing)I am trying to write what I can only describe as an Address to the Nation, made by their leader, Lord Paradise. I am struggling a bit as I lack the credentials to write an address to a utopian nation (I am not the leader of a post-societal paradise) Can you please tell me what you think of it/anything you feel I should change.

&#x200B;

> I am not your conqueror, I am not your leader. My people, when I look around at you, I see my own masters. When my family founded this great nation of Idyll 512 years ago, we chose a name, we chose a promise. A promise that was in spite of the world that came before this one. This was a world of greed, misery, and poison. Machinery that was supposed to provide us with abundance had left us in want. The very few sat above the rest, hoarding the wealth and the resources, drip feeding them down to the masses. Your ancestors were victims of a system that left them trapped, hungry, and cold. They were victims of oppression that was not necessary for any other reason than to keep the belly of the man above them full. This was not a sustainable way of living, oh no, for eventually their spirit was broken. These people had nothing to lose. And when you have nothing to lose, my people, that is what breeds a dangerous kind of desperation. Your ancestors refused to give their lives to these men who enslaved and hated them. A great war broke out. Worker against master: A Revolution. The battles were long and brutal, some even going so far as to utilize ancient atomic warfare. They were the masses against a very well equipped few. It was not long before both sides had reduced themselves to nothing but savages, fighting in the ash with sticks and stones. This was when my ancestors had decided enough was enough. We built the great wall that surrounds Idyll, and we made it the last great bastion for humanity. Do not, however, take this place for granted, my people. Although it has been five centuries, the few remaining dregs of savagery still exist beyond the safety of this wall. They crawl and scurry through the barren wastelands of a bygone age, they want nothing more than to take what we have worked so hard to achieve. These creatures are not strong, they are not scary, but they are still there and they are jealous. They are jealous of my name, and they are jealous of my promise. And once again, as I have done, as my ancestors have done on this day every year since the founding of Idyll, I make this promise. To you, my people, I promise Paradise.This is my first time writing a fantasy poem, or a poem in general actually. As such, I am aware it isn't anything decent. Nevertheless I would appreciate some feedback. 

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-B1jUZIjQU2L7WN55wfSlAhKE1H\_FUeoLCLntnrS5xE/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-B1jUZIjQU2L7WN55wfSlAhKE1H_FUeoLCLntnrS5xE/edit?usp=sharing)I am in the process of writing a short story with dragon characters set in a world of magic. This is an excerpt from the story. It features the protagonist, Zenith, returning to his home after a violent encounter with a monster--finding a friend waiting for him.

The focus of this excerpt is to create context for the relationship between these two characters and give insight into their unique personalities.

I would greatly appreciate any form of critique given, but I am especially looking for the following insights:

Dialogue: is it believable, does it hit the proper emotional notes?

Descriptions: are they vivid, do you as the reader get a good picture of the scene?

Engagement: do you *want* to read this? Are you grabbed by what is occurring on the page?

Thank you for reading <3

&#x200B;

(set to allow comments) 2,456 words

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MNJZHHvt3XT9tSgxLe-q7jxQw71i4F\_Jv\_49r50SOho/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MNJZHHvt3XT9tSgxLe-q7jxQw71i4F_Jv_49r50SOho/edit?usp=sharing)Looking for overall impressions of this chapter. I know that is vague but I really am just looking for anything stands out good or bad, thoughts on characters, setting, world building. Would you keep reading? What made you want to or what turned you off? Feel free to add comments in the doc.

 My story is about a young man named Sepharin MacTaggart struggling to help his mother pay down their family's debt. After losing his job, a stranger proposes an opportunity with a large pay day, which could be the solution to his problems. But, if he takes it and is caught it would mean ending up in the Dansik, a brutal jail that people don’t come back from.

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1\_F5WzvQyJA-AOLfsCNue5IC9U5G5HMyShoJ85oZaK8s/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_F5WzvQyJA-AOLfsCNue5IC9U5G5HMyShoJ85oZaK8s/edit?usp=sharing)

Edit: thank you all for the feedback and discussion! In relation to the names, there is a reason for this. There’s a lot that could not be explained in this first chapter but does come out in the following ones. The story takes place in the 1930s. In 1900 seven gods came to earth and divided up the us amongst themselves. They all have strange and different names. For example: Adillian, Ophelia, Odo, Baiven etc. After they took over people start changing the names they chose for their children to align more with the names of the gods, abandoning conventional names. So people born after a certain time have more fantasy leaning names. People before more conventional.Hello everyone. This is the first part of a short story, apart of my passion project set in a fantasy world.

I hope you like it. And if you take the time to check it out, critique  would be greatly appreciated.

Exactly 1,437 words:


Part One:

A mounted white horse was galloping through the hills of a wide open field. Grass hissed in the wind as it’s hooves sent clumps of dirt flying into the air.
Upon it’s mighty back, a man draped over by a black cloak rode, one hand used to grip the harness, while the other cradled a bundle of white blankets and crimson stained sheets.
The sunset was bathing the green land in hot, fiery hues of light. The sky was streaked with iridescent shades of orange and pale blue, and a faint image of the moon was suspended high above the clouds.
A struggled cough emanated from the bundle of stained blankets, writhing for a moment before going still. The cloaked figure bent their head, his heart sinking deeper than a ship in the ocean. 
He tucked with the blankets as the land jutted upward, turning into a long, steep hill. The horse of hazel mane neighed as he kicked its side, urging it to ride faster.
Wind as strong as a raging storm watered the figures’ eyes, sending shivers of cold onto his numb hands and fingers.
He was almost there. Just a little bit further.
On and on and on he rode, and finally, the hill curved down to the top of a high, rounded peak, nearly big enough to be considered a mountain. The horse and it’s rider skidded to an abrupt stop to survey the shining world below.
The borders of Morumard’s end glowed it’s mighty presence before their very eyes. The figure threw back his hood, hugging the bundle closer to his chest.
Under the sunset, he’d never witnessed such unmatched beauty. The dying sunlight shone through the cracks between the vast, line of green mountain peaks standing before him. The free, fielded land at their base waved up and down for miles upon miles, drifting with small clouds of mist from the wet day before. The ocean before the Morumardian shoreline crashed far behind the range, beyond the distant horizon and shrouded in a thin haze. It was miles away, but the beach wasn’t where his goals lied today. 
He shifted his gaze a bit to the left, toward the East, and saw what was embedded into a mountain growing at the front of Morumard’s end.
A small castle, which had been built against the walls of the mountain. With a circled, thick body of blood-red bricks, each side fitted with a tall, thin tower which tore through the air above. Atop the burliest building rose the tallest tower of them all, it’s dark purple roof ending with a sharp tip which glinted in the sunlight. A long set of twisting stone steps snaked up the jagged, rocky mountainside, leading to a pair of large double doors at the front of the building. Each tower was fitted with a window, every one stained with  glass of the deepest blue.
“The Morumardian archives!” August gasped under his breath, feeling his eyes go big. He cradled the bundle and pulled back a couple of the sheets, revealing the face of a sleeping baby, it’s lips dry, cracked and dribbling with tiny jewels of blood.
“Not long now little one,” he said to it in a hushed voice, kissing it on the forehead.
“The answers we seek couldn’t be found anywhere but here.”
He snapped his head up, covering the baby’s face in the blankets again.
“They have to be here…”

***

The night outside the hospital window was dark with a cloud ridden sky. August stared, trying to ignore the sinking feeling churning the pit of his stomach. His reflection glinted off of the dusted window. His hazel eyes hanging with grey bags, his beard long and overgrown, skin old and wrinkled with the curse of age.
August pursed his lips at it, biting back tears.
The streets below the window were silent, devoid of life. Tall, black lamps stood side by side across the walkways, bathing the shop windows and old, battered buildings with dim, yellow firelight.
Back at his home in the village of Winderman, of all the times he’d dreamed of living in the kingdom, August had never once considered how lonely the streets could become hours after sunset.

“The Monroche kingdom slumbers at peace tonight,” an old, ragged voice rasped from behind him.
“One would deem it wise for you to do the same.”

August glanced behind his reflection in the glass. A man draped in emerald robes was standing at the door to the room, beside the unkempt bed that pressed itself against the back wall. White strands of hair protruded from his scalp and hung on his shoulders. Red eyes stared from within his skull; eyes that were blazing like the depths of dragonflame.

“How do you expect me to sleep this night, Doctor Mildrem?” August asked.

“By crawling into your bed and closing your eyes,” he rasped, crossing over to sit down on a chest, which had been placed on the opposite side of the door.
“Give it an hour or so and I’m sure you’ll doze off.”

“Spare me your comedic gestures old man,” August hissed. “I am in no mood for jesting.”

A thin smile traced along Mildrem’s lips. “I apologize sir. I only meant well.”

August opened his mouth, then shut it again, suddenly regretting his small outburst of rage.
“No. I apologize Doctor.” He croaked, turning from the window to face him.
“Truly.” 
There was a pause.
“I just don’t know what I’m going to do with him…”

Mildrem was chewing his lower lip. With a cold sigh, he limped toward a cot that was standing in the centre of the room. Placing his bony hands on the wooden fence, he gently rocked it from side to side.
“Even the one who worries you so dreams peacefully at this very moment,” he said, looking into the cot, his expression warm and serene.

“Indeed,” August agreed, crossing the room slowly. He leaned over to peek into the cot himself, (despite having done it ten times in the last hour), watching as a small, baby boy slumbered inside, bundled in warm, white sheets and blankets.
His face was eerily pale, with dry, peeling lips that were a sickening shade of green. August swallowed as he saw a thin rivulet of blood dribbling down his sons cheek. 
Mildrem reached down with a cloth and dabbed it away as August felt his eyes well up, a stinging tear escaping the droop of his right eye.

“Y-You haven’t—.” He stammered. “You h-haven’t concluded a diagnosis yet, have you?”

Mildrem didn’t answer as he tucked the cloth into one of his robe pockets. 
“I’m afraid not, sir. These symptoms are… new to me. I have theories, but not a hardened answer.” His voice was like trying to drag chains through a swamp.
There was long, agonizing silence for a few moments. The only sounds that filled the room were the constant ticking of a clock, which was standing on a mantelpiece next to the chest, and the violent rapping of wind against the cracked window at the back of the room.
“How is your wife?” Mildrem ventured, cutting through the tension.

August turned his head to the second bed in the room, which was currently occupied by a woman with frizzy black hair, and a deep frown that plagued her in her sleep.
“Alright I suppose,” he said. “She sits with him all day. I keep trying to get her to eat but… she insists on waiting until he eats first.”

Mildrem nodded, then exhaled. He dug his hand into one of his pockets, and August jerked away from his wife to give him a curious look.

“On the topic of food,” Mildrem rasped, withdrawing a small vial and holding it out to August. “I think we should start using these!” His eyes flickered toward the sleeping baby.

August reached out and took the vial from between Mildrem’s fingertips. It was small, and filled with a silvery, grey liquid that reminded him of moonlight. He dropped it into his palm, rolling it around as the contents swirled inside.
“What is it?” He asked.

“Liquified nutrients,” Mildrem answered. “Nothing odd or dangerous, just filled with enough iron and so forth to keep the lad’s heart beating.”

August nodded in understanding, then placed the vial into his own pocket.
“Thank you,” he said. “I think I’ll make an attempt at trying some of that sleep myself.”

“Best idea you’ve had all night,” Mildrem agreed, who was already reaching for the door handle anyway. “Goodnight, sir.”

“Goodnight to you too, doctor.”The magic system is well thought out so I didn't go into detail in this post. I worry that some of the politic elements in this story is lacking and unrealistic. I do want critique on the entire concept presented here. 

Country #1 is where the entirety of the book takes place. 


This country has been in decline in large part due to adjacent kingsoms trying to annex it. Due to this, borders have shrunk and city populations have risen. 

In this country there is one incredibly large and old city. 

Around 20 years before the book starts q large famine occurs in the country leading the leader of country #1 to sell the industrial areas of its one and only city and the ports in exchange for food for the next 30 years or so (the length of time is not yet solidified). 

To combat this country #1 has built new country owned factories which are mysteriously successful. These factories are built like small fortresses with very limited access. 

Thats the setting. 

Main trio of Characters: 

Laimal 
Son of a middle class merchant mother and cook father. Has a passion for medicine. Is nicknamed neck due to a overly large neck  and is not valued by those outside of his family though he is not aware. Physically average. Often uses words he doesn't understand. Is deeply empathetic. 

Soranne
Rich girl. Tough and very educated. She struggles with anxiety and self esteem. Her main source of anxiety is that she's afraid of losing relationships, crumbling under the smallest amount of displeasure expecting them to turn on her and not blame her. 

Unnamed character 

Headstrong character with many of the loveable traits that stereotypical fantasy heroes posses. Comes from humble means. His struggles mostly arise from his poor situation. Confident and takes lead well often says things that he regrets. A little overconfident at times. Stubborn and doesn't think flexibly. 





Magic:
The magic system in these books is split into 2 different types of magic new and old. 
The pre-existing magic is a natural occurring mineral that acts as a catalyst for physical changes such as speeding up or slowing down water. Or the dispersion of heat. 

New
This is the secret to the factories mysterious success. This magic is a secret held by country 1 discovered around 5 years prior to the start of the book. How the magic works not important to the story. 



Plot. 

Our characters are identified as potentials to learn magic. They are taken to a university like compound where they are taught magic while in the compound, they are isolated from the outside and are subject to propaganda. The trio eventually realises that the compound is not preparing them to be magic users for industry but weapons for an upcoming war. Meanwhile tensions in the city rise as country #1 prepares for war.


Update:

Tysm for all the criticism and suggestions. This has helped me so muchThis is a fictional story based on a story that my Gran used to tell me when I was tiny.

Long ago, in a faraway land where the snow always fell and icicles grew like trees, the snow giants were having a battle.


They had been fighting for days to the misfortune of poor animals living on the land, destroying their homes and scaring their young ones. 


One day the snow giants had gone too far, and so the King of the land of snow the mighty and strong Warrior Bear gathered four of the most bravest Subjects in his Kingdom together to the animal Council. 

The Snowy Owl, The Snow She-Wolf, The Fox and The Seal. 


The five animals were in Council for three days, but they came up with a possible plan that might save them from the battling giants. 


"We shall call upon the Goddess of Snow and the Goddess of Sun and barter with them to help defeat these fearsome giants!" 
The King said confidently. 

So it was that the King called to the Goddess of Snow, but the Goddess of Snow said regretfully. 

"Although I do not like or approve of these troublesome creatures; they are creatures of my domain, and therefore I am forbidden to hinder or hurt them; however you can ask my Sister, the Goddess of Sun, she may be able to assist you!" 

So the mighty Warrior Bear called upon the Goddess of Sun, and the Goddess of Sun asked. 

"Mighty King; what will you and your Subjects give me in return for my assistance?! "

The Snowy Owl came forward and said. 
"I shall guard the sky, I have wisdom and stealth!" 

The Snow She-Wolf came forward followed by the Fox. 

The She-Wolf said. 
"I shall be guardian of the Earth; I am Mother of all and I shall protect all fiercely as any Mother does!" 

The Fox hurriedly cut in. 
"I have cunning and quickness, I shall outsmart anyone who tries to trick any animal in this  Kingdom!" 

Finally, the Seal came forward and said
"I shall guard the Oceans and Seas of this land; I have patience, kindness and knowledge!" 

The Goddess Of Sun thought about this for a few moments and then said. 
"So be it! I shall accept your gifts, I will help you!" 

The next morning felt the same for the animals, the snow giants resumed their tiresome battle, and the animals were feeling a little downtrodden when suddenly the Snow Hare looked up at the sky and called out with excitement. 

"Look… Look! It's the Goddess of Sun, she is playing catch with the Sun!"

The other animals following the Hare's gaze saw with much excitement, the Goddess of Sun) holding the flaming orb in her hands, and throwing it high into the sky. 

The snow giants were too busy about their battle to notice the Goddess of Sun at play and so as the Sun rose and stayed where the Goddess threw it; it blazed down upon the land strong and bright. 

Gradually the Snow giants began to realise their fate was sealed but by then it was too late for them to flee to the mountains, and soon after they were just two puddles of water which the animals of the land decided to drink. 

From that day forward, the animals of the land of Snow stuck to their world and working alongside the Goddesses and Gods their home was peaceful and harmonic and the snow giants never battled again. Some time ago I included these little beings in my bestiary but I want to know if it sounds interesting for the public view

Let's start with the basics

**Source**

The humans that inhabit this world do not know how the fairies arose, the only thing they know is that these little beings appeared in the middle of winter singing a beautiful song.

But for obvious reasons I am the creator so... I know everything about fairies These little beings are the souls of children who have died at the hands of the cold or coldly killed by some curse, even by their own parents.

The fairies were created by Gerald (one of the last Krosmonites, who survived the extinction) in an attempt to revive the corpse of a child killed by a Wendigo.

For a fairy to be born, a special flower is needed that is known as "fairy cry" this is created, literally by the cry of the fairies themselves

&#x200B;Hey all! I'm curious what you think about magic ceilings in your stories or stories you love and your feelings when the originally established rules of the magic system are broken.

I feel like I've seen this done well in some cases where a new drug/device/element/etc. changes the nature or limits of a power. More times than not though, I think writers use cop-out answers like "we misread the holy texts" or "this wise mentor we're just now introducing in book 3 knows things the protagonists didn't because, uh, wisdom."

What are your thoughts on cases where this is done well (or not) and how you feel about stories that do this at all?Here's a quick summary to put you in context: My story has two main characters who are a romantic couple and were child soldiers for the typical evil empire before this empire collapsed due to a zombie apocalypse (kind of. I promise it's much cooler if I explain it thoroughly). The two main characters are trying to survive this apocalyptic world with other child soldiers they rescued from the collapse (The two MCs are now in their mid 20s after years of being child soldiers.) My plan is to have one of the two characters become the antagonist at one point or the story and have the climax be the encounter between these two.

Character 1 is troubled by all the things she has done and her journey throughout the story will be about accepting what she has done, gaining confidence in her actions again and leading the group of child soldiers to salvation. She will have to confront the past of the world, which ties to her actions quite a lot. 

Character 2 tries to remain supportive and calm about their situation so she is very involved in taking care of the child soldiers and helping them be functional again after all their trauma. However, as the story progresses she will lose faith in the world and turn against it to become the antagonist of the story. 

The plan is to have C1's arc go up while C2's goes down so it would be quite an obvious parallel between the two. One realizing humanity is worth fighting for and that despite her having made horrendous mistakes in life, she has to keep moving forward and follow her ideals to protect her people. The other loses her faith in being able to save her people since she believes humanity is at its core evil and there's no way they can achieve peace. She wants to fix that by... Uh... Going back to monkey... (It makes sense, I promise)

The problem is that C1 at first wouldn't have as big of a motivation since she is troubled and doesn't have a clear goal in mind. She is distant to the child soldiers because she doesn't believe any of them should be near her and even though she is exceptional at combat due to her proficiency with the magic, she doesn't have as much going on for her during the early part of the story so I worry that she isn't too interesting despite being the MC. On the other hand, C2 might not be great at combat but she proactively tries to protect the children and has more of a decisive attitude. During the course or her arc, just like C1 gets better when it comes to mental health, she will get better in combat while her mental health gets worse. That makes me worry she will be a favorite character at the beginning and then people would be mad when she goes evil because that focus on her will obviously not be as big.

I'm very indecisive and I keep changing traits from each of the two characters all the time. Sometimes C1 is the one who cares about the children while C2 is distant but then I find C2 doesn't have a motivation that can be ruined so that she goes evil. Sometimes I also try to see if I make C1 be extremely cheerful and positive despite what she has done but then I find that there's isn't as much of a progression with her from being pessimistic to being positive. Any thoughts on this? I can provide more info if needed and I'm open to any suggestions as well as questions! I obviously left out quite a lot of things since this post was big enough already.So, right now I am working on a romantic comedy story where there is a villain antagonist who falls in love with the main antagonist of the story, but I've had so many fun ideas and I was thinking of a trilogy and how it would work.

For context, the basic premise of the story is that there was this liberal democratic country where everyone was happy enough living in a country that was free and known for being a free country full of opportunities. However, a coup happened so swiftly and so decisively that the old government was removed from power and a new government was put in power. It's officially known as the People's Free Democratic Republic of Esharia. That probably tells you exactly what you need to know regarding the government.

So nobody is happy that their awesome free country got replaced with a totalitarian dictatorship and people are fighting back.

First book begins!

Our main character enters the country with the goal of deposing the tyrannical Queen. She makes it clear she wants to remove the Queen (the main antagonist from power) but she conveniently forgets to mention that she wants to be an even worse ruler than the Main Antagonist.

So MC falls in love with the Tyrannical Queen because she is an awesome challenge, she's a sadomasochist and Stockholm Syndrome. There is romance between these 2 morally black evil villains who both want to be tyrants but one wants to be the greatest villain of all time, the other is just an evil bitch with absolutely no redeeming qualities about her whatsoever.

Second Book

So TQ (Tyrant Queen) isn't the main antagonist, but she is still an antagonist to MC. The main antagonist is the head of the government in exile of Esharia. A corrupt politician (I'm thinking of basing him/her off Vladimir Putin or Hillary Clinton). He insights rebellion against Esharia and is more of TQ's rival than MC, though since our CO (Corrupt Oligarch) is the main antagonist, they still have to present a challenge or obstacle for MC to overcome. TQ, despite not being any friend of CO, is still a threat to MC because she wants to be the Queen of the People's Republic of Tyranny. Their romance really is confusing, but it's not called a Romantic Comedy for no reason.

Third Book

There is a very difficult struggle for MC, a personal one which doesn't come from TQ or the main antagonist, but from herself. I don't know what I should do with this one. Anyway, the antagonist of the third book, I'm thinking should be a morally white, saintly warrior. A sane moral prudent sober white knight whose goodness and morality are so shiny and icky that she even causes her allies to cringe with how pure good she is. HA (Hero Antagonist) wants to liberate Esharia from MC who has proven she is an evil tyrant and TQ because TQ is worse than Saddam Hussein or Kim Jong Un and seriously needs to be put in her place.

HA wants to be the greatest and best hero of all time whilst MC wants to be the greatest villain of all time, making them rivals to each other.

***Critique***

I'm having a little bit of a block, I don't have many more ideas of what to do, but I sure hope to make this trilogy interesting and a fun read. Villain protagonist isn't exactly a new concept but my idea of a villain x villain romance, combined with several other things makes this an ambitious project for which I would love to go big with it.

So I basically want more ideas or suggestions or critiques on what to do to make this trilogy better.Want to be held accountable by the community or just brag about/celebrate your writing progress over the last week? If so, you're welcome to respond to this weekly writing check-in thread. Feel free to tell us what you accomplished this week, or set goals about what you hope to accomplish before next Wednesday!

**So, who met their goals? Who found themselves tackling something totally unexpected? Who accomplished something (even something small)? What goals have you set for yourself, this week?**

_______________________________________________________________________________

*Note:* **This check-in is open for you to promote your work!** If you have a book/story/blog serial etc. that you want to share, this is the place to do so. You may include links, but be sure to write a few words as well!This is something I kept considering as I played the story off a teenage werewolf. Off course their is the simplest explanation, “masquerade.” But I actually thought this could actually be fun. 

So first, the parents. They are heavily religious and he’s worried how they would react, especially with the fact they are both ditzes who continue too forget incredibly important things. What time too pick up the kids, make breakfast, clean the house.

His sister can’t keep a secret too save her own life.

His twin is a magic user like him, except for the fact that her powers initially manifested in telepathy, which was mistaken for sever schizophrenia. 

Wich then resulted in him developing Dementiaphobia before being turned. 

Then there’s Mina, the love interest who he literally took more than one bullet for, who has Cynophobia. 

Lucy, her older sister that’s like some older brothers in that “you so much as look at my siblings and I will murder you violently.” 

There dad John who is an active  Marine, and there shoot forts questions never police mother. 

The bully who turns out too be a serial torturer, 

His pack which does everything they can too go unnoticed.

There’s also his Jewish grandmother who is not a women too be messed with, and was part off a group off monster hunting cabalistic Jewish order. 

Don’t forget Mr, Conrad who would do anything too get his hands on a supernatural being if he knew they existed. 

so he can work out how they work and gain a Nobel prize. 

His father won one and he is extremely insecure. 

This all comes too a head when Mina figures out, 

inducing a stress breakdown in which he rambles for an hour straight on the subject. 

What do you guys think?We start with the basics

**Appearance:**  He is greyish-skinned with two long branch-shaped horns emerging from his head, he is 2 meters tall (not counting the horns) and has a muscular build, he also has long white hair, silver eyes (this due to the use of dark magic) and pointed ears due to his origins.

**History:**  He is the son of an elf and a human (the products of these relationships are known as "inhumans") due to the hatred that the elves felt for this type of relationship, he was forced to escape with his parents to the human kingdoms. to avoid death, unfortunately his parents were killed in front of him and he ended up being sold as a slave to the high lords of the elven kingdom, there he spent much of his childhood, until he managed to escape with the help of many of his kind, during his flight was found by a noble family who decided to take him as one of their servants, during his stay there he was educated by Dahlia whom he would consider as his second mother and whom he would love like never before. This happiness would not last long since one day the king's right hand, a renowned magician and who was a very close friend of the noble family, would find him using light magic (an element that could only be used by elves and inhumans). ) and would find a lot of potential in his skills.

Asking permission from the noble family, this wizard named Hans would take Asgore (which is the name of the villain) as his apprentice and bring him with him to the capital. During his life in the capital he would meet Lena, the first apprentice Hans had and with whom at first he did not get along, but little by little the two fell in love and maintained a relationship, several years later both would marry and have two daughters. , but things would change; because the human wars would begin (Its name is due to the fact that the humans initiated the conflict, by assassinating the king of the giants. This made elves, dwarves and giants unite against the humans). During this time he met the king's son (whose name is Ax), forming a friendship that would last for years and would lead to a conflict between the two friends after the murder of the king and Hans. This conflict started by the different points of view in the war that these friends maintained, Ax wanted to avenge his father and end the elves. Asgore wanted to end the war so he could give his daughters a better life.

To achieve this, Asgore conspired against his best friend by meeting with Austri, the fourth son of the king of the dwarves.

Ax would find out about this thanks to his informants and instead of directly confronting his friend, Ax decided to deceive him by having Asgore's wife and daughters killed, covering everything as an attack orchestrated by the moon elves, he did all this with the only one purpose of keeping Asgore on his side and win the war with his help.

Unfortunately, Asgore would fall for the deception and begin to hunt down different elves in order to find the murderer of his family. Several years passed and Asgore began to lose his mind progressively, until one of the most loyal servants to the king told him the truth about what happened, this made him furious as never before; but it had all been a trap. Ax no longer considered Asgore a good ally after his mental decline, so determined to put an end to this problem Ax accused Asgore of treason against the crown and sentenced him to exile in the most dangerous area known, the "island of the beasts"  On the island of beasts, Asgore will be forced to continually escape from monsters known as "dragon slayers." 

 his agony would last for months until, in an attempt to hide from the beasts that hunted him, Asgore would come across the ruins of an old civilization (which I have already mentioned in previous posts and I call this civilization Krosmonites) where he would meet the main villain of the saga (which I still haven't named him) 

But to be able to refer to him, I will call him "Gerd"  Gerd was one of the only survivors of the holocaust that caused the extinction of his race (but don't feel bad for him since it was Gerd who caused the war that would lead to the death of the species) and had been locked up on that island along with the others. monsters that he himself created. Gerd was looking to escape from his prison, in order to fulfill what he would call his "destiny" and when he met Asgore he would see an excellent opportunity to accelerate his plans; but he would not achieve it with the dying state in which Asgore was.  Gerd needed a weapon and Asgore would become her. So before his death, Gerd gave him what would later be known as dark magic and with the false promise of recovering his family, he made Asgore take the dark magic, which immediately began the assimilation process, modifying Asgore's body. in such a way that he was now almost unrecognizable, his skin turned pale similar to that of a dead man, his horns stood out and in addition to this he obtained the power to steal abilities from other magicians.

A new asgore emerged, but the dark magic would wreak havoc with his mind, he no longer knew who he was or who his family or allies were, much of his memories were erased and replaced by new ones, what he had once called a family It was nothing more than an empty shell. During his escape from the island of beasts, Asgore would discover that he possesses a new ability, he was able to raise monsters known as "ravagers" these beings were the souls of those who died violently. 

With a new army at his hands, Asgore decided to take revenge on the one who had caused him so much pain. Some time later, one snowy night, Asgore came face to face with his friend, murdering him with his bare hands, but not before destroying the kingdom that was once his home. But this did not satisfy him, he also sought to end the other races, because Asgore considered them just as guilty as his own friend. This new conflict would be called the "war of the 4 heroes" and in it the other races were cornered by Asgore's army, forcing the elves, humans, giants and dwarves to hide to avoid their deaths, this was until all the united races decided to create 4 powerful weapons to defeat Asgore and it was like that. In the last confrontation the 4 Heroes defeated and sealed Asgore under a great stone seal. ending the terror that he had generated 

**Obviously this confinement will not last long, as Asgore will be the main villain in my first book known as "Fire Dance"**Book title: The Godbearer

Description: Adal, the mortal mother to a slain God, has been summoned to a court of a foreign king. 

Desired feedback: tension and pacing are the big ones. Does Adal have a voice? feel like she has an arc? Do the other characters appear to have a consistent personality that peaks through their dialogue and actions?

Link: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NhWtjJmp-5KHBiCbs8qWEUEVOPHvG6EdxyEq7oCz8Go/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1NhWtjJmp-5KHBiCbs8qWEUEVOPHvG6EdxyEq7oCz8Go/edit?usp=sharing)

Additional context: none of this is necessary to understand the chapter, but it provides context to a few lines. 

Women whose sons have been chosen to be God's Avatar are called Godbearers. God was murdered by a rebellious Angel right after He took over Adal's son. 

Adal is from a country called Crise, but was an immigrant in another country called Carpasia. Ister, a diplomat from a country called Geldun, helped to smuggle her into Geldun, where she should be safer.

The King of Carpasia is named Imon. Its capital is called Alma. The King of Geldun is named Balint but he is a child so a council of noblemen rule in his place.
I just want to know if the character is believable.
I need suggestions on how to end this story. I want the character to improve himself. Be a little more humble get to know his neighbors maybe even reveal he's an actual dragon. Just not sure how to get there.


He just lay there halfway transformed. A scaled tail  spilled off of the couch, a clawed human hand a foot that was human the other not, he couldn't be bothered with it. Polymorphing was such a chore for him other dragons could do it as easily as breathing while his clunky body refused. Peice by peice his individual parts would shift it was slow as hell and took all his concentration.Unfounatley,he just wasn't good at it, never had been. He had to hold that damned human form all day too. Just to scrape out a living working at Wendy's.  

Yep fast food service how humiliating! You try working the register with a taloned hand! Or squeezing yourself behind a counter that even in human form felt cramped. Just to come home to an equally cramped, dingy apartment smack dab in the middle of the city.  How did other dragons manage? He'd heard stories that a few of his kind loved being "human" some so much so that they immersed themselves in it completely. They would have friends, family, the complete package. Then when they were done with one life they'd "reset" and live another one over and over again. How could any dragon want that?   He would take the cave with a hoard of gold and jewels any day. He had thought so often of just taking off just stretching his leathery body his massive wings beating the gust knocking  pitiful humans aside  taking one, mighty leap into the air, unfettered, Soaring across the clear blue... 

No. Mankind's jungle of concrete and steel stretched on for miles and miles choking out the sky motto mention...airplanes he thought wincing. These humans and their metal flying machines. A pale mimicry of what he was. Like  some strange ill contrived mechanical dragon of sheet metal scales and artificial roars of a jet engine.  Pathetic. He dreamed of snatching it from the sky in his claws sending it hurling to the ground in ball of flame.  

It was just like so many human contraptions so insulting. He went to the kitchen to eat something purely out of boredom. He glanced over at his gas stove it was pretty wrecked but functional. One day while he was searing meat in a pan! Of all things he felt nothing but  disgust in the pit of his stomach.

Look at you. Preparing your meal with a stove? Are you loosing all sense of yourself?  Man discovered fire they say; but you were BORN with it! You are a furnace of infernal flame! He roared violently. He tore at it throwing peices everywhere trying to tear out the spark plug surprisingly his neighbors didn't seem to notice. 

Why did he stay here? Why did he stay here walking to his job past the Saint George Cathedral. With saint George valiantly battling the dragon. The craftsmanship he had to admit was really well done. Wings and scales of marble carved with intricate detail sweltering marble flame beating against Sir Gorge's shield. Sword drawn armor melting away. It was...it was just a hunk of rock! Nothing more.

A beer and a grilled cheese in hand  headed to the computer. Life just wasn't what it was in the days of his ancestors. Long gone where the days of gathering hoards in a quite cave ( which he used to pay student loans by the way) where adventures, and magic was common place. He had been born into a time of fading glory and fewer and fewer magical creatures roaming about. Though he was pretty sure his boss was a Griffen in disguise. Judging from the bird like shrieking and lion like roars that seemed to bellow out of that old wind bag's beakish face on a constant basis. Then there was the mystery feathers and something that looked like cat fur in his office.

A few customers had even complained about "hair" in their food, when he was around. Strutting like some glorified pidgin. Who did he think  he was this wasn't some five star joint. It was a fast-food joint he wasn't even a CEO or anything. Just his boss, Lord pidgin he called him from then on king of grease traps and junk food.

Great one of the few mythical creatures with in proximity and he hated his guts. He settled in front of the PC. He at this point polymorphed into Matt Simons his human form. Nothing to special about him close cropped chestnut hair and brown eyes and a slender body. He was sporting a baggy white t shirt and denim jeans oooh exciting. 
This was more for convenience then anything. 
It wasn't fun getting talons caught in between keys.
He went to one of his guilty pleasures. He went into a website for furries. One of his neighbors was an advent member. A scaly who's fursona was...a dragon. 

He was here to roleplay as himself with other scalies there. With the occasional neon wolf or fox from time to time. He shuttered it felt so dirty! But it was the only catharsis he had. He began to log in as flagondragon257 when his cell went off. He rolled his eyes it was his mom again. Just calling to belittle him and berate him tell him once again how much better his brother who was a successful surgeon. Why can't you be more like him? She would say. She was along this line of speaking while he listened dejectedly before giving some half assed reason for hanging up. Back to business. 

Hi guys,

This is a first chapter I'm writing. Is it good? does it have a hook? I had got feedback that I write purple prose for some of my earlier chapter critique posts. So I cut down on the description? Is it okay, or too devoid of descriptions?

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1slAhugB5R3sQ6hIFnkH98cAURLBxiTEOcCnKy7LeyfA/edit?usp=drivesdk](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1slAhugB5R3sQ6hIFnkH98cAURLBxiTEOcCnKy7LeyfA/edit?usp=drivesdk)

Feel free to comment in the doc.Hi everyone.

&#x200B;

Just looking to share a short story I wrote accompanied by an illustration I inked.

&#x200B;

Please let me know what you think!

&#x200B;

 [The Edge of the Wood - shortstory post - Imgur](https://imgur.com/gallery/jcaqHKT)This is a new fantasy world I creating. I am trying to make as original as possible and am open to any suggestions.

This world is built around elemental magic using the four most common elements, water, sky, fire, and earth. There are these people divided into four different groups depending on what element they control. They are called Waterkeepers, Lightningkeepers, Firekeepers, and Leafkeepers. Waterkeepers can control water, breath underwater, and speak with water creatures, they also control the moon which controls the tides. Lightningkeepers control the sky (other than the moon), they can also communicate with birds, insects, and such. Firekeepers pretty much control fire. They also rule over the other keepers and think they are way better than everyone else. Leafkeepers don't control the earth (surprise). They control plants though and can communicate with land animals.

The land is basically divided into four sections. At the top is the Leafkeepers land, below them is the Firekeepers. Beside the Firekeepers and Leafkeepers to the west is the Lightningkeepers. Beside the Lightningkeepers is the ocean which the Waterkeepers live in. The Waterkeepers use to live in a lake beside the Firekeepers and have cities on land but when the Firekeepers took over the Waterkeepers apposed them then went into hiding in the ocean. No one knows they exist anymore. The land beyond the lake they use to live in where they had cities is called the forbidden lands. Below the Firekeepers is where regular people live (like us!). The keepers call them normal folk and they are often used as servants by the keepers.

At the top of the power system is the Emperor who is a Firekeeper. Next there are the Highest Highkeepers 1 for every keeper (except for Waterkeepers, you need to exclude them unless I tell you otherwise.) The Emperor and Highest Highkeepers are the only ones who know that Waterkeepers ever existed. Below them are just regular Highkeepers. Of course there are some Highkeepers more powerful than others, that's how life works. Lowest are Lawkeepers, they are kind of like the police.

Keepers always have three babies. Originally they always had four now they always have three. (I'm still work how that happens out any suggestions would be welcomed.) They have one baby of every type of keeper. When babies are born they can talk right away and are very intelligent. By the time they are three they have the intelligence of an eight year old. Keepers also stay in the prime age of around 20 until they are 50 then can live regularly up to 110. Keepers do not pick their children's names till they are around three and the children can participate in picking their names. Names are picked according to what keeper they are. Names also have a lot of power, you do not have your full powers until you have your name. When you are born you have a mark on your hand indicating what kind of keeper you are. Waterkeepers marks look like a water drop, Firekeepers is a flame, Leafkeepers is a leaf, and Lightningkeepers is a lightning bolt. 

That is all I have right now, it looks like a lot more when I have it written down. Any suggestions would be welcomed though. I feel like I have a lot in some places and nothing in other places.I want to know what you think from a reader perspective so I’m leaving details out. You can tell me how you feel about it. 

https://docs.google.com/document/d/186j-2XBUWIs8K5wWHdrpPef-RJRQZleI9lEo4ocdDEQ/editHello! I've been trying to practice writing more by writing excerpts that could be expanded into a complete story but that are for now standalone. This is one of those excerpts, and I'd really appreciate some feedback on my style and what I could improve!

\-

He could do it now, Otto thought suddenly. Henrik’s back was turned, the castle sleeping, the streets dark. He could finally finish this, take a dagger to his neck and escape long before anyone noticed, steal into the night and find refuge with Leofric’s men until a ship could smuggle him overseas.

But even as he commanded himself to reach for his knife, his body disobeyed, arms stiff and hands trembling. He wanted to think it anticipation, but he knew that would be a lie. 

It was fear. Fear of the look in Henrik's eyes as he lay dying, as he realized that the one man he’d allowed his wretched heart to trust had betrayed him.

And Manes forgive him, but monster or not, Otto did not know if he could suffer having this boy’s blood on his hands.

“Gods, man, are you deaf?” Otto nearly jumped, blinking rapidly. Henrik had turned from the window to stare at him, openly annoyed. Otto cleared his throat, straightened his back, willed his hands to stop shaking.

“My apologies, Your Grace,” he said, forcing a calm he didn’t feel. “It’s been a long day.” 

Henrik rolled his eyes. “As I said, you are dismissed, Captain. Get some rest.”  

Otto bowed. “As you wish, Your Grace.”

“And Captain,” Otto stilled as he reached for the doorknob. He could feel Henrik’s eyes on his back but couldn’t bring himself to turn to meet them. “Thank you,” Henrik finished, his voice as gentle as Otto had ever heard it. “I owe you a great deal.” 

Otto swallowed. “I do only as my station commands, Your Grace.”
 
Henrik didn’t respond, and Otto left, shutting the door quietly behind him.Hello everyone,

This is my first time posting here, and I was looking for criticism regarding how enjoyable of a read my first chapter is. Important things for me to know would be where along the reading you became engaged or hooked, if you were hooked at all. 

Also, the chapter is mostly a fight scene, so if there are moments that don't make sense to you or seem weird, I would appreciate knowing what I could change about it to make it better.

Any extra advice or improvements that could be made to the chapter would be helpful and very much appreciated! 

To give a summary of the chapter, it is about 4100 words long (8 pages) and follows the decent of a group of demon-slaying knights to a desolate underground city. I would prefer comments and criticism to be posted here, but of course, please comment directly on the google doc if that would be better for you.

Thank you to those who spend time reading and commenting!

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UN3HCGLzNKRoIaA8akd1Tys2dXb7Pc54R9O3-8KDxPo/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UN3HCGLzNKRoIaA8akd1Tys2dXb7Pc54R9O3-8KDxPo/edit?usp=sharing)First disclaimer, the narrative is not from the perspective of a member of this race, but they do play a major role in the plot/world-building. I would love some feedback and critiques on them, along with possibly an idea for what to name the race. For the sake of this post I will refer to them as Geos, but I am looking for a better name. 

So, the Geos are mostly humanoid in their shape; however, no two are exactly alike when it comes to the number of appendages, location of them, etc. The Geos bodies are made of minerals, for instance some have entirely diamond bodies, others made entirely of sand or clay, etc. This developed into a hierarchy within their society with the Geo's made of harder substances on top and those of weaker material on the bottom. 

The other twist with the Geos is they all have an inner light that "leaks" from their body. For most, it starts as one or more "eyes" on their head from which the light comes from, and as they age these holes expand and new ones may appear. A Geo can manipulate the light to form illusions around themselves, appearing as something else. The more light that comes out from them, the stronger of an illusion they can make. 

The current issue lying with the Geos and what is building to the current plot is that their homeland was overtaken by a human military force. The other races of the homeland are heavily discriminated against because they all have monstrous appearances, but the Geos were able to escape the discrimination by using their light to appear as humans, which lead to the military force basically just integrating them into their society. The upper caste of the hierarchy wish to restore their rightful king, but the lower caste are in support of the human occupation because they are no longer being treated as lesser.I have a magical artefact that reflects back at the viewer their own beliefs. The viewer sees things in it the way they believe those things to be e.g. you would see an enemy doing evil things because you suspect them to be doing those things. Crucially, however, it might just be your own suspicion, and the enemy might turn out to be innocent. You may also see what looks like the future, except it’s your own personal vision of the future, depicted in a convincing way. A religious person may see their god(s) talking to them. The mirror shows you things that you are likely to believe.

Is this thing as dangerous as I think it is? In my setting, the “big good” saves the world, but then one of his allies sees in the mirror a vision of the big good being secretly a big bad and, convinced, starts a war to overthrow him. This sets the world on fire.Okay, so, basically after more than a year working on worldbulding, I decided that I would finally start thinking about a story set in this world. Now, of all the possible ideas (that I might write later), there’s one that I am excited to write the most.

For a little context, in my world there are different races of elves based on what natural source of magic they use, and they are divided in different countries. The one country I’ll be focusing on is the Light Country (provisory name). Now, there are two “sub-races”, if this is the correct term, of Light Elves: Sun Elves and Moon Elves. The country is a military estate and is ruled by the Solar Army in the East and the Lunar Army in the West. The thing is that this two armies have been in a kind of cold war with each other for centuries, and at the point of my story, they declared war with each other. 

I have two MCs in this story, a pair of twins that are in opposing armies. I want to show both sides of the war by their point of view and explore how having different beliefs have the potential to destroy even the most important and strongest bonds. Neither side of the war is wrong or right, they’re just different in ideals and ways of ruling the country.

This is the basic idea I’ve had so far and I would like to know what people think. If you have any questions, I’ll do my best to answer them.I tried to create something interesting that could probably grab a readers attention from the get go, hopefully at least. I wanted it to not only introduce the idea of magic in this world but also to introduce the dark things that may come from it, an ominous feeling of some sort, and a key concept for the future.

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bgRcaBMXJUgkClmGnpAYidXqT_aGbFQ5cfVYc7HBN0A/edit

What I mean by that is, to give further context to the scene, is that the ritual they are performing is what puts the events of the story into motion. It is the reason for the antagonists presence in their world as well as the reason for why several main characters have their abilities. Introducing this is the main purpose of this prologue, but it also introduces one character who will remain important to my MC throughout the story. So critique on characters here isn’t too much of a worry, I just wanted critique more on how this could be improved, could be changed, and if it would be good enough to start a story with anyway.I have a story in the works, a very nontraditional fantasy setting. Basic lore is that there were eight gods and they were assholes. they each created a species to serve a purpose in the world and did not want them to ever work beyond what they were made for. They were all essentially slaves to these gods. From time to time some would rebel, and as punishment they would put some handicap on the species responsible. Like one where they have a hard cap on their lifespan and the moment they reach it they will drop dead. Or another one where they messed with them psychologically so they only feel comfortable in a nomadic lifestyle, preventing them from ever building a civilization of their own. 

Eventually the gods reached a point where they needed a new form of punishment. Their idea was to create a predator to the main races, something to keep them afraid and in line. So their loyal servants spread rumors about "The one true apex predator" while they developed it. but before their work could be finished, they were betrayed by one of their own and all killed.

centuries later, people are launching expeditions into a continent that was unfinished. the gods had all sorts of strange things in there to see what works. it is also where they stored the one prototype of their monster.

&#x200B;

https://preview.redd.it/q1jm4v28y9f81.png?width=1635&format=png&auto=webp&s=c736defc3cb415d5a5e1f423f227cbe8c1618600

While not a perfect predator, it is still immensely powerful. the rumors never indicated what the creature looked like, but built in psychological manipulation would cause anyone to recognize it on sight. I wanted to go with something different for a monster such as this since i feel that too many monsters filling similar roles have similar shapes. So i went with a mouthless fish-snake thing.Forgive me if I'm posting this wrong in any way or if I used the wrong flair or anything (I mean, I THINK this is classed as a question?). I haven't really written any proper posts before because I get super anxious but I just really wanted some opinions.

So, right now I have two ongoing ideas for books but ofc I'm here to ask about my fantasy related one. I haven't really fleshed out too much right now, I'm mostly focusing on characters rather than world building because I find if I do the world building first I get bored? But that's not the point.

My basic idea is that the story's two main characters are a General (later ex General) for the King's army and an ex pirate (I've decided he possibly has magic, and there may be some sort of prophecy written in the stars or something) who gave up his criminal lifestyle to settle down after trouble with his crew. There's another high ranking military guy who is super power hungry (I'm still figuring out what his reasons for that are) and he puts into play a plot that ends in the King's assassination (also still figuring out why he does that). So, the Kingdom is distraught, the Prince is suddenly taking on responsibility after his father's death, and the Bad Guy needs a couple of people to blame the assassination on because he knows there's evidence that would lead to him, but if he gave the Kingdom the assassins on a silver platter nobody would suspect a thing. These two people he blames happen to be the two main characters, and he uses their suspicious backgrounds to fuel the fire and make them seem more likely to be responsible.

This is at most what I've got in mind for the story, I know that the MCs end up working together despite originally not being so keen on it to get the evidence and clear their names, there're dragons somewhere later on, some sea adventures (possibly including magical sea monsters) and there might be another more dangerous evil lurking in the background that has to be defeated in a huge magical war, but that's about it tbh. 

Just with what I've written so far do you think you'd give the book a chance? (Sorry it's not much, but I can try to answer any questions anyone might have)

(Also sorry if this is really badly written)Writing up (well mostly DRAFTING) a fantasy story that's atypical and safe y'know? I'm not trying to reach the giddy heights of Tolkien, Lewis, or Martin but I also want it to be a good read so that people forget about life for a while.

My protagonist (I'm calling him Jon) is your bog standard European anti-hero with a symbiotic demon thing living inside his soul.  He isn't conventionally attractive, I describe him as a rough ugly young man with a large broken nose, a scar running from his hairline over his left eye, a fat upper lip, and gaunt cheeks, with an oval-like head. And while he is muscular, he is considered Skinny or lanky by characters in the story. (regardless of how ugly he looks he does get married, because I do want the ugly fucker to have some happiness).  

He's a prodigy with big swords (Claymores, Longswords, and zweihanders - not those huge anime swords), he knows how to use things like shorter swords, maces, axes, and polearms - but he's only average with them.  He isn't good with bows or crossbows but he is good at throwing things like stones and small knives.  He DOES have some offensive magical abilities, but it takes the wind out of him and at best he can throw like three soccer ball sized fireballs before he needs to keel over and take a breather, the magic in him mostly being defensive orientated: Like being able to ignore the pain of a deep cut for a while.

He does have a ANGRY BADASS mode which is drawn from the demon in him to completely be numb to all sensations and to have stupidly broken endurance but it send him on a bloodlust and he's basically a wild animal - and coming down from it gives him terrible migraines and parts of his mind fizzles out so he forgets what water tastes, or the name of the town's local drunk.

Now, Jon "DIES" at certain points - y'see he's not "Human" but a cursed unliving thing, and there is no cure or breaking of this curse.  And everytime he "dies" and wakes back up he forgets something important to him - like the face of his father, the warmth of his mother.  And it's not like he feels his flesh melding back together, removing the bits of steel, grit, dirt or what have you from his body - the demon within does, and the demon is more of a subservient slave than an oppressive force, and the poor unholy thing is in a constant state of pain and hurting for merely existing, and he can't DO anything about it - should he so desire, Jon can torture the demon by just thinking of flaying its skin off within his mind.

I probably wrote too much already I dont wanna exceed the wore count - please OH please tell me if it's too stupidly powerful for a possibly low-grade fantasy story.I've this idea to begin the book with a young noble girl being first introduced to her genetic magic by a tutor to establish her first connections with the magic. Due to the magic's dependency on bloodletting and her being at a young age, this will be kept rather basic and from the POV of the tutor.

I'm asking this because i'm unaware of any fantasy books that begin in such a way and I'm cautious if this is a pitfall or if there's any advice to work towards making this interesting and avoiding it as an info dump.Hi everyone, I'm currently querying an adult fantasy inspired by the Byzantines with profession-based magic and heavy on the political intrigue. The title has been mentioned as a potential issue. I'm curious if anyone's got some good ideas.

I have a few ideas:

The Gilt Vase (the current title)

The Princess and the Potter

Born in the Purple

The Golden City

City of Gold and Shadows

&#x200B;

Here's the blurb:

Leto the potter is in a mountain of debt, and slavery looms. To escape the jaws of the labor camps, he plots to impress the new empress Verina with a gilded vase. She’ll have no choice but to pay off his debt. Trouble is, he has to break into the palace. When he’s caught, he lands in the cell next to hers. How was he to know a coup was going to ruin his well-laid plans?

But Leto's never been one to sit on his laurels. After they escape, he spins another plot: give the empress up to the senate. They’re offering a huge reward, enough not just to get him out of debt but to make him rich. But as they move from danger to safety, keeping one step ahead of the senate, Leto begins to fall for Verina. She is beautiful and smart and wants to make the lives of everyone in the city better. He couldn't imagine anyone better suited to rule, since she’s determined to stop the senate and eliminate debt-slavery. He wants to help her, and there's riots in the street against the senate's cruel reign. They could turn that revolt into revolution, but they don't have much else going for them. The fugitive empress has lords loyal to the throne, but their armies are months away, if she can contact them at all.

If Leto gives her up, there’s no doubt she’ll be killed. But with the guards coming after him and his family for his debt, he might not have any other choice.

\---------------------------

Thanks for your help!I've been writing a book on and off for a little over half a year now and its still mostly in rough draft. I've put some thought into the magical system but would like some additional feedback.

Magic is something that a large number of people have. Once your magical abilities begin to manifest you can learn any school you put your focus to. One mage can know spells of multiple different elements and type. These spells are weaker than what an advanced or specialist can use. After you master a higher tiered spell, your magic will begin to alter itself to the type you chose. It will lock you into only using that branch.

Spells have to be cast with hand movements at the very least. Usually in the forms of hand signs, tracing runes in the air, and the need of a magical focus. It all depends heavily on the branch of magic you pick. 

Mana is used to cast spells and is much like a muscle of the body. The more you use it, the stronger it will become. There are draw backs with mana as well. Such as if you go out drinking before your mana has recovered, your tolerance will be much lower. Spells that are interrupted have backlash in depending on the spell tier. Anything from physical pain, small scale magical explosions, and elemental effects. Like if you're a fire magic specialist and your minor spell gets interrupted, you may have severely dry skin or have your hair set ablaze. 

This is the basics behind it, any and all feedback is welcome. Thank you for your time!To whet thy palate: Imagine Hogwarts but it's a military academy, a main character has explosive anger issues, and all the dormitories are horribly dilapidated.  

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xWgA4txD\_0fmBaY51kAk34B-p1MqJDHBGdedBVuge9E/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xWgA4txD_0fmBaY51kAk34B-p1MqJDHBGdedBVuge9E/edit)Hi there! I haven't asked for critique here in the last year I think, yet lately I actually started enjoying writing again, mostly because I moved from trying to write novels to *actually* writing short stories.  
I hoped to get criticism for my last story, 'enlightenment', a short story about a magical plague which I feel quite proud of. I thank any and every kind of critique, and would really appreciate your honest opinion!

&#x200B;

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1N\_SsZgtXy-yFsYv-W-x9YKk9DT4D7Y6s/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=115454566262905205459&rtpof=true&sd=true](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1N_SsZgtXy-yFsYv-W-x9YKk9DT4D7Y6s/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=115454566262905205459&rtpof=true&sd=true)

So thanks again for any effort made and have a good day!

Ps. English isn't my mother tongue, so some weird writing may showcase from time to time...I find writing blurbs to be the hardest part of any project. You want to give enough away to capture the readers interest but at the same not so much that it spoils the story. You also don’t want to allude to a premise promise that your story just doesn’t live up to.

Are there any good guides out there for writing a good catching blurb?

The below is my blurb for my current WIP:

————————————

Femira is a thief living on the fringes of society. She has little interest in doing the honourable thing and has no problem stealing, cheating or even killing to get what she wants. 

A chance encounter throws her into a political scheme that she’s unsure if she can handle but it comes with the promise of true power. The power to command the earth itself to her will. She finds herself training with the most elite runewielders in the world and struggling to maintain the identity of a person she’s never met.

Prince Daegan is disgraced by his abusive father and left to squander in the far reaches of the world. Inherent to a long line of powerful Runeweilders, Daegan lacks any of the powers that were held by his ancestors. 

Military powers are rising in the world, and newly discovered powers can turn the tides in either direction. 

DISCLAIMER: This story has adult themed content and whole lot of profanity, combat—the kind that involves knives sliding into eye sockets and brains spilling onto floors—the usual stuff, scenes of intimacy, and a heap of world-ending monsters ready to eat people. If you’re easily offended by any of these things like protruding rib cages or a bi-sexual male MC then you might want to bring a cup of murder tea… you should get that reference somewhere around chapter 45, I assure it’s very clever.


—————————


What do you think of the above? I’ve seen it done commonly enough on web platforms to use a disclaimer as means to make a few jokes about he premise and try to give more about the story, but is it trying too hard do you think? 

Along dark and empty plains, a tall man rode his horse-drawn wagon down a desolate dirt road. The horse walked in slow, labored steps, occasionally letting out high pitched whines. The man spoke to comfort the horse as she walked. 

"Easy, old girl, you're doing a wonderful job, it won't be much longer" the man said, gently. 

Thunder roared through the air, as lightning danced in the sky, a small bolt of lightning struck a tree near the road. The horse stood on her hind legs with a loud neigh. The man gently pulled on the reigns as the wagon began to shake. Eventually, the horse returned to her previous position once more, before continuing her slow and fearful walk. 

When the skies were calm, the road grew silent and still. Not a gust of wind, only the horse's footsteps and the turning of the wagon's wheels. The man unhooked his lantern from the wagon and unfolded his map. Holding the lantern over the map, the man studied it intensely. He traced a finger along a straight and long road, eventually ending in a fork. One way led to another long and empty length of road, the other a shorter stretch of road, leading to a large mountain. A short way onto the road, "Travellers' Pass" was written. After he finished studying his map, he began to search his bag in the dim light, eventually pulling out a sheet of paper. 

On the paper was a charcoal drawing of himself standing next  to a woman, she was holding a small girl with another girl standing in front of her. As he looked tenderly at the picture, a sudden breeze began to blow, and the lantern's flame started to flicker softly behind its chipped glass. He hurriedly moved his coat to shield the lantern from the wind. Eventually, his efforts were in vain when the lantern was snuffed out. The darkness encroached as he looked on in dismay. 

The man signaled for the horse the stop. He sat still in the darkness, the sounds of thunder occasionally breaking the silence. He clutched his horse's reigns, the horse remained unmoving, though still letting out the occasional small, shrill whine.  

He turned his attention to the road, where a small light could be seen in the distance. He excitedly signaled his horse to walk slowly down the road in the direction of the light. Eventually, the faint outline of a person was made visible in the light. He called out to the figure, who then started to move faster in his direction. Soon, two more figures became visible behind the one holding the lantern, who was tall and muscular. One was short and thin, the other was far more muscular than that man in front and stood between them. 

Once the three figures had reached the wagon, the man in front, gestured for his two companions to stand behind him before handing the  short, thin man the lantern he was holding. 

"Well, isn't this a surprise" the man in the front said "It's not every night you see a wagon without a lantern" 

"It certainly wasn't intended, had some trouble with the wind earlier" The man explained.  

"In that case, I'd be happy to lend you ours, but me and my boys will need something in exchange" 

"That would be mighty kind of you. What is it you lads will be wanting" 

"You see, we've been on the road for days, and we're quite weary" the tall man said with a small grin. 

"I take you folks will need a ride then? The wagon is a bit small, but it can get you where you want to go. Seymour said. 

"Well, not exactly" the man said with his grin growing wider. 

The man cocked an eyebrow before replying. "Oh? What is it that you want then?" 

The tall man raised one hand, and the two men pulled out long and sharp daggers, the tall man pulled out a dagger himself before he spoke again. 

"We were thinking, you leave the wagon with us, and we let you walk away, codger"  

The man tightened his grip on the reigns, never breaking eye contact with the tall man before him. The two men brandished their weapons behind their leader, no one saying a word. The man in front eventually broke the silence. 

"Listen, none of us want this to be harder than it needs to be, the sun will be up in a few hours, just hop off the wagon, and leave with your life" the tall man said, his grin having given way to an annoyed expression. 

"Alright, alright, I can see we're not getting anywhere, I just have one small thing to do, and then we'll be parting ways" the man said, before turning around. 

"Don't try anything sneaky, old man" the tall man, said with a scowl on his face. 

The man suddenly turned back around, before he threw the burnt out lantern from his wagon toward the tall man, knocking him to the ground. The light of the lantern that remained lit was caught in the broken glass left in the tall man's face, now adorned in fresh, bleeding gashes.  

"Run" the man shouted to his horse. 

The horse ran down the empty and dark road, the wagon bumped and shook as she struggled against the mud beneath her hooves. The first signs of dawn were evident in the still dark sky, as the man gazed upwards. Lightning continued to illuminate both sky and ground. The horse's breathing had become labored and heavy as she ran.  

 Eventually, a large bolt of lightning struck a small tree nearby, sending the tree to the ground. The horse let out a high-pitched yowl before abruptly running toward the fields away from the road. The man moved to grip the reigns tighter, but they quickly slipped from his grasp. The horse freed herself from the wagon and quickly ran out of sight. The wagon tilted slowly before falling onto its side, sending the man from his seat onto the road. 

The man began to lift himself from the ground, only to fall back down, grasping his leg. He surveyed his surroundings, the plains lay expansive, and empty, the odd tree occasionally visible. He weakly attempted to move from where he had fallen, looking back to way from which he had come. His eyes widened when a small light, and three figures came into view. The figures approached quickly, appearing to grow larger and larger. The man turned his attention further down the road, two figures were approaching at the same brisk pace. 

After a few moments, the three bandits had come fully into view, the tall man's face bearing fresh wounds. The bandits surrounded the man on all sides, the tallest brandishing his dagger and he slowly approached the man. With a swift movement, the tall bandit stomped his foot onto the man's back. 

"Well, well, it would seem as though your brave efforts were for naught, rest assured, your steed will make an excellent tunic and your wagon a fine bonfire" The tall bandit spoke with a wide grin across his face.  

"Boss!" The man holding the lantern shouted, before a hooded figure quickly lunged at him, knocking  both him and the lantern to the ground.  

A second cloaked figure run from behind the first, and with a quick motion, gave a harsh stomp atop the lantern, the shattering of the glass sounded as the plains grew dark. The tall bandit quickly took notice and poised himself to attack the hooded figures. Before he could, the muscular man ran toward the first figure. The figure quickly sidestepped his attack and retaliated with a hard kick to the muscular man's leg, causing him to stumble briefly.  

"Hey, how long do you think you'll need?" The hooded figure spoke, in a young female voice. 

"Give me a minute or two, it should be plenty" the hooded figure behind her replied in a young male voice. He outstretched his left hand, his palm facing the ground, a black smoke bellowing from his open palm.  

"Done" 

The hooded girl, lunged toward the muscular man, throwing her entire body at him, knocking him off balance. As he started to regain balance, the figure reached into her pocket, before throwing a handful of dry soil into the muscular man's eyes. The man's pained screaming echoed throughout the area.  

The hooded girl turned her attention to the tall man, who was already running toward her with his dagger. The girl started running to his side, the tall man pursued.  

"Don't be daft, pick up your dagger and do something!" The tall man shouted to the short man, who was still on the ground. 

"But, boss" the short man said, his voice quivering. 

The smoke at the hooded boy's feet had begun to gather upwards, eventually forming three smokey humanoid shapes that began to advance on him. The short man hastily picked himself up from the ground, and started running with all his might away from the field until he was completely out of sight. 

"Damn coward, get back here!" The tall man yelled, to no avail. "I don't give a damn how many of you there are!"  

The tall man drove his dagger into one of the of the humanoid figures, causing it to dissolve back into black smoke. He quickly turned to the other two nearby, until the ground beneath him was obscured by the smoke. His attention then turned to the hooded boy in front of the wagon, and the tall man began to run toward him.  

Without a word, the boy extended his left hand once more, the smoke swiftly gathered beneath his hand once more. He clasped his hand slightly, causing the smoke to bellow upwards once more. A single, towering humanoid figure formed from the smoke. The tall man drove his dagger into the figure as he had done the previous figures. Smoke emanated from where his dagger had been plunged, but the figure remained standing. 

"You know, you've got spirit, I'll give you that, but unfortunately, we really should be leaving" the boy said. 

The tall man took a step back before the smokey figure latched its hands around his neck, and began to tighten its grip. The tall man struggled against the figure as he choked for breath. Eventually, he went limp and the figure loosened its grip, causing the man to fall to the ground.  

"Did you kill him? Didn't think you had it in you." The hooded girl asked as she ran from across the field. 

The boy placed a hand on the tall man's neck and felt around for a short time. Soon, removed his hand and spoke. 

"He's alive, just unconscious" the boy said. 

As soon as the boy finished speaking, the tall man's eyes shot open and he quickly moved to his feet and began to run. Quickly leaving the vicinity and into nearby thicket. 

"Okay, I guess, just alive then" 

"Do you want me to go and get him?" 

"No, we have better things to be doing right now" the boy turned his attention to the man next to his wagon. 

The two approached the man, who had managed to sit himself up against his wagon. 

"You have my thanks, if the two of you hadn't come, I wouldn't be here now" the man said, his voice shaking slightly. 

"You're very welcome, but, are you injured?" The girl asked, looking him over.  

"My leg" the man said through groans of pain. 

"You think you can take care of this?" The boy asked, looking at the girl. 

"Who do you think you're talking to?" The girl replied heartily. 

"Perfect, I'll go get the horse" the boy said, before walking out of sight further down the road. 

"Well, we better get this leg fixed up" the girl, before walking to a nearby patch of grass. 

She put her right hand over the grass, a soft green light emanated from the grass, before being gathered in her hand. The grass was now withered and brown. The girl returned to the man, holding a ball of pale green light in her hand. She placed her right hand on the man's leg for a moment, and the light faded away. The man looked in awe at his leg, now moving without pain. 

"I don't know what you just did lass, but you're something incredible" the man said, still looking at his leg.  

A few moments passed by, and eventually, the boy returned, the man's horse following behind him. The man quickly stood and rushed to his horse. 

"I'm so sorry Goldie, I shouldn't have asked you to run" the man said, softly stroking his horse's mane. "I does occur to me, how did you know I had a horse, lad?" 

"We were walking this way when we heard a scream, then she ended up nearly running into us" the boy replied. 

"I'm terribly sorry, she gets jittery around lightning" the man said, right before his attention turned to his overturned wagon. "She won't be able to do much unless I can fix this though" 

"I think I can help you with that" the boy said, pulling out a small vial. 

"The boy drank the contents of the vial before poising himself next to the wagon. The smokey humanoid soon joined him and both gripped tightly under the wagon. As they pushed, the wagon began to lift from the ground . The man looked in awe for a moment, before taking to the other side of the wagon and began to pull. Eventually, with one final push, the wagon was upright once more. The man looked on with a bewildered smile. 

"I don't know how the two of you do it, but you're really something" the man said, still gazing at  his wagon. 

"So, since it looks like there are no more bandits around, we should be going" the girl said, looking toward the boy. 

"Since you both have done so much for me, there must be something I could do to repay you" the main said looking at the pair. 

"Actually, there is"Joined this sub yesterday with an excerpt, here again with another. Different character. Looking for any feedback. 

Boom= longer note

Bah= shorter note

- = small pause


*Boom-Bah-Bah-Boom-Bah-Bah-Boom-Bah-Bah-Boom*

Aliti, like the rest, was enthralled by her elder sister's performance for the tribe. A once-a-year chance exclusively given to the most talented youngster. In the tournament organized by the elders, her sister easily trounced all of her opponents. They dubbed her Vetheus the Uncontainable.

She was now performing in front of the entire tribe, the start of her legend. Her name will soon be known all over the lands. Aliti was proud to be her sister and aspired to follow in her footsteps.

Aliti stood there, watching her sister dance to the beat of the powerful drum, the earth shook beneath her feet. The audience erupted in cheers when the beat changed from calm and steady to forceful and rapid.  Her sister adapted, as she switched her dance seamlessly. A thunderclap jolted the crowd awake, and they looked up. Aliti continued to gaze with rapt awe as whispers began to surround her.  

*BahBahBoom-BahBahBoom-BahBahBah-Bah-Bah-Boom*

Her sister continued to dance with her eyes closed, concentrated on finishing her performance, oblivious to the noises.

Time seemed to slow down, Aliti couldn't comprehend what she was witnessing. Her sister danced as water gathered around her, she observed with wide eyes. She moved, and the water moved in response, guided by her hands. The tempo changed and her sister responded. Aliti continued to stare, slack-jawed. Water fell and wisps of fire rose. She gave the order, and the flames danced with her. Aliti felt her hearts beating faster than ever before. She wanted to rush up and question her sister but couldn’t interrupt the ceremonial dance, the beat had altered once again. In reaction to her sister's calm and steady steps, she felt the mountain under her tremble. Despite being tired and hot, her sister maintained her unshakeable resolve. The final section came quickly, and her sister's response was also quick. A gust of wind appeared to gather as her sister's feet began to move quicker than they had ever done before. 

*BoomBoomBoomBoomBahBoomBoomBoomBoomBah*

As her sister collapsed on stage, the now calm and concentrated crowd let out a collective gasp, bringing the dance to a close. The ground rumbled as Aliti and a few elders hurried towards her sister. Aliti was angry at her sister for keeping secrets but that didn't matter right now; she needed to make sure her sister was safe. 

She aspired to be like her sister more than ever before.Hello! I have been working on a novel for the past five or so months, and was hoping to get some feedback.

This is a ~2k word prologue mostly meant to set the tone and draw the reader in without dumping all to much exposition on them. I'm mostly interested in feedback on if I have somewhat achieved that goal, as well as any general feedback you feel like giving. 

Thank you in advanced!

[Google Docs Link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XDcptKv7ikye04-KzjMhMTUstGq4R4GsiVZNdJFgMU0/edit?usp=sharing)I think I need some help with my magic system, but not so much on its inner workings, and more on how the world and, specifically war, would be affected by it. I would like to know if the following sounds reasonable or what I could improve.

Basically, in my world, mages use these special stones called aetherstones that they implant on their bodies, and which are created by alchemists using various ingredients and techniques. Different stones give access to different spells (and usually each mage has a limit of three stones in their body). However, even if you have a stone, you still have to train, and some spells are harder to master than others. So, even if you have access to a powerful spell, that doesn’t mean you can use it easily. You have to be as good a mage as the spell requires.

Now, all mages have the same basic abilities, which include enhanced strength and a Dune-like barrier that protects from bullets (the setting is inspired by the Napoleonic wars). This barrier however can usually be overwhelmed by a good bullet barrage. These abilities can also be improved to a point with training.

I intent for there to be a lot of different spells and abilities used in my story to make for some cool battles (usually 1 on 1, or not much more than that). Some examples are short distance teleportation, flame control, invisibility, electricity, etc. However, when I try to think about how these mages would be used in large scale battles (they’re not supposed to be an underground organization, they are an established order associated with the military, similar to the Jedi Order in the Star Wars prequels), I struggle to think about which abilities they should have and how they would be used.

What I did is establish that mages are usually a very small part of an army (something like 1/10, maybe less), since they require a lot of training and money for aetherstones. And because of how expensive and difficult to master some more powerful aetherstones are, they are not usually mass produced.

So, the mage forces in the order army are usually organized like this:

\- Melee mages – these mages act like shock cavalry, making use of their enhanced strength and speed to break formations. Their main weapon is a cavalry sword and, sometimes, a pistol. In this division you have those mages that are not really good at spells, so they mostly use their strength (I’m still thinking about a basic spell that I could give them, but since I have my protagonists' spells more or less established, I need this basic spell to be something that would seem reasonably ‘below’ what a more experienced and powerful warmage would want to have in his arsenal).

\- Ranged mages – these use different kinds of explosive mana projectiles for spells. The most mainstream projectiles (cheaper and easier to master) are usually not as efficient against mages, being mostly used against normal soldiers (who, again, are the majority). Anti-mage projectiles are more expensive and difficult to master, so only a few of these mages are equipped with them. All of these projectile spells usually take a while to charge (for deadly shots anyway), so they’re usually only useful for large battles, and not in 1 vs 1 scenarios (since the fights my characters are usually involved in are 1 vs 1, they don’t use these much).

\- Summoning mages – there are some demonic creatures in this world and some mages can enslave them and use them to fight (only one per mage though). There are not too many of these, as this is considered a more complicated spell.

\- Specialist mages – all mage orders usually have this division where all other mages end up. Those that master unique and expensive spells that can’t be mass produced are put here to be used in special missions. This division usually doesn’t work as a solid block, since here you can find all different sorts of powers to be used in specific situations. These mages can be used in espionage, assassinations, scouting, skimirshes, dealing with specific demons summoned by enemy mages, other specific roles in battle, etc.

I’m also thinking about having different divisions specialized in stuff like trench digging, healing and other stuff.

Because of all the different spells, there is also an organization in my setting that focuses on recording all the spells known to mankind in a database, including if possible those made by rogue or enemy alchemists. They work basically as an intelligence agency. I think, in a world where there are so many different ‘super powers’, organizations that focus on creating extensive databases about those powers would be very important and gain a lot of power.

However, in the battlefield of this setting, I imagine it could be expected to not be a lot of variety in spells, besides certain specialists. Kinda like in games with many abilities certain 'builds' end up becoming the meta (in this case, the exploding projectiles being the preferred offensive spell). Another reason is due to in-universe recent advancements in firearms that have made mages in the battlefield more irrelevant over time. Before, mages would obliterate any non-mage peasant force in war, but now even peasants can kill mages if armed with muskets (mage barriers protect them from two or three shots in a row, but a good barrage overwhelms them). This made governments invest less over time in aetherstones and mage training, and more in firearms and cannons.

What I want to know is if this makes sense to you guys. What basic spells could be useful for a regular warmage based on my divisions, or any other division that I could add? Am I overlooking some other factors that would justify different divisions or focuses for my warmages? Ask any question to help me think about how I could improve.

Thank you for your attention!Any feedback would be appreciated!

\*\*\*

&#x200B;

For two years I had mentored this boy in the arts of wizardry, and now I had to stare as he cried over my cold corpse. It was torture to witness this, though not due to his tears and wails. No. They only added to my anger. 

Did he really believe I’d die in my own laboratory? Me, the greatest wizard in the world? Insulting. It had only been fair to let him suffer for injuring my pride, but his woe had begun to bore me, so I snapped my ethereal fingers and sent my soul to its carcass.

“You failed my test,” I said as I rose from the blood-covered stone tiles and dusted my brown beard. “I’m terribly disappointed.”

“M-master Armion, you are alive! How—”

“Quit your yelling and hand me a chair, Erloc. My back is killing me. Ugh, you left snot all over my clothes.” With a snap, the snot and blood vanished from my blue robe and the crimson puddle where I had lay dispersed. 

Erloc stood with his mouth agape and teary eyes, then rushed to hug me and sob in my chest.

“What is this about?”

“Oh, master. I thought I had lost you forever. I don’t know what I would have done without you.”

“Maybe jump off a cliff.”

“You are too cruel, master Armion.” He hugged me tighter. “I missed your insults already.”

“Yeah yeah. I really need to sit, boy. And bring me my staff.”

Erloc released me and wove through the laboratory, side-stepping the charmed brooms that swept the space. He came back with an oaken chair and my white staff.

“Now,” I said as I took my seat and staff, “let’s begin your lesson. What can you tell me about the powers of this staff?”

“You had said that staves were just pieces of wood, that the magic came from the user and not the instrument.”

“Right, but that isn’t fully true. You see, in the hands of a great wizard, this staff holds great power: it grants wisdom.”

“How so?” 

“Like this.” I smacked him with it.

Erloc rubbed his head with a wince. “I don’t feel wiser.”

“You will when we finish this lesson. Now, in your estimation, why did you fail today?”

“Because I didn’t do what I was supposed to?”

Smack. “Don’t be clever. What were you supposed to do upon seeing my corpse?”

“Um, call for help?”

“What for, you fool? I was dead.”

“But, y-you weren’t. I mean, you are here.”

I rose with a glare. “Wrong! I was absolutely dead. Do you think I merely play tricks? I will tell you what I wanted from you. You had to see my dead body and know that a genius like me would not die. You should have never assumed that death had conquered me, but that *I* had conquered death.”

His face went flat. “Master Armion, that makes no sense. Did you make up this whole test just to get my praise?”

“That’s a stupid question. Of course I did. Your whole purpose as my pupil is to praise me.”

“I thought it was to learn magic so I could become a wizard.”

“Not really, you had to try to learn, then fail miserably and become jealous of me. An excellent pupil would have grown to hate me, which would be the greatest admission of inferiority.” I sat back and sighed. “Instead, I get a pupil who actually learns. Horrible.” 

“Oh, master, don’t be so hard on yourself.” He held my shoulder with a tender smile. “I was indeed impressed today. I mean, you have done more amazing things before, but this was good. Making me cry should count.” 

How dare he be so condescending? I rose and nearly left, but an idea struck me.

“Actually, kid,” I said with a grin, “It might be time for a change in this tutorship.”

“That… doesn’t sound like a change I will like.”

“Oh, don’t fret. This will be a great opportunity for you.” I sat again and slowly caressed my knees, treasuring his look of distress. “You see, you have progressed marvelously in the field of magic. So much so that I believe it is your turn to impress me. I have a little challenge for you.” 

“A challenge?”

“Yes, a simple one.” I leaned closer with a sly smile. “You have to slay the dragon in the mountains.” 

“The what?”

“The dragon in the—”

“I heard the first time! How am I supposed to do that? I can’t even cast a spark of fire.”

“You won’t need it. Dragons are immune to fire. Oh, and they are also immune to magic.”

“Master, I will get roasted!”

“Hm, maybe you are right.” I rubbed my beard in contemplation of his predicament. “Ah, I know what will work against a dragon. Here, take this powerful weapon.” I gave him my staff of wisdom. “Swing hard, boy.”After enduring the life as a slave for 9 years, 18-year-old Nezian Multhar, along with his slaver’s children, Ayane and Demios, arrives back home in the Kingdom of Blackend. Much to his surprise, the proud Kingdom he remembered from years ago is now in complete disarray. Its King, Braffert IV Rolfane, is viewed as an utter joke to the country and he has no control over the lands he rules. This allows for invaders to occupy and pillage as they please with no repercussions. House Stagger of the neighboring Kingdom of Nerathes are the foremost abusers of the incessant pillaging, as they have taken occupancy in three regions of Blackend. Infighting amongst several once noble houses is now a common occurrence. Foul creatures thought to be long extinct are now roaming the lands because there is no military presence to prevent them from doing so. 
Nezian, called Nez by most, feels obligated to make a change to the Kingdom he worked so hard to get back to. Upon his arrival to Slainstone, a small village where his family used to be Lords, he singlehandedly and stealthily kills Tizon Stagger and his men, who were occupying Slainstone and making its people suffer. While Nez had been away as a slave, his master Tygyrios took a liking to him and trained him in a specialized stealth combat which is practiced in the foreign nation of Ogoga. 

King Braffert hears word of this heroic act and calls Nez to the capital, Coldbrink, where he gives him an opportunity to build up Blackend’s military using the training he learned from his former master and establish an order of Knights. Nez agrees on the condition that his family be given their lands and titles back. As Nez works diligently to build a formidable military force, it catches the attention of the cruel Nerathesian King, Therard Berhaut, who has been dealing with his own problems to the south of his Kingdom. 

Avitus Vaelor, who was thought to be dead for 800 years, has been resurrected and has reestablished his once lost Kingdom of Erhaum. He promises to conquer the neighboring Kingdoms because he believes the Below Lands will “swallow the world” if he fails to do so. 

King Therard wants to enlist Nez’s talents for killing to travel to Erhaum and have him stealthily take out King Avitus. Nez refuses because Nerathes has caused nothing but turmoil for Blackend so they do not deserve his help. Therard will not take no for an answer, as Avitus is decimating his military forces. Therefore, he commits atrocities against Nez that ultimately force him to do whatever he commands. 

That’s all i feel comfortable with revealing for now. There are a lot of intricacies that I don’t want to include and obviously a ton more characters. This story has been going on in my head for the better part of two years and I have doing only the world building but haven’t got around to start writing yet. Let me know what you guys think!Hi there,

I would appreciate some thoughts on this rough draft of my first chapter. I can't decide if I should go with first person or deep third POV for this story. I originally wrote the chapter in third, but then halfway through chapter 2, I thought maybe the first person would be better because this character has a unique perspective of the world and a strong voice that doesn't come through in third. However, I feel like I lose out on a lot of the worldbuilding aspects that I love. I'm also planning to incorporate multiple POVs, so there's that. 

This chapter is 1497 words, and it's the first-person version. Let me know if you think the voice works here, or if it falls short and you think the third would be better. I'm torn. 

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nZ-7ERPcEYvwfByhXQ92SIHoUOtLwYOdWuEuWOpcmxc/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nZ-7ERPcEYvwfByhXQ92SIHoUOtLwYOdWuEuWOpcmxc/edit?usp=sharing)Do you want to talk with the r/FantasyWriters community about an off-topic subject for the subreddit? If so, welcome to the weekly Open Thread! Here you may open discussions or ask questions unrelated to fantasy writing. Most topics lacking a home elsewhere on the subreddit can find one here. 

Subjects must be kept safe-for-work. Comments will be held to the standard of conduct we enforce elsewhere on the subreddit, those key tenets being:

1. Be respectful.
2. Don’t be rude or hostile.
3. Don’t copy or plagiarize.

It's possible that our automated bots *may* take down comments with links in the thread if they are unauthorized for the rest of the subreddit. Moderation will fix those instances if we see them occur.

This post will stay pinned as a top post until a new Open Thread post replaces it next Monday. Enjoy!I came up with an idea for a scene so I wrote it down, the thing is, I came up with it in my mind, so it works well when thought out but it feels weird when put into writing because the actions happen at the same time. Anyway, so that you guys get an idea, mind you this is still a very rough draft:

Kayo raised his arm and prepared to cast a spell "I call upon the raging flames, unleash your power and envelop the world in lightning and thunder, Sandaigdigan!"

A magic circle formed and quickly grew while the miniature sun started to condense  — at the same time, a crudely shaped pyro lily formed at Akasa and Sulo's position, forming a barrier, the dark mana infection was neutralized by the immense flow of mana and their wounds started to heal  — meanwhile, the raging flames of the miniature sun was replaced by electricity and at last turning into a million bolts of lightning, striking down every inch of the ground withing the spell's radius, the pyro lily barrier protecting both Akasa and Sulo. The resounding boom of thunder came shortly after.

"Your strength is admirable, to be able to still be standing after be—"

The witch fell on her knees, smoke kept emanating from her body and blood began to pool around her.[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1U5WqwIv9PVwr0s3ppiMWZqhG54thf6-adQFZaqW2yNg/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1U5WqwIv9PVwr0s3ppiMWZqhG54thf6-adQFZaqW2yNg/edit?usp=sharing)

I'm linking the entire WIP because last time I didn't the link got screwed up for some reason, but stop whenever you want, i wouldn't read all of it either.

Use whatever criticism you want, don't be shy.

Edit: aight, two comments in and i know this is *not* it. Thanks to the poor souls that read this for convincing me to restart everything.Hello there.

I'm here to have another session of feedback of the first couple chapters of my story. It has been great receiving lots of helps, but I feel that there's still one crucial thing lacking: tension.

So, first off, a little synopsis:

This is a story about a programmer student that's suddenly transported to another world without a hero like power and stuff, except an ability to program things. What will an ordinary programmer student like Vincent do when he is abruptly thrust into dangerous situations over and over?

Anyways, I would be thankful if anyone can give me general feedback. But I would be even more grateful if you can also answer several specific questions:

1. What do you think about the tension? I'm not making a grimdark story, but I want to have at least a bit of tension.
2. Have the dialogue become natural? I'm not sure why, but unlike later chapters of my story, the first couple always sound weirder than the rest.
3. Did I do okay with infodump?

That's all. Thank you in advance.

Without further ado, here are the chapters:

[Chapter 1 & 2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bEEq9OFPYD_j9FZp8_vLAfnzggd485zk/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=112716139512223523868&rtpof=true&sd=true)

You are free to comment inside and even give some suggestions if you're up to.

Cheers.Forgot to make it public, embarrassing. But yeah, please give feedback, that would be awesome.

 [feedbackpls - Google Docs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1waPTjRcmZAMT_PMknBI_dkzAGJTMBliCwVbAtTi0Sk4/edit)**So this is the first page of my novel (presumably). does it hook you and if not should I reduce the descriptions?**

Kreetan felt the evening moving like a tortoise. He couldn't wait for nightfall. It was quarter past seven and it was the fifth time he stole a glance at his silver pocket watch hanging over the chest of draw. He saw the piece of paper for the hundredth time, trying to discern any clue about his author. It simply said,

‘*The Punj Lion, 781 Marakin Road,  At 8:00 evening’.*

Not a lot to go on, he thought to himself as he adjusted his buttons and ironed out the wrinkles in his translucent shirt. Kreetan observed the handwriting and decided that it wasn’t Manu’s. Manu had been his informer. He had been key to some of his most exciting articles for his newspaper. But that was in his early days, where his articles were more of gossip than anything of substance.

He took the piece of paper and looked at it again. The handwriting was a scribble, hardly legible. Written in a hurry, he supposed. He finally pocketed the paper with a sigh. At least, the mystery would be over in another forty-five minutes. He swung his long embroidered coat over him, which was more like a long shawl over his shoulder. He snuck his short dagger beneath his coat and headed down to his streets.

Kreetan’s olfactory senses were attacked by a concoction of various smells as he headed down to the market square, making his way towards the Urvak Rail Station. The market square was a sea of heads. Snaking his way through the crowd, he found it hard to remain civil and started pushing his way to the market. The smells of sweat, myriad of sweet smelling flowers, grilled meats and boiled corn was sweet, but obnoxious to Kreetan. He saw a child crying for his parents. He pushed past the child hurrying to the other side. Preoccupied with his thought, the voices of haggling and loud rhyming phrases to attract the customers was nothing more than a low buzz.

Once past the market, he checked his pocket watch again and began to pace briskly. The lights from the lamp posts flooded the street. The station was even more populated than the market. He supposed that it was to be expected. The Nahri-Mal, one of the biggest festivals across the continent, was the following week. Most people were hustling to and fro, receiving their friends and relatives or running to catch their train to their hometown.

Purchasing the ticket, Kreetan pushed his way till he reached his train. He got in and seated himself on the nearest bench. Once settled, the beads of sweat began to cool down.

The city trains usually smelled of coal. He hated it. The cool breeze lapped his face as the train set in motion.Our main character, Aldard IV of Hostenhausen, is a high prince of the Kingdom of Seneca and   
the inheritor to its throne. His father, Aldard III sends him as an ambassador to a mysterious, little-understood nation far to the west called The Volganate to negotiate a non-aggression pact between the two nations.

When he arrives, he realizes that The Volganate is controlled by a cultish society that worships the black god. He is captured, tortured, and brainwashed, with the intent of him becoming another puppet for their ideals. Through this, he learns that they are preparing to open magic portals to the void beyond the borders of our universe, from which the armies of the black god will march, and conquer all the world in darkness.

He escapes his torment and must make the journey back to his own kingdom. Along the way, he meets average folk just living their lives, and he learns what it means to be a leader for the common man, as well as being able to see the good in humanity despite all he has been through.

When he finally returns, he sees that everything has changed for the worse. Little shops and houses are either abandoned or replaced, and the streets are empty, save for the thugs who walk at night. He learns that his father passed away while he was gone due to "illness" and it was said that Aldard IV died on his journey. This provides justification for a member of Aldard III's old court, Naerus to take reign of the kingdom, and he is the one implementing all these changes. It is then revealed he was bought out by the same society that tortured Aldard IV.

Aldard must reveal Naerus to the rest of the court, sit on his rightful throne, bring the Kingdom of Seneca back to its former glory, and prepare for the coming war that will decide the fate of the world.So I made a post about magic drawbacks that got removed since I didn't fully flesh out the magic so here is a new one.  It's a small guide to how my character's magic works.

**Earth:** he can manipulate earth into structures and other tools. Eg, swords, axes, etc.

**Drawback:** He can't move more than what his physical body can lift. if he does his bones begin to crack from the strain.

&#x200B;

**water:** He manipulates water at will. Creating whirlpools, waves and can even walk on water.

**drawback:** he requires to be touching the water and becomes dehydrated really quickly

&#x200B;

**fire:** he produces flame which he can shoot out to attack or use to fly.

**drawback:** his flesh burns away to power the flames. He once burned one of his arms off. he can also burn through his own life force to fuel the fire. This will shorten his life span.

&#x200B;

**plant:** He can make vines and roots grow out to attack. He can also make crops grow very quickly. He even has a wooden prosthetic arm.

**drawback:** roots begin to grow out of his body. Eg, Roots will grow out of his wrists

&#x200B;

**spirit:** He can speak to spirits. Even temporarily step into the realm of the dead.

**drawback:** he is vulnerable to demons and other spirit-like entities. They can possess him if he isn't careful.

&#x200B;

**blood:** he can use his own blood as weapons. Drawing runes with it to summon constructs to fight for him. He can also transfer his blood to others to heal them.  (Edit: he can also summon lesser demons.)

**drawback:** extremely high risk of blood loss. if he uses it too much he can go beserk and lose control of himself.  (Edit: due to being exposed to demonic entities.)

&#x200B;

Ways he countered some of these issues.

&#x200B;

**earth:** He got his bones replaced with metal. His joints are gears, pistons and other mechanical parts.

&#x200B;

**fire:** he uses runes and other spells to increase his healing rate. sometimes he uses external sources like forest fires or torches. He also uses runes to increase his pain tolerance.

&#x200B;

**spirit:** he uses runes and charms. he drinks holy water (not the Christian one) to give him a stronger immunity. 

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

What do you guys think? do the drawbacks balance with the magic? are some of them too harsh?

&#x200B;

BTW: to the mods. Did I do it right?[Docs link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1M3vlXOKJHC_AouyetkBX0323tF-upyK4YUZoHTwLTHE/edit?usp=sharing)

Thanks in advance for any feedback. It is a fragment of a larger story, but I'd like to know if this part is any good. There may be grammatical or spelling errors as English is not my first language, though most likely they will be scarce. You are welcome to ask for any more clarification than provided below. 

Background:

MC, named Vivian, is a Catman of black panther race, what we would call a "furry" or "demi-human", but those terms are considered to be racist and are used as such in this world. He was a human living in our times, but has been reincarnated to his current state in unknown circumstances. His natural, game-like class is the Craftsman, due to which he is able to use magical cores(remnants of monsters containing magic) to enchance weapons and other equipment, which was usually done by the mages. He is currently in a kingdom that is highly racist towards every non-human race due to past wars with them, to the point where the Beastmen, like the Catmen, are always the primary suspect of everything, mistreating them is not looked down upon, etc. He needs money for his further travel though, so he decided to stay in the city for a while after saving the count's son, due to which he was given a venue.Hi everyone,
First time writing here , nope everything is fine with the post. 
As the title says, I am wondering about whether or not my ideas can work so I would like an opinion by you guys.

The story’s mood is dark,mysterious and a bit “pessimistic “ I’d say. I would like  to write a dark fantasy book (or series, whatever will be) , and the setting is one of a sick,spoiled world, where some still live but whose Golden Age has ended long ago . There is a magic system that I am coming up with,but as a great fan of H.P. Lovecraft I want to fit in it some cosmic horror/unknown entities vibes. Think about it as a mix between bloodborne cosmic threats, dark souls lonely and ruined worlds , and a quite strong fantasy background , with other races such as elfs and dwarves, “gods “ and religions.

Anyways, the story as I am writing it right now opens with a journey already started and up to now, I have written it like a single piece, but what I am interested in, is to create a universe behind my world where different stories can be explored. 
 
What I also liked from Lovecraft’s works is that some are longer and deeper stories,while others are much shorter. Would you think that some sort of journey split in episodes fits the genre? I’m talking about chapters that have real big scene cuts and which are only explained in the next ones,so that there is always space to fill the gaps with ideas and theories by the reader .
Thanks for any advice\-- crossposted to r/magicbuilding \--

 

Hello!  
I have been worldbuilding an Epic Fantasy story for a while and right now I have arrived in the Magic System. I would like some criticism, suggestions, and comments on it since the only thing that I think is keeping me from focusing on the writing is that Im eating myself up over the magic of the world.

First, the Magic system will be a mixture of Hard and Soft. It will have hard magic elements (limitations and certain rules) and soft magic elements, as you will see. It's called The Strings that Weave Destiny, and it's sort of inspired by several magic systems bundled together and some science.

**Background:**  
Everything that exists, what was, will be, and is, is made of the strings of destiny, woven together into seams, which make up patterns in reality, and that is what we *see*. Each seam is made of an uncountable number of strings, and each pattern is made up of an uncountable number of seams. This is the base of the magic system.

All these patterns are part of the Greater Blanket of Destiny, which was, is, and will be.

**Magic Potential:**  
Certain individuals somehow find themselves woven *into* the seams of reality, and while their destinies are now sort of set in stone, they are able to touch and manipulate these strings to an extent. (You could say that the magic capacities of the individual depends on how engraved they are within this great strings, think of a stitch, some can be removed from a piece and other bring the entire piece down \[WoT fans will see similarities to Ta'Veren\]).

**Applications:**  
So, what are the strings? They are organised into three 'tiers'. The Higher Strings, the Lower Strings, and the Untouchable Strings. The Higher Strings are associated with what that affect reality around the weaver, and the Lower Strings are associated with what that affect the weaver itself. The Untouchable Strings are elements that don't fit into either, as well as being more ethereal and dangerous in nature.

Weavers can manipulate the strings in different ways and for different effects, however there are limitations within the own strings on what they can and cannot do.

*The Higher Strings:* The External Strings  
\- The Strings of Ceration: Manipulation of solids, and their interaction. Manipulating these strings allow for the re-shaping of solids into other shapes by basically 'loosening' all the strings that create that particular thing. Think transforming something into clay momentarily and model it.  
\- The Strings of Calcination: The manipulation of the strings itself. Manipulating these strings can immediately 'burn' other strings, effectively eliminating them from reality.  
\- The Strings of Visualization: Manipulation of the 'visual' elements on the world. Think illusions.  
\- The Strings of Binding: Connecting two different things. Imagine sowing two different cloths.

*The Lower Strings:* The Internal Strings  
\- The strings of Mentalism: Manipulation of the mind for extended mental processes. Basically Speech 100, Intelligence 100, etc.  
\- The Strings of Healing: What it says, basically manipulation of one's healing abilities.

\- The Strings of War: The ability to 'solidify' the strings around oneself to 'create' weapons and armour tied only to that person, gaining strength, speed, and other bonuses. Kind of like Stormlight Shardblades or how in videogames the boss suddenly shines and he has armor. (There is MUCH more to talk about here. Originally the string wasn't meant exactly for this, but rather was called the String of Bodyfication which brought mental concepts into reality by forcibly sowing strings together, however because of certain story events, that knowledge was lost, and the string renamed to the Strings of War due to how often they were used for the creation of weapons and armour.)

\- The Strings of Sensations: Manipulation of one's senses.

*The Untouchable Strings:* 'Cursed are the weavers who's hands manipulate the strings of Destiny'

\- The Strings of Life & Death: The manipulation of the life and death of a person. Basically one could, theoretically, 'revive' someone if they were to manipulate their strings of life, but that would bring disastrous consequences not only to that person, but tho whoever is doing the weavings.

\- The Strings of Mind & Soul: Haven't really thought out this one yet, but my end-goal is that through this one could theoretically become immortal and all powerful by 'weaving' themselves deeper into this great Reality.

**Limitations:**  
My way to nerf people who use the strings is that there are three main limitations. First, the more strings you manipulate, the less effective they are. The 'sweet-spot' number is three for the average weaver. However the Higher strings do tend to take more energy and are harder to manipulate than the lower strings.

Second, time. Because of how humans are 'bad stitches' because they are constantly shaping the other ones around them, they are not suitable for manipulating the strings for a long period of time. Ten heartbeats is the sweet-sport number, where after that it becomes exponentially harder to keep control over the strings, as well as over one's own life. The reason its heartbeats and not seconds is because of how lifeforce and the soul is connected to the magic. There needs to be a fuel.

Finally, fate itself. The Patterns of Reality really don't like to be changed, and indivuals like the Weavers who are basically stitches that move on their own, the pattern retaliates by making it harder for them through fate. They often attract trouble, find themselves in difficult situations, and are a target of hatred by some, which has led to the creation of religions, cults, laws and other forms of discrimination against the Weavers. (Ladies and Gentlemen, I have officially engraved Plot Convenience into my magic system).

**The Outlier:**  
It wouldn't be an epic fantasy story without a chosen one element. Sometimes, individuals are born that are so connected, so deep into the strings, that they are both a problem and a solution. They tend to shape reality around them, and their powers *want* to come out. They have higher resistances to the limitations of the powers, such as their sweet-spots being at five strings instead of three, or twenty five heartbeats instead of ten. But just like the others, fate is a bitch, and often their powers are so great that they tap into the 'Untouchable Strings' learning things that they shouldn't, often making them die in the spot, go mad, or become an unstoppable force. These outliers, called Grails in my story (Holy Grail, lots of Arthurian and Nording influences in my worldbuilding) are often hunted by the different organizations that are able to access the strings. Either trying to manipulate them or to kill them.

**Organizations:**  
There are several organisations that are known for their manipulation of the Strings that Weave Destiny. The most common are the Knights of the Round, who's duty is to find the Grails that appear in the world and eliminate them as soon as possible, while ensuring that peace is maintained between the several other Weavers and the Kingdoms of Men (Think Jedi/Aes Sedai).

The Guild of Courtesians, are another. Often found as prostitutes, advisors, and partners to people of influence, they are especially well versed in the use of the Strings of Mentalism and the Strings of Visualization, both for manipulation and for 'counsel' of people of interest. They own the biggest spy network. Usually, their positions offer them protection, but also their ability to manipulate people and remain hidden is what they excel at.

The School of Crafters & Builders are another, using Ceration a lot, and the Healers of Valastrazzi (a region of my world) are another too.

There are other criminal organizations that use weavers for their own gain too, but the constant fear of the Knights of the Round, which act as law enforcement in matters of people with the gifts of a Weaver, finding them and 'Calcinating' their connections to the powers are what keeps them away and hidden. Same goes for the 'normal' people who are gifted with it, they prefer to stay hidden lest they bring the Knights on them, or the other organisations.

The Church of Man is the largest anti-weaving organisation, acting as a wannabe inquisition with extremist ideals that using the power is against Fate itself, and that they should all be purged. Their power is mostly religious, however there are also political figures associated with it, making them a passive threat. There's also the 'Safecities' which are cities in several Kingdoms and lands that are self-sufficient in a way and serve as hubs for people who are running away from Weavers and want to live in a militarized city which enforces with harsh punishments those who use the powers.

I explain these organizations so you can also see how this magic system can be used in practice and how it shapes the world im trying to build. There's lots of things I have in mind but imo if I don't get the magic system right, then most of those things won't really work.

If anyone would like me to talk more about my project feel free to send me a message, I love talking about my work:) and also brainstorming ideas for worlds/magic systems for DnD or other projects.

Please leave any comments, questions, opinions below about this system and its workings. Questions are really appreciated because they help me develop it more by answering things I hadn't thought about but would make logical sense to address.

Thank you!

\~AWLHi all, I was wondering if you guys could read this and tell me what you think? I'd love to hear what you do and don't like and any advice you have! I'm planning on continuing the story, but I first wanted to see how people like it. Thanks in advance! 

&#x200B;

 

The  men held their heads high in the sort of carefree way only youth can  have- the sort of arrogance that is the product of not yet being  disillusioned from their dreams, and ignorance from the fact that the  world that lay on their laps was an indifferent one. It did not even  matter they were training for battle, as they did not yet know the true  nature of war.

 “Right then. Run  it through once more. Remember your sword is an extension of your body,  find balance and fluidity. It is not all about mere strength. Before you  strike, find a path for your sword and be guided with it,” instructed a  man watching the young men. Glints of light danced from the swords as  the men ran through routine again with the sun beating down from above.  They had been in training since morning, but would soon finish for the  day as the hottest part of the day neared.

 A  defeating ring sounded through the air as a blade swiped down the sword  of another, forcing an opponent’s fingers to release; the strain caused  a loss of balance and a stumble backwards into the grass. With the  tumble came a fallen helmet that revealed tendrils of spilling red  curls. Amongst the throng of men fighting there lay a lone woman:  Leocadia.

 With the defeat,  Leocadia questioned once again why leaders from above selected her for  the core. Almost never was a woman requested to join, as the grueling  physical impact proved difficult. Nevertheless, she felt determined to  prove herself as a worthy candidate. “Leo, you know you cannot be paired  with your dragon unless you pass your training,” remarked Emrys as he  offered a hand. Flushed, she took his hand and muttered a small “I  know.” The remark stung, but she took no offense because he had always  given her the truth in a way an older brother would. Emrys leveled at  top of the class, but often paired with Leo due to their long standing  friendship. 

“Class dismissed.  Leocadia, come see me,” announced Sir Tomas from across the field. She  wondered what he could want with her. Surely, she had not done so poorly  as to deserve a scolding? Of all instructors, she did not expect this  from him. Sir Tomas came off as much less combative than her other  instructors from the past; she supposed this was due to  him being much  older than any of the others. If it had to happen, even from Sir Tomas,  she felt relieved it was at least after class and away from the eyes of  her peers.

 “Miss Arel, please do  have some water,” offered Sir Tomas. Leo gladly accepted the jug from  his outstretched hand, pleasantly surprised, and caught the eye of Emrys  from afar giving a wave goodbye. The kind offering of water changed the  tone of the meeting and Leo struggled to ascertain the nature of his  request to speak with her. 

 “Freshen up and have some dinner. After your dinner, you are to meet me in the cemetery. Do you know where the cemetery is?”

Leo nodded her head. “But Sir, is that section of the grounds not forbidden for those in the academy?”

“Why  yes, it is. Do not worry dear,” replied Sir Tomas with a bit of a  chuckle. “Come alone, and do not tell anyone of this. Do you  understand?” 

“Yes sir,  absolutely,” Leo said at once, wanting to demonstrate clear obedience to  her superior, yet feeling unsettled. “But I must ask, have I done  something wrong sir?” 

“Ah, you  Leo? Never. Now, I will see you at 7, sharp.” He turned on his heel and  left for the dining commons with a little hum. After gathering her  belongings, Leo made the fifteen minute walk to her room. She hurried to  the showers to catch the last bit of hot water, but she was too late  and arrived at dinner still in a chilly state. Emrys left a seat open  for her as expected. 

After a few minutes he inquired, “What did good ole Sir Tomas want with you anyway?” 

“Oh,  he just had a few critiques on my form,” Leo lied while scratching her  head, remembering the secrecy that was expected of her.

“Hm,  strange. He never asks anyone to stay after class.” Emrys decided not  to pry so Leo offered nothing more and finished her meal quickly. She  left with a swift goodbye to those at the table. Before heading to the  cemetery, Leo grabbed a heavy coat and scarf; she had not wanted to draw  suspicion at dinner by having the appearance that she was going out.

As  she stepped outside the building she noticed that with the  disappearance of the sun, the grounds had an eerie feel with the  enclosing fog, especially with the gothic-esque architecture; the  pointed tops pierced through the fog like skyscrapers in the clouds. She  departed early to meet Sir Tomas in case she only *thought*  she understood the location of the cemetery, as it was forbidden  afterall. As she trekked on, she could not help but be in awe of the  large lancet windows and meticulous detail put into each structure. She  wondered why this section of the grounds was off limits for those in the  academy.

 The cemetery stood out  easy enough due to a lone lamp post that poured warm light onto the  gravestones. In waiting, Leo looked about at the rows of gothic style  headstones, each a bit different from one another with their delicate  designs. The area looked tended to and not overgrown which led her to  wonder who was not banned from this part of the grounds.   

Sir  Tomas arrived and curiously eyed Leo, who was apparently absorbed. “Ah,  you’ve made it Leo. Splendid! I like to call this area here my secret  garden of headstones. Now, come along. This is not our final  destination.” Sir Tomas sank as he stepped down, descending from the  hill the cemetery lay on.

“Okay  Sir, as you wish,” Leo responded with close footsteps behind him. At the  bottom of the hill stood a lone slender building; it had the appearance  of a castle, but much smaller, almost as if it was a sliver of a castle  that had been cut off. An upstairs window of the structure emitted a  rose color that reflected down to the cobblestone ground below. As Sir  Tomas’ eyes met the red glow he whispered an elated “Ah, yes! I knew  it,” to himself and quickened his pace. The rosy hue grew brighter as  the two neared.

Upon reaching the  door, Sir Tomas hurriedly retrieved a small golden key from his pocket  and used both hands to unjam it. He swung open the squeaking door to  reveal a small space where a winding staircase led to the peculiar red  glow. “Come now, up the stairs you go,” Sir Tomas said excitedly, with a  gesture for Leo to enter first. Cautiously, and a bit afraid, but  wildly curious Leocadia climbed the serpentine steps.

The  stairs led to an opening where a luminous silvery red egg lay,  supported by a statue of a woman with the egg carefully folded into  herself, almost as if guarding it from harm.

 “The  egg in her arms… is it a dragon egg? Why is it glowing? I did not know  eggs could glow.” Leo had never seen a dragon egg in person, only  drawings.

 “My dear, dragon eggs  do not glow. Or at least, none except this one. This is your egg. I know  it is your egg because she is glowing for you. Now, look here.” Sir  Tomas reaches for his coat pocket and pulls out a small folded over  cloth. Inside there is a small twig. “Some people were never meant to  wield a sword. Centuries ago, these ‘wands’ held great power. Maybe you  can make this one work.” He placed the wand in Leo’s hand and folded  both of his over hers.

“Sir, I  don’t know how to tell you this, but I fear you are mistaken,” responded  Leo anxiously, pushing the wand back towards Sir Tomas. 

“No  mistake has been made. Now please, let me leave you here with something  more,” assured Sir Tomas as he gave her hands a final squeeze. He then  motioned towards a leather notebook. The book rested on a small rounded  table draped with a velvet cloth. As he walked to the table he said,  “Stay as long as you like, but please lock up when you are finished.  Goodnight, Leocadia.” He dropped the golden key gently on the table and  descended down the stairs, leaving Leo to herself.

Inquisitively, Leo folded the notebook to reveal the first page.

*Welcome,  I am writing to you from the year 1700. You are here, reading this,  because you have great power within. You can end this war. Now, I will  tell you the truth of how I ended the war of my time in hopes it will  help you end the war of yours. It all begins and ends with the wand you  have just received.*

Leo read the last line of the page: *I am sorry to say, this may be a lonely destiny, but it is a righteous one.*Hey guys! I'd really appreciate a little more feedback on the [intro to my story](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BfGoDgd4M3i4-OJvlVMDm4m_TuuRveY3cusviBwBPCs/edit?usp=sharing)! I really want to improve the sense of confusion and alarm that the MC is experiencing. Thanks in advance!Hi,

Thanks for taking a look at my post! I have been working through a few iterations of this story and am looking for Beta readers to provide feedback!

See more story details below and PM me if you would like to read it.

Thanks again!

\*Blurb: A sleepless man and a woman of the night cross paths before both of their journeys take them to a shop of magical curios and the manipulative shopkeeper that runs it.

CONTENT WARNING: In terms of movies, it would be a hard PG13. Sensual themes, sex is implied but not shown. One swearword (f---).

Feedback Guidelines: Let me know how the story makes you feel! Where are you interested? where are you bored? Where are you confused and don't understand what's happening? Were you let down by the ending? Did something feel unresolved? Could you tell what kind of story this was going to be from the beginning? Are the characters boring/unrealistic/etc?

\*Available to Critique Swap! Preferably other Short Stories or first chapters of longer works

Request for private beta readers and include a short synopsis!(Note: This is a snippet of a fantasy novel I’m writing. I feel like my writing is really amateurish for fantasy and I’m unsure how to improve. 
The world has human elements but humans are like a sub species compared to Immortals and Shifters.)

The hum of chatter filled the room, soft lights and cold drinks served around a Christmas tree. There were generals and envoys and royalty dancing around sparsely placed lanterns. All laughing and joyful, small blushes and crude jokes flying around the room.

I rolled my ring around my finger, unsure what to do with my hands as I waited for people to approach me. As high queen, I was unable to humble myself to others by sparking conversation first. A rule iterated only by Immortal royalty, a rule made by those so insecure. 

Cassandra found me first, Zara at her side. They bowed respectfully before pulling me into a hug. I watched faces turn sour at the action. 

"You look so gorgeous, Levorsi!" Cassie beamed.

"What made you lose the resting bitch face?" I asked under my breath. Cassie rolled her eyes, unable to contain her smile as Zara burst into laughter.

Cassie was in black as always; a steep v-neck and a blue lace corset. I was surprised to see Zara wasn't modeling silver or white. 

She was in a hot red gown with long sleeves, fitted tightly until her waist, where it draped to the floor like curtains. Her lips matched and so did her stark eyeliner. Blue eyes darting across my body to drink in the details of my gown.

Fashion simp at her finest.

She gushed about the design, about how the fur lining the sleeveless cut looked great with my long, curly hair, but my mind wandered off to what her presence alluded to. 

I sipped my champagne, swirling the liquid under and over my tongue until the bubbles dissolved into nothing.

Cassie intertwined her arm in mine and lead us up the stairs; "I don't think they are here yet." 

I watched from above as Zara mingled with sparkling people all the way to her younger brother. She snatched the alcohol out of his hands and gave him a terrifying glare.

But the brother I was looking for was no where to be found.Hello there!

I've pasted below a link to a first draft of a story that I have sketched out to the end, but for which I've only written this first draft chapter.

Although it doesn't have a title, for background the basic plot is as follows:

* Two down-on-their-luck swords for hire, Marsyus and Burdett, are making their way to Az-da-Kolgan, the Holy City of the Sacred Waters, a city neither of them have ever been to, in the hopes of finding work and/or transport out to where more work might be;
* They have been on the road for some time, after surviving a successful siege of a  city elsewhere. What they need first is for their clothes to be repaired or replaced, for them to take a hot bath, get some good wine, and some hot, cooked food;
* Their arrival coincides with a large religious festival, meaning that the city is stuffed to the rafters with travelling pilgrims, meaning that it is hard for them to find a place to stay.
* Eventually, they come across a luxurious tavern house that seems mysteriously empty. At this point, Burdett, who is the younger of the two and more impulsive, rushes in where his older companion, Marsyus, fears to tread (on the grounds that "the only free cheese is in the mousetrap").

It's not necessary to say more at this point, other than to note that Marsyus is right, and much sorcery, swords, and general mayhem ensues.

This first chapter covers their journey to Az-da-Kolgan, the Holy City of the Sacred Waters, but stops before they go in.

Here is the link:

[Draft 1, Chapter 1, Untitled Fantasy fiction 29 January 2022 \[2,142 words, double-spaced\]](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HLcwZg-As6F675nTBNtuvHAzcs18nbZbSODkrby0JeA/edit?usp=sharing)

I'm grateful for any comments you might have on the following:

* The relationship between Marsyus and Burdett
* Pacing (too fast, slow; does it take too long to get where they're going)
* Clarity as to what is happening in general

(As a first draft, there may well be typos, but I'm not so concerned about those at this stage as it'll undergo revision at a later date should I keep on with it).

Thank you in advance!

&#x200B;

\[Made a very minor edit for sense\]Hello! I'm kindly asking for some feedback on this excerpt of my story. It's not the first chapter, but all the main characters are in it, and I believe this is when the story starts to pick up more. The main premise of the story is that they are looking for a way to find the elf's enemy. This chapter is under 6k words. Here it is: 


Hours later, rays of morning sunshine began to peak through the cracks of the curtains. Bashima's bookshelf was now half empty, the contents scattered on the floor around Leila's chair. She'd lost count of how many books she'd skimmed through, how many sketches and illustrations she'd admired that night. 


Her favorite so far had been the one she thought was about the Vampires' rise to power over Mythos, at least that's what she gathered from the pictures. There was a beautiful painting of an armor-clad vampire conquering what looked to be a grand, sunlit city many millennia ago on the first page, and when she'd first seen it, Leila had wasted over twenty minutes looking at every intricate detail; from the towering spires atop the rooves to the glint of the vampire's sword. 


But now, she was "reading" another book, which had something to do with the elves. The sketch she was looking at depicted an elf holding a silver stake over a sleeping vampire's heart. She turned the page to find an illustration of a field with the grand city from the other book in the background. On this field, scores of vampires and elves were lined up facing each other, as if preparing for battle. 


There was then a knock at the door. It was so loud, Bashima shot up with a yelp. 


"This is Lucién!" he barked through the door. "Get up and get ready to leave!" 


"Ugh," Bashima groaned, rubbing her eyes. "What time is it?" 


Leila shrugged, and Lucién knocked again. "Bashima, can you hear me?! We need to go!" 


"Yes I can hear you! I've just woken up, be patient!" Bashima kicked her legs over the side of the bed and stretched, muttering curses at Lucién the whole time. 


"I can help you," Leila said, shutting her book and getting up. Bashima saw the mess around the armchair and sighed. 


"I can get ready dear, you just pick up the books please." 


Leila nodded and hastily began to put the books back on the shelves. Bashima, in the meantime, got dressed. She changed from a nightgown into tight black pants, a loose black shirt, a black leather corset, and a black cape. 


"There we go," she said, observing herself in the mirror. "This will be much better to travel in than a dress." She then grabbed the bag from last night and slung it over her shoulder. "I think I have everything. Are you almost done Leila?" 


"Yes," Leila said, shoving the final two books into place. 


"Splendid, let us be on our way." Bashima blew out the candles and marched out the door, Leila following close behind her. 


Outside, the sun had just risen, and the forest floor was wet with dew. That didn't matter to Lucién, it seemed. He was by Cadhla, tapping his foot impatiently; nearby Milo looked just about ready to collapse to the ground and fall asleep. 


"About time," Lucién said. "We should leave at once, we have lots of ground to cover." He readied himself to mount his horse, but Bashima spoke up before he could pull himself up. 


"Prince Lucién, I know you're in a hurry, and I know you're used to being in charge; but you need to slow down and quit behaving like this is a dictatorship. We're going to pause, and we're going to think about where we're going, and we're not going to be pushed around by you. And if you have a problem with that, I'll give you back your money and you can forget about finding The Dark Prince," Bashima said. 


Lucién let go of his saddle, and slowly turned to look at her. Leila didn't know what she was expecting him to do. From what she's seen of him, she guessed he would either yell at her or insult her. But what he said took her by surprise. 


"Fine, you're right. I'm glad to see you have a backbone, Bashima." 


"And I'm glad to see you can be reasonable. Now," she said, clapping her hands together. "I'll summon some rides, and then we can discuss our first destination. I warn you all to back up." 


Without waiting for an answer, Bashima took three generous steps away from them, and Leila, Lucién, and Milo did the same, leaving a large circle of ground between the four of them. 


Bashima bent down on one knee and rested a single hand on the ground, clutching a fistful of wet leaves, sticks, and dirt. In a low, almost melodic tone, she began to whisper in a strange, ancient language. Then Leila felt it, the sudden gust of wind that was out of place on such a clear, peaceful morning. As Bashima whispered, it grew stronger, ripping through Leila’s hair and roaring in her ears. A foul stench stained the air, like that of a decaying corpse; Cadhla began to whinnie, rearing up and tugging hard at her lead; the ground began to tremble like the beginning of a devastating earthquake. Hundreds upon hundreds of bones began to emerge from the dirt; shoulder blades, ribs, pelvic bones, teeth, all of them started to take shape. Bashima went quiet and rose to her feet. The wind stopped, the earth came to a standstill, and the putrid smell dissipated. 


Before Leila, where only a minute ago nothing stood, were three horse skeletons. Only, they were very much alive. One of them snorted like a normal horse, and the one next to it kicked at the ground with its front hoof. There were three simple leather saddles on their backs. 


“That should spare the rest of us sore feet on our way to Crimson Lake,” Bashima said. 


“Crimson Lake?” asked Lucién, attempting to calm Cadhla in the presence of the skeleton horses. 


“Yes. Water Wraiths haunt sources of water, obviously: lakes, rivers, inland seas, coastlines, swamps. But, they don’t haunt just any lake, river, inland sea, coastline, or swamp. They occur where tremendous amounts of death, and pain, and suffering has taken place. Crimson Lake in particular has had countless Water Wraith sightings over the last one thousand years.” 


Lucién’s face was grave. “Are you sure we must go there? There aren't any other haunted waterways in Mythos?” 


“There are, but I assure you Crimson Lake will be the best spot: you know why. And it’s close to the edge of vampire territory, so we won’t have to travel too far for the blood of a born vampire." 


He took a deep breath, but he gave no more protests. Once she was calm enough, Lucién climbed onto Cadhla’s back. Bashima mounted one of the Skeleton Horses, and Leila knew the other two must have been for her and Milo, but the two of them stared at them with apprehension. 


“I’ve never ridden a horse,” Milo said to her. “Much less a dead one. How about you?” 


“No,” said Leila. “Never.” But there was a first time for everything. That’s what she said to herself as she approached one of the Skeleton Horses with great caution. They were nowhere as near as skittish as Lucién’s horse, at least. She approached the saddle, and the one she’d chosen remained completely calm and still. With as much strength as she could muster, she hoisted herself up and swung her leg over. Leila felt a bit unbalanced at first, but after shifting in the saddle, she was able to relax. 


“Well if the revenant’s done it, now I have to,” Milo muttered unhappily, proceeding to mount his horse in a much more hesitant, jumpy fashion. But, finally, no one would be straggling behind while the others were on horseback. 


“I hope you’re both fast learners, because after today I’m not slowing down for you,” Lucién said, squeezing Cadhla’s stomach with his heels and breaking into a trot. And so they were on their way. 


The further they went north, the thicker and darker the forest got. This part of Mythos was unknown to her. She didn’t know the name of the forest they were in, or what kind of Beasts lurked in these woods, or what Crimson Lake was and why it was so haunted. The only way she got any of these questions was by pestering Bashima, who didn’t seem to mind answering her endless questions. 


“We’re in No Man’s Woods, part of the territory between Nightfall Forest and the Saoirse Mountains; neither the elves or vampires have control over this land…I’m sure there are plenty of Beasts around, but no need to worry about it with Lucién and I here…Crimson Lake was the site of the bloodiest battle of the War, it was about one thousand years ago, many died there, and many of their spirits remain at the lake…” 


It was three days after their initial departure from Bashima’s cabin when Leila had asked more about Crimson Lake. That was all she’d really given her, but that didn’t keep Leila’s curiosity from being peaked. She glanced past the campfire, to where Lucién ate the meal she’d cooked in silence. 


“How old are you, Lucién?” She asked. 


He chewed for a few more seconds, then gave her an answer in a quiet, uninterested voice. “Five thousand two hundred and twelve years old.” 


Milo’s jaw dropped, and a fried potato fell out of his mouth. This was also quite shocking to Leila. The Southern Coven had only come into existence three and a half thousand years ago. 


“Then you must have been alive for the Battle of Crimson Lake,” said Leila, hardly noticing or caring about the way his face went dark, or the way it took him even longer to reply than before. 


“I was.” 


“Did you fight in it? Or were you at least there?” She asked, ignoring the scared look Milo was giving her. Lucién was now clutching his fork: hard. 


“Yes.” 


“What was it-” 


“Leila, dear,” Bashima said, flashing her a smile. “I don’t think he wants to talk about it.” 


“No,” Lucién said, letting his fork clatter to the plate, and looking up at her. “It’s fine. You were about to ask me what it was like, were you not?” 


Leila nodded. 


“Then let me tell you how the lake got its name.” His eyes glazed over like he was returning back to the battle. “On the day of the worst fighting, the day over three hundred elves died, the blood ran in such large quantities that the sand turned red. There wasn’t a single step you could take that there wasn’t a corpse in the way, the water was black from all the decomposing flesh, and the smell was so foul it was common practice to hold your breath until your lungs felt like they were on fire. The battle was a draw, and now no one owns the lake. So the foulest, most dangerous Beasts you could imagine are drawn there like vultures to rotting meat…and there’s no one to stop them. Which is why we should all know what could be in store for us, and why we should keep our guard up when we get there,” Lucién explained.


Milo looked at his plate, bunched his nose, and set it far away from him. “Is there any chance I could keep away from the lake?” 


“Sure,” Lucién said. “You can cower in the woods, but let me assure you, it won’t be safer.” 


Leila didn’t feel scared of this lake…yet. But she could imagine, when they got to the water and her brain began to run wild with the sorts of Beasts that lurked under the surface, she wouldn’t be so neutral about it. 


Not long after finishing their meal, Lucién, Milo, and Bashima turned in, leaving Leila to clean up. Bashima had offered to help, but Leila insisted she go to bed, as the more there was to do, the faster the night would go by. 


So Leila did the dishes, fed and watered Cadhla, kept the fire stoked, went to the water source (Lucién always had them camp near water) to refill their wineskins, and all the stuff she normally did after the others drifted off. 


She eventually ran out of chores to do, plopped down in front of the fire, and waited. 


Hours passed, dragging by like a block of iron being pulled through deep water, and Leila watched the flames dance the entire time without so much as blinking. 


But, when the forest around her was darkest, when all she could see was whatever was in the vicinity of the fire, a sudden sound blared through the night. It sounded like someone was playing a single, slightly off-tune note on a horn in the far distance. 


Leila whipped her head in the direction it was coming from; or at least where she thought it was coming from. Why would anyone be playing an instrument in the middle of the woods at such a late hour? 


A handful of seconds later, the noise stopped. A few moments of silence came and went, and Leila relaxed, wondering if she’d just been hearing things. Her attention returned to the fire. Minutes later, right as she concluded it had to have been her imagination, the horn played again; only this time, it sounded closer. 


Leila shot to her feet this time, spinning in a circle in an attempt to better gauge where the noise was coming from. But the pitch blackness was impenetrable. It was like all that existed was her, the campfire, the three silhouettes on the ground, and the horses; all bathed in the dull, orange light of the fire. Everything else was a void of nothingness from which the strange noise echoed. 


“Hello?” Leila called out to whoever was playing the horn. It went silent. She got no answer; until a few minutes later when the horn started up again, even closer than before, probably so close that if it were daytime, she would be able to see the source of the noise somewhere in the trees. 


“Who’s there?” Leila called again, this time louder. Again, it went quiet. Again, the noise came back closer, louder, a few minutes later. Whoever it was, she guessed, was following her voice. She wasn’t sure if it was friendly or something to be wary of, but not wanting to take chances, she glanced around the campsite for something that could be a weapon. Her eyes landed on Lucién’s sword, which was still in it’s holster on Lucién’s hip. 


Now, the most dangerous weapon Leila had ever held in her death was a kitchen knife, let alone an elven silver sword. That did not stop her from creeping over to Lucién’s sleeping body. The horn stopped again, but still, as gently as possible, Leila wrapped her hand around the hilt and began to slide it out centimeter by centimeter. 


The sword, which was straight, and pointy, and sharp, and could be used as a makeshift stake when needed, was quite heavy for Leila to hold. She managed to get it all the way out of the holster, only for it to tip down and collide with the ground, right next to Lucién’s head. 


Then, before what happened hit her, Lucién rolled over and grabbed her tight by the collar of her shirt, pulling her in with fury in his blue eyes. “What the hell do you think you’re doing?” He hissed.


“Shh,” whispered Leila, holding her finger to her lips. “Wait and listen.” Not a moment too soon or too late, the horn began to play. Lucién’s anger withered away. If Leila didn’t know any better, she would think the new expression on his face was fear, even if it was miniscule. 


“Do you know what it is?” Leila asked, her voice no louder than the crackle of the fire. 


“That’s the cry of a Manticore,” Lucién said at a volume far too loud for Leila’s preference. She shushed him again, but he gave her an annoyed look in return. “Manticores like to toy with their prey before killing it, make them lose their nerve. Tonight is not the night it will choose to attack, no matter how loud we speak.” Somehow, that didn’t calm Leila in the slightest. 


“Are you sure?” 


“Almost certain.” 


After examining her face for a few more seconds, he let go of her collar and snatched back his sword. “But if you’re that scared, I might as well keep guard. It’s not like I’ll be able to fall back asleep with all that racket.” 


“Thank you,” Leila said, feeling a hair more secure now. He responded with a low grunt, then sat up in his sleeping bag and pulled a knee to his chest. 


For what felt like ages, they sat without talking. The only sounds being the fire, Milo’s soft snores, and the Manticore, which would make Leila jump every time it decided to make that play that eerie note. 


After some time, Leila found herself staring at Lucién from across the fire. Five thousand years old: he was five thousand years old. He probably knew everything there was to know about anything, having lived through so much history; all Leila wanted to do was ask him questions about him and his life, but there was one question that had been the most prevalent in her mind ever since they’d met Bashima. 


“Who’s The Dark Prince?” Leila asked, breaking the silence. 


With baffled eyes, Lucién looked her up and down. “You’re joking.”  


“No? I’ve heard a little about him from the witches, but not much. He’s a vampire, right?” 


Lucién continued to give her a baffled look. “Indeed. Is that really all you know?” 


“I think I heard them say he’s a decent fighter as well, but aside from that, yes.” 


“He’s not just a decent fighter,” Lucién said. “He’s the best warrior the vampires have. He alone killed fifty of the elves that died at Crimson Lake.” 


"Wow, so is he a real prince? Or is he just some really talented soldier," Leila asked. 


"Yes, he's a real prince. He's Queen Morana's eldest son, only ten years older than me." 


"Why don't they call him by his real name? Why is he called The Dark Prince?" 


Lucién rolled his eyes, and replied, "'The Dark Prince' is a stupid nickname our Elven Knights gave him at the beginning of the War out of fear. The vampires use it in reverence...but out of fear as well. To most he's become an untouchable myth, a figure of evil that represents all the suffering the vampires have caused in Mythos, someone who leaves nothing but death and destruction in his wake. But in reality, he wears dark clothes and rides a black steed into battle, which is the only reason the whole 'dark' part of his pseudonym came about. Even so, this is what almost everyone in Mythos calls him anymore, because over two thousand years, they've forgotten his real name." 


Leila couldn't help herself. "Do you know his real name?" 


He nodded. She didn't even have to ask. "His name is Kazimir. And he's nothing to be afraid of." 


At this point, she wondered why he was being so open with her, rather than shutting down the conversation like he usually did. "Why are you telling me all this?" 


"Because," Lucién said. "You're the one who's going to find him and get him out of there, and you’ll need to know how." 


Pushing her luck, she asked one more question weighing on her mind. "Why do you want revenge on him?" 


His face went cold, and his eyes went colder. "You ask too many questions." He looked away from Leila and into the darkness. "It sounds like the Manticore is gone, or atleast done stalking us for tonight." 


Leila blinked. She hadn't noticed it had been silent for the entire conversation. 


"I'm going back to sleep. If it comes back around, don't try to steal my sword; you'll impale yourself. Just wake me." 


"Okay," Leila said. 


With that, he laid back down, faced away from Leila, and went back to bed. In my story, i want to call a group of warriors who can use "nature" magic druids. It is the best word i came with so far, but i'mm not really sure about using it, since druids were celtic priests, not warriors. But i just can't think on other word for it.  


What do you guys think when you see something like this? My first language is actually portuguese, so is not easy for me to make a new word like in english, it just doesn't work that well.  

The long and dusty road lay before her like the beginning of a tale yet to be told. Straight and true, the King’s road was well-traveled and safe for all who roamed under the protection of the Hand of God, an order of religious knights, priests, and holy men that graced the kingdom. They were the will of God, providing security and guidance to the King. 

Ada, a cleric’s apprentice, was a small part of the dutiful apparatus that patrolled the realm, acting as a military hammer when called upon. During times of peace and prosperity, though, the men and women of the Hand of God acted similar to a political tool for the temple elites. 

Dressed in a form-fitted leather vest and pants with a thick, woolly coat, Ada presented herself as a perfect disciple of her temple. Prim, proper, and well-kept by even royal standards, she was a woman of sixteen years and beautiful. Her hair was dark raven and kept in a tight bun, and she had green eyes and soft rosy cheeks. She was kind and smart, a soft soul within, with a beauty that radiated outward for all to see. 

Mostly, it made Ada feel weak in the eyes of her temple masters, as her looks had never saved her from poor physical prowess. She would always thank God for gracing her with the power to manifest some of the more potent spells. Ada knew that was what granted her the ability to please the priestess and be anointed as a cleric’s apprentice. 

Ada could hardly contain her excitement. She was tasked with her first real quest. She had been traveling for four full moons and finally reached the outer edges of the King’s domain. Ada would leave her home behind, along with the safety it provided. A cold wind began to blow over her shoulder as the sun started to set, casting a pinkish glow on the rolling green plains ahead. Ada gripped the horse’s reins tightly, and she began to feel something stir in her as the mare pranced in protest. 

She began to flood with emotions as her sensibility was inundated by doubts and fears. Mostly, she longed for her family. It was a loving home, and her brother, Tom, and sister, Bella, would most certainly miss her. When they were younger, they were inseparable. Ada knew they would be gathered at the fireplace at this moment, drinking warm apple cider and laughing at father’s former escapades as a woodsman. Mother would sit back in her chair and smile as she busied herself with mending clothes. A tear began to stream down her rosy white cheeks. She felt alone and homesick, the chilly wind creeping deeper down into her. 

*Wack!* Ada felt a blunt pain to the side of her head. 

“Ouch!” she protested. 

“Snap to it, book worm.” The Paladin rode forth on his horse, placing a thick dirty leather glove back on his hand.Hey all, first time sharing this project! Looking for a critique for the prologue of my work. It's been a while since I did it, and re-reading I'm questioning if it's a decent hook, or whether it's too slow to hold attention. Hoping for some interesting/useful feedback, and that y'all enjoy!

(And of course, forgive me if there's errors I've missed, though I have tried to patch any gaping errors...)

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jDahlPp5pJzK35dqla3kvcMAbZdfhB04moHVCkIdK3o/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jDahlPp5pJzK35dqla3kvcMAbZdfhB04moHVCkIdK3o/edit?usp=sharing)Hello there!  


I have been concocting a creation story for my world as of the last two weeks or so, and this is what I have managed to make thus far, there is much more to go.  I will not say any more details than what is needed but know that the story does continue, so do not say that you wish \*blank\* was wrapped up or such things.  This work is 4113 words in length, but you can critique one of the three sections if you'd want!  The title of this work is called "The Sculpture", and is the creation story for two other works I plan to make called "The Prince" and "The Journey", it is a book with ties to history, worldbuilding, and even some philosophy.  Thanks, I hope you enjoy :)  


[https://docs.google.com/document/d/14SgJypWqpkxhtPiUcDb8185V39FtaMarSeB6P25c7jM/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14SgJypWqpkxhtPiUcDb8185V39FtaMarSeB6P25c7jM/edit?usp=sharing)This is a micro-fiction writing prompt and challenge. Using a theme of “Union” and fantasy elements, write a coherent vignette or snippet ***using fifty words or less*** and post it as a comment.

Have fun! The thread is in contest mode so that comments appear in random order with hidden upvotes.I have a demigod race of humans that came after humans, but they live on a different planet. I wanted to make their culture similar to that of the earth but in the early stages of this race they were not allowed to go to earth. They have 3 Fallen Angel mothers that teach them about the humans and how life is on earth and they are able to view the lives of people on earth through crystal ball like objects. This allows them to pick up on how they act, what type of dialogue they pick up on, how to skip past time periods in their evolution such as the stone ages, etc. they’d essentially pick up the things they liked about the earthlings world and adapt them to their culture, then quickly surpassing them. This way, I can develop their culture by mixing aspects of cultures that already exist on earth. Is this a good concept or is it a cheap excuse for me to not develop a fully unique and separate culture of demigod humans not of this world?This is my first time sharing my work with everyone and i'm super nervous but would love people opinions! I've spent a while editing it and rewriting bits and this is my first book.

Heres the link:

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/10McW0kpXOYSZ-uFI0fj-Daao8bXVUglYQDMLPD3kPLA/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10McW0kpXOYSZ-uFI0fj-Daao8bXVUglYQDMLPD3kPLA/edit?usp=sharing) Hi I am looking for beta readers for a dark Omegaverse RH!

**Title:** Psycho Shifters (warrior omegaverse)

**Genre:** RH fantasy romance

**Steam level:** medium

**Summary:** An abused human discovers that her life has been a lie and she is actually an Alpha shifter, a warrior beast of lore. Forced to train for war beside three psycho Alphas she discovers her power and the secrets of the universe.

**Trigger warning:** lots of violence.In the link is a chapter I drafted that focuses on the tritagonist of the story. I'm interested in general feedback. I've struggled with a lack of confidence in my writing for the past year or so, and I'm pretty eager to get a sense of where my abilities as a writer stand. I feel that I have been a bit too close to this project for quite some time, so I figured I'd look for feedback from outside eyes now.  


I am trying to go for a negative character arc with this tritagonist. I am also wondering if evidence of her descent down this sort of path is believable in the context of the ending scene, and the conclusion to the sample chapter makes sense. 

Thanks in advance if you take the time out of your day to read my work!  


Here is the link: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YPdpJ\_G6B5Dc1-86larTMEPQV0eKmcynIjHqcxIHwCc/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YPdpJ_G6B5Dc1-86larTMEPQV0eKmcynIjHqcxIHwCc/edit?usp=sharing) So while I’m working on a stand-alone book, I thought I’d share the concept for what I was working on before but ultimately put “on hold” because I wanted to take the time to become a better writer and as well as publish a few works that were lower risk to get my foot in the door. I ultimately do want to return to this concept in the future; however that won’t be for at least another few years. So, consider this a super early “Looking for critiques” thread! 

The origin story is pretty simple; a divine pantheon ends up having to watch over and care for a mortal species and watches them come to realize despite their mortality; their potential and skills are vast. Debate surges within said pantheon as to what to do with said mortals and it leads to these deities killing each other in an event known as “The Divine War”.

Said incident concludes in a stalemate, however while there were once an unnamed number of these divine beings, now just a handful remain. 

Millions of mortals caught in the crossfire as the beings they worship as gods are all waring with one another and it leads to division that impacts the main mortal species for centuries on end.

Fearful that these deities would declare war on one another once again, one of said gods (who would be considered their “Dark Lord” despite being more Chaotic Neutral than Chaotic Evil) granted a single mortal immense amount of power to serve as a sort of guardian for mortal-kind. However, there is a catch; should another mortal slay said guardian, that mortal would take their place as the next guardian. Yes, I know the similarities to the Shardblades in The Stormlight Archive and The Elder Wand in Harry Potter. 

However, the end result of such is one big game of reverse-tag where although one is granted divine powers to serve as a guardian against unwarranted divine wrath, they must also constantly watch over their shoulder for any mortal that may be avaricious enough to tempt god-like power. 

There were a set of goals in mind when I came up with this concept;

1. Apply Pro-Wrestling Style story-telling tactics to a fantasy setting; 

The closest that did such would probably be how in A Song of Ice and Fire; there really is no core protagonist or antagonist, characters change from being more heroic to more villainous based on perception and their own moral codes and most of the characters involved are pursuing the same thing, yet only one can have it. As a pretty big fan of New Japan Pro-Wrestling, I’ve always loved the way their performers tell stories through choreographed fights and tell so much with just mannerisms, changes in spots or points in a match among other subtle details and wondered how I could incorporate the core concept of these characters pursuing the same goal only to realize that just one can obtain it add magic, life and death stakes and the over looming threat of divine wrath and that’s kind of how the idea came to be. 

• Having a recurring series I can always come back to; 

I’ll be straight up and admit that I’m more of a gardener than an architect when it comes to my writing style. I only go into the core of a writing with a few set ideas, scenes and character arcs and let everything come together with time and improv. Call me “not doing it right” if you want, but I’ve gone out of the way to never try and break the natural flow of a character’s arch until I at least started writing the second draft. And therefor, I’d have no exact plan for it to be just a one-off or a trilogy yet no exact number of books in mind. Rather, seeing how many different plot-lines I can do with one core set-up. 

• Timeline; 

One of the ideas I had when thinking of the concept was the potential of starting out in a traditional Medieval Fantasy setting but, as the series goes on (since said guardian would be ageless as a result of the powers granted to them, so one could potentially witness so much of history if they played their cards correctly with this) could progress as far as a setting similar to the Powdermage series or if I get far enough; have it all conclude with a setting that’s more akin to Blade Runner, Final Fantasy or Mistborn. 

• Starting power.

More of a long-term goal and a bit of a reach for a writer who’s more of a gardener like myself; but even if I never do reach goal number 3, the big goal would be to try and write to where someone could start at whichever book in the series and still be able to understand what’s going on or the context that lies within.

I know this post is long, but I felt like sharing this concept will help me when I decide that I’m ready to re-visit it. I am very much open to criticism or quips and queries on the subject matter of the concept.WARNING: If you have a fear of bugs, specifically ants, avoid this post.

Coming up with a race for my next novel project, one of the primary themes throughout is along the lines of "What makes a monster?" I would love feedback on the physical design of them, and also if anyone could come up with a nice name for them I would love that lol.

As they are based on a variety of ants, there are a few variants in the species that have their own unique look. For a general base to build off of, they are large ants whose exoskeletons have gained a slight humanoid shift. Without further ado, here are the variants:

* Monarch: Each nest of these creatures has a singular Monarch who functions similar to a queen bee or queen ant, spending their entire life time laying eggs. Visually speaking I am planning on going heavily off of the xenomorph queen from the Alien franchise.
* Builders: Builders have large yellow/orange sacks coming from around their throat, and have the ability to spray out a rapidly hardening foam which is used to build structures for the nest. I'm thinking of having a hose-like appendage coming from their mouth which is where the fluid will spray from. 
* Jumpers: Have far more legs than their fellow variants and can launch themselves into the air for scouting purposes. They essentially condense themselves like a spring and fire off into the air. 
* Gorgers: They have large, almost ape like front limbs which they walk around on, and an additional set of arms around their mouth used as mandibles. Gorges eat most organic material and then secret a paste that the rest of the variants eat, much like how honey bees produce honey to feed to drones and larva.
* Seeders: A parasitic variant and the only variant beyond the Monarch that can lay eggs. Heavily inspired by parasitic wasps as the seeder will hide inside and control a host.

They communicate primarily via pheromones like most insects as opposed to having a defined language. However, by consuming the hormones of another creature they can access portions of that creature's memory, which can include but is not limited to learning their language and how to speak it, roughly. The more they consume the more knowledge they could gain. However, the knowledge has all the biases and perspectives of the individual they received it from. For instance, if one were to feed off of you, it could vaguely speak whatever languages you speak, but it would use the same diction as you and make the same mistakes i.e. if you have a stutter it would too. 

They also have a pseudo religion. That is the term they use for it as there isn't a true comparison for how they view the dynamic, or at least not a term they have been exposed to yet. Each nest of the bug creatures will typically be in a symbiotic relationship with a mystic snake creature referred to as a Naga. They praise the Naga's because they are egotistical and simply enjoy the attention, and occasionally inject themselves with venom from the Nagas as different types of Nagas can transfer different blessings through their venom. The Nagas prey on the natural predators of the bug creatures, so the Nagas are essentially just using them as bait.Sci fi?

Humans became capable of FTL travel at the dawn of the 23rd century. The debate of terraforming arose only when contact with native life happened. The Gaians supported terraforming and focused solely on uninhabited planets. The Sons of Haephesut became the Galaxy’s humanitarian aid, building colonies without sacrificing the integrity of the planet.

~
Chapter 1
~

7am. The lights switched on and a cheerful tone began to play. Pol yawned and stretched, rubbing his eyes before reaching for his glasses. “Stop” he said, sitting up. The cheerful tone stopped. Rummaging through clothes, Pol listened to the weather and news. The newly installed spaceport in Bodika had increased rainfall, but today was sunny. While Pol was showering, the AI pinged, reminding him that today was field trip day.

The shuttle was waiting for Pol when he opened the door. He stepped inside, nodding to the three other people on board. His was the second to last stop before school. The shuttle glided along the roads, only shuddering slightly when it came to a halt in front of the last stop. The door hissed open and a young boy climbed in, nodding to Pol and smiling at another passenger. The short journey was punctuated by the last boy and his friend’s laughter. Trying not to feel envious, Pol scrolled through Trito, the planet’s social media network. Videos of dogsharks doing tricks were common, but the occasional rant about new installations and the weather changes were a welcome respite.

The shuttle juddered to a halt in front of the school, a small group of buildings just outside city centre. All 5 children alighted, going their separate ways with purpose. Pol walked towards the largest building, containing the main hall and cafeteria. Abel was waiting at the front of the main hall, a table of ration bars and bottled water beside him. “Pol! Glad you could make it!” He smiled, gesturing to the table, “take what you need, today will be busy!”

“Thanks, Abel” Pol mumbled, grabbing three ration bars and a bottle of water. The teacher insisted on his first name being used, and it always felt awkward. They sat together for a while, occasionally greeting classmates that were arriving for the trip. Once the whole class had appeared, Abel slapped his knees and stood up. “Are we all ready?” He asked, addressing the small group of bored teens. No response, but he knew they would follow him to the shuttle as he strode off. 

The shuttle ride was a long one, going way past the city limits, past the old disused hab domes, all the way out to a structure in the middle of the desert. It was a hulking thing, crude and primal. The shuttle stopped and the class approached on foot, Abel and Pol leading the group. Others hung back in groups, chatting and Vidding with friends and family. The structure grew in both size and detail as the group drew closer. It was an early gen hab unit, Pol realised. The lumps and bumps were the environmental control generators. One for oxygen, one for water purification, one for rad filtering and one for backup. It was old and rusted, but still standing.

A young woman was stood at the doors, waiting for them. “Here for the tour?” She asked Abel, checking her intranet bookings. Abel nodded, and raised his palms, hushing the group. Pol, who hadn’t made a sound until now, suddenly felt the urge to cough. “This is sacred ground” Abel said “we must respect this place, so I will ask for no vidding inside” cue an annoyed groan from the class “but” Abel continued “photos are permitted” and with that, he turned to the young woman, who pulled a card from her pocket to show everyone. “This! Is a macro card. It was used over 450 years ago by the first settlers” she pressed it against the door and a tone emitted as it swung open. “These were early prototypes of our nanocards” she continued “multiple cards would be needed for just one facility! Luckily this is a Skeleton key management programmed” she turned and stepped into the old hab unit, clearly expecting to be followed.

Pol was blown away by the hab unit, both it’s size and complexity were astounding, despite how crude it seemed to modern tech. There were rooms and rooms of bunk beds laid in rows, kitchens big enough to feed an army, a gym with rusting equipment, and common areas that looked as if the inhabitants had just left for a day trip. A book lay on the table, MADE ON EARTH stamped into the leather. The woman held the book up for all to see. “This is a relic! Discovered not long after the colony was established, after sorting through the Pioneer’s belongings.”

“What is it?” A student piped up. Pol rolled his eyes. They had books on Triton, just the ones made with synthetic paper. The young woman blinked, not expecting such a dumb question. “It’s a book!” She said brightly, “filled with first hand accounts of the startup of the colony!” She gently opened the cover and showed the class, “and look! Real paper made from real trees! Has anyone here been to Earth?” She asked desperately.
“I went for my PhD! There was a garden with trees dating back to the 20th century!” Abel offered, not bothering to contain his pride. The woman nodded, smiling gratefully at the teacher. “Earth is the beginning of humanity, and is a set example of the conditions for people to thrive” she continued, holding up the book, “now, who wants to hear an excerpt from the diary?” She looked up to more hands than she had estimated. She smiled wider and motioned for everyone to sit down.

Pol sat cross legged, taking small bites of his ration bar as the audio-story continued, telling of feats of bravery and ingenuity on the frontier of a barren planet. Water had been pressurised into comets and sent towards the network of planets needing it, with Earth at the top of that list. The standards to become an astronaut had lowered considerably since Mars had been officially terraformed in 2496, and it was Pol’s biggest dream. Tuning back into the audio-story, Pol listened to another hour of the thoughts of a Pioneer. They were mostly about how the food was gross and the person on the bunk below grinds their teeth at night.

There were moments in between where they described going outside the unit. The pressure suits were stuffy and uncomfortable on the crotch; a comment that was met with laughter from the teens. Other HabUnits were described to be dotted around the landscape, none of which were still standing. The diary entries ended on the 1st of January, 2608, with the Pioneer leaving this diary behind for the next wave of Pioneers. Pol shook his head as if waking from a trance, his messy brown hair bouncing over his glasses. Standing and stretching a little, the tour guide clapped her hands. “Now! If you want to hear more, I’ll be giving your teacher the link to our site. There’s one last stop on our tour, though” she turned and gestured to a doorway.

The door whirred open to reveal an open hangar, a large contraption at one end and a viewing area, filled with tourists from all over Triton at the other. Pol squinted through his glasses “is that… an ice launcher?!” He said in awe. Abel smiled and nodded before raising his hands to gain the class’ attention. “We have a reservation here for today’s ice launch to Eris. Please stay in our cordoned area, as this is a dangerous work site. Do you understand?” He said in a measured tone. Everyone nodded solemnly.

The ice launch was spectacular. The pressurised comet was loaded onto the sling and the structure extended upwards, building tension in both the cords and the audience’s stomachs. A tone sounded over the speakers. “Welcome to our 175th ice launch! This comet will be sent through our deep space network to Eris. Please stay inside the corded areas to avoid injury and death. GaiaCorp cannot accept any responsibility for death, dismemberment and/or injury. The countdown will begin soon. Thank you for your custom!” A cheerful woman’s voice sounded tinny and shrill over the old tannoy system, making her statement sound slightly sinister. Pol took a deep breath and focused on the screen showing the live feed of the event he was at. The tone sounded again.

“Stand by for launch in 10… 9… 8… 7… 6… 5… 4… 3… 2… 1… Launch.”Hi all! I'm nearing completion of my first fantasy novel and I'm hoping to get some feedback on the best way to start the story. Currently I have an epigraph before chapter one, but I'm wondering if I should keep it? Here's the epigraph, and for contrast I'm also including the first bit of chapter one. I would also love any overall feedback on either bit!

Epigraph:

>*As long as there have been stories, there have been stories of magic. Tales of men and women performing extraordinary feats - things beyond any natural or scientific explanation. Movement from one side of the continent to the other in an instant. Monumental storms appearing suddenly on a clear day. Entire villages spontaneously erupting in flames. Limbs that have been missing since birth re-growing. These stories make it sound like magic could make anything possible. Most consider them silly tales only related by their fanciful ideas of an impossible life. But I have begun to notice patterns in these stories. Common threads and themes. Rules. If I can understand the rules then maybe I can bring magic back into our world.* 

&#x200B;

 Chapter One:

>*Yet another charlatan,* Bleddyn thought to himself, *at least this one is entertaining.*  
>  
>The magician was lit by a pale red glow from a tinted lantern. Shadows danced across the patrons’ faces as they sat enchanted, drowning the day’s miseries in cheap ale.  
>  
>The magician, who called herself Maia the Magnificent, hardly looked it. Her pale skin was complemented by a long, greying braid flecked with dust from travelling, and her clothes were likewise flecked with mud. The only magnificent thing about Maia was her bright red cloak.   
>  
>In fact, Maia’s cloak might be the most magical part of the entire show. The long, flowing garment danced and flowed as it produced wonders and curiosities from hidden pockets with every flourish. Bleddyn had to admit that it was impressive. Along with tricks Bleddyn had seen dozens of times, Maia had managed to manifest flame and light on command. Hidden flint and oil perhaps? Regardless, he was certain of one thing.  
>  
>*Her magic isn’t real.*Title says it all. 

Background: My story, I like to describe as X-men meets Hogwarts. It's modern fantasy set in fictional Virginia town. Magic and fantasy creatures exist, but hidden to larger society. Those in "the veil"(the world of magic), set up schools to teach kids how to use their abilities properly. The schools also take a few select few students and train them to fight against Eldritch beings. Its a short introduction to one character named Corbin. And before you ask, yes he was named after the movie. Also a running joke in the rest of the story. 

&#x200B;

 

This world was pure. Shandoa National Forest. “This is how life was meant to be.” thought Corbin. “I’ll enjoy this curse before it takes me.”, he said out loud to the woods. He sat as he stared at the rows of trees. He took the time to feel the wind on his face and sniff the breeze. He sighed hard as the wind died, removing the flow of sensation to him. His mind was lost in thought as he reached down to untie his boots. 

“*Corbin*”, said the radio on his backpack.

“Dad”, was his one word reply. 

“*Hey kid… do me a favor. Stay south of the Chansey river. We had another hiker disappear*.” 

“I’ll sniff them out.”, Corbin thought. At a young age he realized his senses were beyond most other people’s. Smell, hearing, then realizing he could see perfectly in the dark and that it wasn’t a common thing. After that, the changes happened. 

“Will do dad, I’m about 3 clicks southwest from the crossing now.”, he held on the radio as he pulled his socks off with his free hand.  

“*Thanks, be careful out there. Be back at the station at around 6, your mom has some news for you.*”

“I’ll be there”, Corbin said standing now barefoot. 

“*Good.. LeVerte out*”. 

Corbin laughed. “I wonder if he realizes his son is a *LeVerte* too.” Smiling Corbin looked down at his feet. He held his breath as he flexed his feet. His toes melted together, while the meat of his feet slowly expanded out. He took a breath as he observed the new form. Three toed claws, jutting from his now heavily padded feet. Wiggling his new toes, he looked at his hands. It was always a little unnerving for him to watch. Ring and pinky growing together, middle and index finger growing together; then morphing to thick skin with razor sharp claws along with the thumb growing out and shifting to the same. He opened and closed  his hands as his new clawed fingers took shape to loosen them up. He stared at his claws as he remembered the first time they changed as a child. He cried himself to sleep nightly for close to a month because he didn’t want to be a monster. 

“Time for fun, I’ll enjoy this while I still can.”, he said while sprinting forward toward the tree line. He jumped 6 feet in the air, and landed on the side of a tree. Using his claws as leverage he climbed effortlessly. Near the top he kicked back and sailed through the air landing on a large branch. Taking a few seconds to regain his balance, he then sprinted along. Leaping forward, he jumped and springboarded off the tree and sailed through the air towards another branch. He sunk his claws into the branch as he fell,  and swung underneath. Spinning his body around he perched up as he sniffed the air.  Being far above the forest floor he looked over the treeline, as he stood, still sniffing the air.  Stopping his normal routine of backflips and aerial maneuvers he stepped off the branch and allowed himself to fall naturally to the ground below. The smell. It smelled salty, and of death. It smelled like fear manifested. 

“That’s it, that’s what happened to the hikers.”, he said to the trees. Against better judgment he went deeper in the woods to follow this scent of fear.Edit: Revised draft here [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VPDD-uohVe5acQKKD-oVz-UVK\_zGsIRH9SXni\_aBo8c/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VPDD-uohVe5acQKKD-oVz-UVK_zGsIRH9SXni_aBo8c/edit?usp=sharing)  


Sylas awoke to the smell of bacon. “Breakfast is ready, you lazy freeloader!” A gruff voice shouted up the stairs. Sylas rolled off the bed, and unceremoniously fell face-first to the floor. The first few moments of consciousness tended to be rough for the guy. A morning almost never passed where Sylas had the forethought or coordination to get out of bed with his feet on the floor. Thankfully, Sylas had the bright idea to pad his fall with pillows the night before.

After remembering his bipedal tendencies, Sylas stood up, and walked out of his bedroom, down the stairs, and into the kitchen. “Good morning, sleepy head.” His mother spoke in her usual cheerful voice, with a bright smile on her face. She was a tall woman with long, curly, brown hair that reached halfway down her back. Her hair was adorned with a crown of white and pink flowers, and she was wearing a green ceremonial robe.

“Good morning ma’, good morning pa’” Sylas replied, sitting down next to a plate of eggs, bacon, and toast. “The garb is unusual. Big day today?”

“Yeah, thanks for noticing! It’s so nice when people notice my efforts.” She replied, still smiling, but staring intensely at Sylas’s father. He shrugged, and went back to eating. “A horde of some unidentified species has been sighted. The village elders wanted to arrange a meeting with their resident druid.” She finished, and took a bite of her salad. The same salad she ate every meal of every day.

Sylas’s father grabbed a piece of bacon, and pointed it in the general direction of his mother. “You sure you don’t want some? Eating nothing but plants every day can’t be good for you.”

“Honey, I don’t know why you keep asking. You know most druids have to abstain from eating meat. And you’re one to talk. At least I don’t eat rocks every day.”

“Minerals, Mary. Only Rocks I’ve eaten were back when I was a boy. And you know it’s necessary. I Can’t use my stone-skin without them.”

"Don’t you mean mineral-skin? And you were eating rocks before you knew it was related to your powers."

“Well yes, but in my defense, I was a dumb kid.”

Their banter lasted a few more minutes before Sylas finished his breakfast and decided it was time to go. He grabbed an extra slice of toast before heading towards the door. Before he could leave, his mother stopped him. “Don’t you leave without a hug!” She said, squeezing him until his eyes began to bulge, and he tapped uncle. “Say hello to the kids for me”, his father said.

The sun beamed down on Sylas as he walked towards the village’s school. Norbury village was mostly just a bunch of farms and houses in a two mile radius in the plains of Ostea. To the East was the Ostea-Kyhun river, which defined the border between the two countries of its name-sake. To the West was the Almer forest. To the south were various villages, the closest being about a four day walk from Norbury. About a week to the north was the city of Aurelia. Sylas had been there once before, but hadn’t traveled much. It’s usually too risky to leave the village as a Powerless.

Sylas arrived at Norbury school half an hour after leaving his home. A few of the staff, Johnson’s parents, were setting up a stage for the graduation ceremony later this week. It was rather rare that anyone ever bothered. There was no graduation ceremony between school years, and almost nobody made it all the way to graduation. Most people left the school when they gained their powers, either to start adventuring or specialized lessons, and that typically happened to humans when they were ten years old. Sylas was already 18, and the chances of gaining powers at his age were slim. Of his class of 20, only he and Johnson were Powerless, and Johnson was born of two other Powerless parents. In a low mana density area such as Norbury village, it's not all that common for two Powerless parents to produce another Powerless offspring. Two powered individuals producing a Powerless offspring was uncommon, though.

Sylas headed through the crowds of 5-9 year olds and arrived at his fencing class, stopping once to loosen his boot. The instructor wasn't there yet, but some of the kids were. Thankfully, Johnson was there too. Not that Sylas was too thankful, but the kids were. If John wasn't here, one of the younger kids would have to spar with Sylas, and he took some minor amount of pleasure in winning against opponents weaker than him, though he'd never admit it.

"Hey Sylas. How's it going?" Joseph asked

"Same as any other day, I guess. I saw your parents setting up the graduation booth just outside. It's almost time for us to say goodbye to this place." Sylas paused. "Or at least me. Are you still planning on becoming a teacher like them?"

"Yeah. It's not like there's many other jobs available for Powerless like us. It's the only thing in the village that doesn’t basically require a relevant power. Unless of course I plan to become a freeloader like you."

"Hey now, you know I spend most afternoons and weekends tending the fields."

"Yeah, but your mother could do what you do in a day with the snap of her fingers. The only reason she doesn't is because she doesn’t want you to feel like you’re completely useless."

Sylas gritted his teeth. Johnson wasn't wrong, but belittling his efforts seemed unnecessary. It wasn’t like Sylas could become a teacher too. Years of dealing with classmates half his age has shown him that he didn’t have nearly enough patience to deal with kids all his life.

"You'll pay for that comment once we start sparring, dick."

"I'd like to see you try." Johnson grinned

10 minutes later, the fencing instructor arrived. As usual, Sylas and Johnson were paired up. They both donned their masks, grabbed their foils, headed to the piste, and the moment the instructor called for the spar to begin, they engaged.

Sylas aimed straight for John’s face with the first lunge. John tilted his head a few inches, dodging the point, and took a step forward, stabbing at Sylas’s torso. Sylas couldn’t retract his sword arm fast enough to parry the attack. Instead, he stepped left and shifted his torso just enough to dodge the blow, and palmed Johnson’s arm away with his other hand. Sylas retracted his sword arm as he twisted, and turned back the other way, going for a thrust at Johnson’s chest. Johnson blocked from below, and forcefully deflected the strike upwards. With both their foils still above their heads, Sylas used the opportunity to kick at Johnson's stomach. Johnson jumped back before the kick landed, blunting the impact. He then grabbed onto Sylas’s boot, and twisted. Before Sylas fell, he pulled his foot out from the boot and rolled to the side, off the piste. Before Sylas could recover from the roll though, Johnson had already stabbed him in the back of the head, winning the match.

The instructor glared daggers at Sylas for his numerous rule violations, but years of dealing with the boy’s antics had shown him that calling the boy out on it would do nothing. He would do them again in a heartbeat if he thought it meant he had won the fight, disqualification be damned. “Sylas, Try to aim for center mass when engaging. Too easy to dodge otherwise. And make sure not to show your back to the enemy, especially when you’re still in their range.” The instructor called. “Johnson, textbook work there. I know it’s not easy to fight someone who doesn’t abide by the rules, but I’m sure fighting Sylas all these years has helped with that. Good fight.”

A few hours of bouts and exercises later, the class was dismissed, and Sylas headed for his other class of the day: history. A few minutes into the lecture, Sylas’s eyes glazed over. Sylas hadn’t paid much attention to that particular class in years, claiming that there was no point in a Powerless who would never be able to leave the village in learning about what happened in other cities and countries centuries ago.

\---

3 hours later

\---

Sylas arrived at his family’s farm. Today, his task was to care for the Ostean Giant Flytraps. Swarm season was upon them, and his mother had spoken at great lengths about the importance of keeping the pests from her fields. She handled the watering and general upkeep, so all Sylas had to do was empty the flytraps. The swarm greatly outnumbered the flytraps’ capacity to hold them, and when a trap closed, it usually took a week or two before it opened again. If they weren’t emptied, the fields would be overrun with locusts, curious children, and other pests within a week.

Sylas dropped his backpack and grabbed a notebook labeled “encyclopedia”, and turned to the page for Ostean Giant Flytraps. Since Sylas’s mother was a druid, he kept a notebook on every species he encountered, and wrote whatever knowledge he had on them. He had hoped that it would aid in him gaining powers like his mother, but nothing ever came of it. His hope had died, but the habit had not.

‘*Ostean Giant Fly Trap:*

*Size: averages 3 feet tall and 6 feet wide*

*The Ostean giant flytrap is a domesticated and magically altered species of flytrap created by crossbreeding the Kyhun Giant Snaptrap, the Ostean pitfalltrap, and several other similar plants. The Ostean Giant Flytrap produces a sweet and acidic substance that attracts, sticks to, and dissolves most tiny insects. For larger insects and other species, the hair-like teeth are usually enough to capture its prey.*

*Although the teeth will not puncture human skin, small children may become trapped by them, should they be dumb enough to climb inside.*

*Ostean giant flytraps can be emptied by pouring a basic solution into their mouths. This will neutralize their acid, and cause them to open.*

*Ostean Giant Flytraps are considered a delicacy in some areas. It is usually wise to neutralize them beforehand, though.*

’

Sylas finished the passage and took out a jug of baking soda diluted in water, and a broom from his pack. He then spent the next few hours pouring the mixture into each trap, then sweeping out the dissolved insect slurry. He was most of the way done when he heard a weak voice from one of the closed traps. “Help, please! I’m stuck!” it cried.

Sighing, Sylas walked over, and just before pouring the solution into the trap, he paused. a sadistic smile creeped onto his face. “Hey kid, are you in there?”

“YES, yes, I’m in here. Please save me!”

“You know, you’re not supposed to be on this property. I’m fairly certain your thrashing around in there killed the plant. The owner does not appreciate her property being trespassed, nor ki”

“I’m sorry, I’m sorry! Please let me out.”

“I don’t want to hear sorry. I just want to know you’ll never be back here again. Otherwise, I’ll just leave you in there.”

“I won’t! I’ll never come back so long as I live.”

“Promise?”

“I Promise!”

Sylas poured a good amount of the jug into the plant and over the kid. When it began to open, Sylas yanked the boy out, and checked him for acid burns. Thankfully, the damage wasn’t bad. Sylas stuck a thumb over his shoulder and spoke “exit’s that way.” The boy ran, without uttering so much as a thanks.

Sylas stared at the corpse of the flytrap. Given the area it was in, Sylas was fairly certain he had been the one to plant this a few months back. ‘Explains the dislike for children’ Sylas chuckled. ‘Wow, I really need therapy. Hopefully a mind-mage comes by the village one of these days.’

Sylas’s stomach grumbled. He had skipped lunch that day, and since his parents were out for the day, he had to make his own dinner. Thankfully, it seemed the main course was right in front of him.

Sylas dragged the flytrap to a clearing, and grabbed some salt and firewood to cook it with. After an hour of prep-work and cooking, Sylas took his first bite. The outer skin was crispy, and the inner flesh was soft and juicy. It tasted sweet, salty, and slightly sour, almost like pork belly cooked with pineapple, but with a good deal of earthiness to it.

Sylas stood up to go back home when he stumbled. He looked down, and found his limbs to be shrinking and turning green. His consciousness blurred. His eyes shut and dissolved into his face. His mouth rapidly grew outside of his head, until it was as large as he was. He screamed, his scream turning to a hiss, his hiss turning to a gargle, and his gargle turning to silence.  


Edit: revised draft here [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VPDD-uohVe5acQKKD-oVz-UVK\_zGsIRH9SXni\_aBo8c/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VPDD-uohVe5acQKKD-oVz-UVK_zGsIRH9SXni_aBo8c/edit?usp=sharing)    
I did this a while ago but I don't know if it looks good or bad and I want the opinion of third parties.

From the time she was a child, Irune was taught the history of her world and how dangerous it could be to explore beyond the walls that protect the kingdom of Minetri. Now, with the disappearance of her father and the growing winter, Irune will be forced to enter the darkness of the forest, beyond what she could have ever imagined, discovering along the way fragments of her unknown past and the relationship that these memories they keep with Basgar, the current crown prince, unraveling with their actions, a web of lies that encompasses much more than her own life, questioning everything she once believed. 

A new threat has begun to appear on the horizon; The danger of a growing war has begun to corrupt the pillars that support the kingdom of man, and now, from the ashes of the fallen races, an ancient enemy has arisen ready to eradicate everything in his path in order to fulfill his broken promises.This is the first part of a short story I am working on, please let me know if you have any comments, I'm happy to receive any type of feedback.

" The wind blew strong and cold as day became night. Icy rocks, covered in snow, filled the frozen lake, surrounded by dead trees, almost being ripped out of the ground by the harsh and cruel wind..."

click on the link for full story:

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hZm\_2-gyIbyfqGqKsBc6HvTE8AI8M1QQR9tO\_gUFcpc/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hZm_2-gyIbyfqGqKsBc6HvTE8AI8M1QQR9tO_gUFcpc/edit?usp=sharing)

Let me know if you want to see what happens in part 2Hi guys... My stories come from dreams I have. I've always had a bizarre imagination. Let me know what you think. Enjoy!

Click the link below for the story:

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gtrglZDi7OcLR4B7rZ8UY-0rTkueJLwOjkyLqbRcvDs/edit?usp=sharing A fine autumn evening. Trees looked lifeless, dry leaves scattered around everywhere. A soft breeze.

There were quite a few dwellings around me. Not many, the place seemed to be scarce in populus.

My black robe, thin and light, was floating mid-air, as I was strolling through.

I wasn’t in the best condition. Torn rags were hiding beneath that robe, and a rusty old blade.

I saved some money to buy some good clothes, and a better blade.

Strolling and looking around for a place to buy garments.

It was a quiet and mountainous region, with some paved ways here and there.

I found one!

“Finally!”

I walked right in, and found a man sitting there casually, drinking his booze.

There wasn’t much to the building. A decent signboard, and some garments here and there inside.

“Which one, young man?” He said, as he rose from his seat, and placed his boze aside.

“I’m not much into fashion, something cheap and durable will do.” I responded.

“Oh, don’t worry! I’ll get you something that suits you.”

“Very much appreciated!” 

“I’ll first take your measurements!” He said and came up to me, with his measuring tape. He smelled reeks of booze.

“Do you regularly have customers?” I asked, as he was busy measuring my waist.

“No son, you see… There aren’t many people here. Everyone’s leaving to ascend… I’m an old man… I can’t ascend… so I’m here for the rest of my life. You seem to be someone new. Where are you from?”

“I’m ascending, from the first Vestigial Initially.”

“Oh! There! I’ve heard the situation there is getting worse everyday, from some other people like yourself. You're a lucky young man!” He said as he walked away in search of some garments for me.

“Yeah it sure is.” I said, masking my sorrow.

A few moments of silence followed, and he was back with some clothes with him.

“Try them!” he said, as he passed on some blue garments and a new black robe to me.

“Oh! I’m pleased, how much will it be?”

“Oh… um… two-hundred son.”

It was unreasonable, but I felt sorry for him. I paid the price he named, and walked out with some great new clothes on me.

I hoped to buy a better blade, but to my dismay; The place had very few people, and none were making weapons.

I decided to look for one after I ascended to the fourth Vestigia. Titled 'Before We Burn.' I've had this idea down for a while, and have been meaning to start writing another fantasy novel for a while but feel like I have cracked this short story. Just looking for feedback to see if this is something worth exploring or if I should focus on my novel. Would appreciate any and all feedback. 

The story starts with Helen daydreaming, she sits atop the great pyramid. Polished stone beneath her feet, open-air in front of her for as far as the sky touches.  Fresh air blowing through her nostrils, she is free. In front of her, standing not on stone but on the air itself is Paris. He offers her his hand, and she hesitates.. She looks down, hundreds of feet of pure nothingness ending in solid stone. She trusts him, she takes his hand and instead of falling… she flies. She looks beneath her, people, civilization going to work, craftsman doing the job of gods, kids playing in the market streets, lovers on dates, poor living conditions, kings getting fat and squabbling amongst themselves… and war, bloody war. She sees horrors out of this world, rivers run with blood, famine, diseased refugees fleeing their tribes. She sees;’s herself and Paris as above it all. 

She awakes at a small island named Cranae, their final day in Greece before setting sail to Troy. The last day of their grand escape. What follows is a minor representation for Helen and Paris of what’s to come, the horrors they bring to their average man. What their love does, their corruptive love. The night before, they caught a soldier belonging to Agamemnon at Rocky Island. Not only the soldier but his tragically young son as well, who is just old enough to travel and only went because of his fascination with Egypt. They were guiding merchants to Egypt on a trading mission, kind of like bodyguards. Helen knows this man, and would even consider him a beloved friend. Back when Helen was a child just after her father, King Tyndareus,  died, this soldier was one of the only men to ever show her basic kindness. He treated her like the child she was, not a throne, not a way to get resources. Maybe it’s because he was so lowly he never saw a chance with her, in no world could he ever get her hand, so he just ignored the promise, he treated her as his fellow man. Especially in Mycenaen times, this attitude towards noblewomen was nearly non-existent, they were treated as untouchable gods. 

But, despite that, this man poses a threat not only to the Trojans resting there but to Helen herself. Despite their relationship, this man is still loyal to Agamemnon, and honor compels him to tell Agamemnon the truth, at least this is what the Trojans staunchly believe.  The story that follows, is all about Helen and Paris deciding this man and his son’s fate while once again reconciling their grand choice. Their escape wasn’t a spur-of-the-moment decision, it had a ton of moving parts. They had to be confident in both of their choices, and this is just a final argument sort of thing. This is the place where their love, and fate, are cemented. The prospect of killing this innocent man becomes immediate between Paris and his soldiers, with Helen being the only intervening voice. She wants to let him go, Paris warns her of the consequences. “It’s not my safety I’m concerned with, it’s yours.” Paris’ main concern is that this soldier now knows Helen WILLINGLY fled Sparta, there’s no way she could ever say she was brought against her will. This soldier could flee and tell Menelaus, and then spread his story to the rest of the soldiers of the Mycenaeans. This takes away a safety net for Helen if Menelaus finds out, if Troy loses the following war Helen’s head is gone. That’s, unfortunately, the reality for unfaithful women in this time and region, a fact that makes Paris pretty uncomfortable considering his society views women as equal to men in many respects. Mycenae and Menelaus need to believe that Helen was kidnapped against her will, it saves her life. 

There also comes the prospect of going back to Sparta, and this becomes a strong possibility in Helen’s mind. Paris doesn’t reject it, he loves her and wants her to be nothing but safe. He does say, this is her last chance. After Rocky Island, there’s Troy… and once they reach those lands, there’s no turning back. Nothing. She has a daughter in Sparta she dearly misses, friends she would love to see again. She has a life she feels still attached to, despite that life harming her at every turn. She just doesn’t know and is in an in-between. There are multiple “final choice” talks, where Helen constantly looks back to the mountainous mainland,  deciding whether or not her love for Paris outweighs her love for her countrymen, her love for her own life, her responsibility to make sure suffering never shows itself through these lands to the people she cherishes.

While she contemplates, she has a conversation with this soldier. “You’re probably wondering why on earth I’d ever do this, something this selfish.”

“I know exactly why you did it, and I understand.”

Helen questions why he treated her so nicely, like how her father used to, like a human being. Goes into how even her friends abandoned her after she became queen, she became isolated. But not him, he still played games with her, he told her stories when she was bored, he looked out for Helen. 

“A little girl that just watched her father die, living in the same walls, the same bed, as the ones responsible for his death. Yes, I take pity on that poor soul, whether or not she knew she was living with the culprits”  What they did to you is a torture that isn’t found anywhere else in this ethos. Not even the Gods with all their wisdom and creative thinking could come up with a punishment that cruel.”

Helen is heartbroken. Her world has been shattered, she never considered the idea that Agamemnon was responsible for her father's death. But it makes so much sense… she feels horrible, she feels guilt, anger, but also… stupidity. How she never considered the option, how she knew how terrible Agamemnon was but never considered the possibility he’d do something that evil. She watched this man skin babies alive for the sake of the ‘realm’ but never considered his evil would touch her. In an attempt to somewhat stay in the past Helen says something to the effect of:

“he died of illness”

“I find that extremely unlikely.” a quick rebuttal. The solider explains the strategic significance of Sparta, and how Agamemnon is a conqueror at heart who has in many situations toppled local governments to achieve what he wants. His regime has done far worse than poison a king, Agamemnon will do anything to ensure his family curse is broken and seeks nothing but to control the entire world. 

“Why do you tell me this now? Why aren’t you honor-bound to those secrets?”

“A confession from a dead man can’t be treasonous, especially when the confession is morally justified” The right thing matters now.  War isn’t now,  its in the future.  Protecting secrets is in the past, what is in the present moment is your well-being, that’s the only thing I can help aid.” 

Helen confronts Paris, with all the anger years of having a dead father can boil. “Please, please tell me this is all real. I’m not some part of a cruel scheme, this isn’t for my power, the name I hold, the blood in my veins, my money. Tell me you love me, that the last month hasn’t been some fairy tale I’ve been dumb enough to believe. Tell me you mean it when you kiss me, when our hands touch it isn’t just me that feels like I’m no longer mortal. Tell me you feel like nothing else exists when you look into my eyes. I need this to be real, please assure me you mean what comes out of your poetic mouth. 

Paris tells her he’s meant it, he asked a god for true love years ago and somehow… fucking somehow that wish came true, he’s found the woman he loves and all he wants to do is show her a world where she climbed to the top of it, where she can be the person she wants, he doesn’t just want to be with her, he wants to watch her excel at being herself, he wants to watch her change the world. “The way you look at me, that’s all I want, and that’s all I’ll ever need.”

They embrace, and the choice is made. She is going to Troy, and if that means the death of the man and his son… she’s sorry for it. But she’s made her choice, it’s her and Paris against the world if it has to be. 

After, a compromise is made. The son is taken as a hostage, and the man is told to return to his normal duties. Both are maddened, enraged. But the father understands it's out of his control, his temper clearly doesn’t subdue, but it’s out of his hands… when it comes to dealing with royalty, it’s always out of his hands. The cost of war has already shown its true face here, and it’s forced a family to be ripped apart. The son is dragged off to be a hostage of Troy, and the father will spend the next decade trying to find his son. Before their final embrace, the father tries his best to assure his son it’s for the best. He assures him this won’t be the last time they see each other, and he can't wait to see the man who grows to be. He will find his son, at all costs. 

As Helen and Paris sail off, Helen reassures the boy he is safe. They both share a love for Egypt. Both say they hope to be there together someday, with his father. Helen says she’ll take the boy, they can stand atop the Great Pyramid together. She loves its history, how it’s something that will always exist throughout the ages. The great pyramid will witness the end of the world. She marvels in the culture, the art, the architecture, she loves it all. The boy smiles. In front of the three, sits an ocean of possibilities.I've linked the piece.

One of my characters is a smart criminal, and she is trying to negotiate whilst there is a magical truth teller character in play. Basically I just want to know if her trick/negotiation is realistic and would work or if it just kind if falls flat and feels forced. It's a very rough iteration but I really want to know how it seems.

Thank you :) 

[link here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gyLqiC1SWGEhI7QdZzNbUeXbJFcNYjqASr53__nTMyo/edit?usp=drivesdk)Want to be held accountable by the community or just brag about/celebrate your writing progress over the last week? If so, you're welcome to respond to this weekly writing check-in thread. Feel free to tell us what you accomplished this week, or set goals about what you hope to accomplish before next Wednesday!

**So, who met their goals? Who found themselves tackling something totally unexpected? Who accomplished something (even something small)? What goals have you set for yourself, this week?**

_______________________________________________________________________________

*Note:* **This check-in is open for you to promote your work!** If you have a book/story/blog serial etc. that you want to share, this is the place to do so. You may include links, but be sure to write a few words as well!I'm writing a fantasy story that revolves around Gods, Spiritual Warriors, Spirit Worlds, various Spirit Creatures and a lot more. But I'm here to talk about the Main Character. 

The MC is a fictional version of me (Self-Insert) Is he a Marry Sue? In my opinion. No. But it's up to you to decide. (I'm open for criticism just don't be an a-hole about it)

The MC isn't all powerful, all knowing, or just completely invulnerable to mistakes. He doesn't handle every sitiuation perfectly, sometimes he needs help or just can't do it depending on what it is. 

In the beginning of the story, he awakens in hell. The reason why is because he tried to kill some people because of what they did to him. Fast forwarding past hell (if you want to know a little more about it lemme know) He tries to kill them again, this time succeeding. From here, he becomes a vigilante/serial killer. 

He kills bad people, primarily pedophiles. The two people he killed first, sexually assaulted him at a young age. Which is why he primarily targets pedophiles with zero exceptions and believes He's right in doing so. 

To sum up

He's a revenge driven (psychopath I guess) that'll kill anyone he deems bad according to his morals, and without any exception. Friend, Family, Celeb, Male or Female. And he believes he has every right to "put them down permanently" thus sending them to hell, a place he has access to. (For more context on how he has access to hell simply lemme know)

That's it for now. Any opinions? 

Along dark and empty plains, a tall man rode his horse-drawn wagon down a desolate dirt road. The horse walked in slow, labored steps, occasionally letting out high pitched whines. The man spoke to comfort the horse as she walked. 

"Easy, old girl, you're doing a wonderful job, it won't be much longer" the man said, gently. 

Thunder roared through the air, as lightning danced in the sky, a small bolt of lightning struck a tree near the road. The horse stood on her hind legs with a loud neigh. The man gently pulled on the reigns as the wagon began to shake. Eventually, the horse returned to her previous position once more, before continuing her slow and fearful walk. 

When the skies were calm, the road grew silent and still. Not a gust of wind, only the horse's footsteps and the turning of the wagon's wheels. The man unhooked his lantern from the wagon and unfolded his map. Holding the lantern over the map, the man studied it intensely. He traced a finger along a straight and long road, eventually ending in a fork. One way led to another long and empty length of road, the other a shorter stretch of road, leading to a large mountain. A short way onto the road, "Travellers' Pass" was written. After he finished studying his map, he began to search his bag in the dim light, eventually pulling out a sheet of paper. 

On the paper was a charcoal drawing of himself standing next  to a woman, she was holding a small girl with another girl standing in front of her. As he looked tenderly at the picture, a sudden breeze began to blow, and the lantern's flame started to flicker softly behind its chipped glass. He hurriedly moved his coat to shield the lantern from the wind. Eventually, his efforts were in vain when the lantern was snuffed out. The darkness encroached as he looked on in dismay. 

The man signaled for the horse the stop. He sat still in the darkness, the sounds of thunder occasionally breaking the silence. He clutched his horse's reigns, the horse remained unmoving, though still letting out the occasional small, shrill whine.  

He turned his attention to the road, where a small light could be seen in the distance. He excitedly signaled his horse to walk slowly down the road in the direction of the light. Eventually, the faint outline of a person was made visible in the light. He called out to the figure, who then started to move faster in his direction. Soon, two more figures became visible behind the one holding the lantern, who was a tall and thin man.  

Once the three figures had reached the wagon, the man in front gestured for his two companions to stand behind when he took a few steps closer.  

"Well, isn't this a surprise" the man in the front said "It's not every night you see a wagon without a lantern" 

"It certainly wasn't intended, had some trouble with the wind earlier" The man explained.  

"In that case, I'd be happy to lend you ours, but me and my boys will need something in exchange" 

"That would be mighty kind of you. What is it you lads will be wanting" 

"You see, we've been on the road for days, and we're quite weary" the tall man said with a small grin. 

"I take you folks will need a ride then? The wagon is a bit small, but it can get you where you want to go. Seymour said. 

"Well, not exactly" the man said with his grin growing wider. 

Seymour cocked an eyebrow before replying. "Oh? What is it that you want then?" 

The tall man raised one hand, and the two men pulled out long and sharp daggers, the tall man pulled out a dagger himself before he spoke again. 

"We were thinking, you leave the wagon with us, and we let you walk away, codger"  

The man tightened his grip on the reigns, never breaking eye contact with the tall man before him. The two men brandished their weapons behind their leader, no one saying a word. The man in front eventually broke the silence. 

"Listen, none of us want this to be harder than it needs to be, the sun will be up in a few hours, just hop off the wagon, and leave with your life" the tall man said, his grin having given way to an annoyed expression. 

"Alright, alright, I can see we're not getting anywhere, I just have one small thing to do, and then we'll be parting ways" "Seymour said, before turning around. 

"Don't try anything sneaky, old man" the tall man, said with a scowl on his face. 

The man suddenly turned back around, before he threw the burnt out lantern from his wagon toward the tall man, knocking him to the ground. The light of the lantern that remained lit was caught in the broken glass left in the tall man's face, now adorned in fresh, bleeding gashes.  

"Run" the man shouted to his horse.Hello, all! 

I am seeking a bit of guidance here. This is a topic I have tried to research, but seem to get conflicting or vague answers when I do. It honestly feels as though, if one decides to write fantasy, they must have been born inherently knowing and fully understanding what a magic system is and everything to which it pertains. I often hear it brought up even amongst readers of fantasy, but anytime I try and inquire what they mean, it is treated as a joke. It's honestly frustrating that I can't be taken seriously just because the answer seems so obvious to those who are more familiar with the genre.

It is the system part that confuses me the most. I cannot, for the life of me, understand how a few fireballs, or healing spells could be *systematic.* This makes no logical sense.


 I am more of a refined master of the science fiction genre. My exposure to fantasy has been through select works of Ursela K Le Guin and Anne McCaffrey. However, I would like to delve into fantasy, or at the very least, dip my toes into these proverbial waters.

I wish to write fantasy without incorporating the more silly, or whimsical elements such as elves, faeries, or flying reptiles with an affinity for gold (why a winged lizard would have any interest in money it cannot spend is beyond me). As a man of science, being an entomologist, I have a more analytical mind. I wish to keep my fantasy world grounded in reality and logic. I wish to explore things such as medieval weaponry, such as swords, or daggers per say. I wish to explore magic not of the hocus pocus variety, but more as being technology perceived as magic. I find myself confused when I think of magic as a *system,* however. I understand how to incorporate magical elements into my writing, but fail to see how it is supposed to be *systematic.* Is this an element I can choose to ignore?


If I am writing a mage who carries a wand that is a piece of technology he perceives as arcane, and the wand can cast what he thinks of as magic spells, I don't see where a system would come into play. A wand, is a wand, is a wand, is a wand, is it not? *Poof! A fireball manifests,* does not seem as though it should have an entire sysyem built around it. Or, what of say, a dagger with an enchanted blade? How would this be a system? How could that possibly be?

Am I misinterpreting the meaning of the phrase? Is the *"system"* part of the equation more akin to the way it is used when one says *"justice system,"* meaning a rule of law and order, in adherence to a monarch, or governing body? Is it more like a processing system? 

I could use some guidance and assistance here.

Any insight into this, would be greatly appreciated.This is my first time really trying to write a novel. I've always wanted to write a full novel so I finally tried my hand at it. I wanted to see what everyone thought of it and see if it was worth following the story to write more.

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wcHxfZr1qWVHRQDx5u8UIQFni0xznNw3N4OI4FU3I2M/edit?usp=drivesdk 

# The Hollow Man

>The Man will come one day.  
>  
>Smiling. Smiling. Smiling.  
>  
>But don’t you look at the mirror.  
>  
>Dear children of mine.  
>  
>Please,  
>  
>Do not glance at the mirror.  
>  
>He will smile at you.  
>  
>He will grin at you.  
>  
>He will tell you sweet nothings.  
>  
>But don’t you look at the mirror.  
>  
>Dear children of mine.  
>  
>Please,  
>  
>Do not glance at the mirror.  
>  
>He is the father of the things that hide in your closet.  
>  
>The things that live under your bed.  
>  
>The hands that seem to want to grab your feet at night…  
>  
>All, Answer to him.  
>  
>But don’t you look at the mirror.  
>  
>Dear children of mine.  
>  
>Please,  
>  
>Do not glance at the mirror.  
>  
>His rotting breath and bright teeth will be the last thing you see If you, my Darlings, open your eyes to peep.  
>  
>Fear my Children,  
>  
>The Hollow Man.  
>  
>**2:45**  
>  
>Rani was awake. And It was not her face looking back at her in the mirror.  
>  
>**12:05**  
>  
>Heat. A foul-tasting mouth.A dry throat.Ugh.Rani was awake. She threw her blanket across her room. Squinting in the darkness she tried reaching for her water bottle. It took her a few seconds. It had been knocked over and had rolled under her bed. After a few tries, she finally got it to open. The familiar grip of the blue Tupperware bottle calmed her like it always did. It had been with her when her sister died. Then when her mother had. And finally, when she had caught Vinoj cheating on her. She smiled at the bottle.“Just you and me buddy.” The bitterness actually stung. She put the bottle down and turned to sleep. As she tossed around trying to get comfortable (something that was oddly so hard at times, the body that seemed to be content dozing away just a moment ago seemed to now scream for movement) she kicked her bottle by mistake, spilling its contents to the marble floor. Muttering a curse under her breath, Rani closed her eyes and drifted off to sleep.  
>  
>**12:20**  
>  
>Rani awoke. But not in the way you wake up to brush your teeth and drink your coffee, she awoke in the way you wake up when your body tells you something is wrong, deeply, deeply wrong, but can’t quite pin down on what it is. She woke up because a deep primal instinct told her something. Something important. It told her to run.  
>  
>The first thing Rani Singh noticed was the smell.A rancid, putrid, vomit-inducing smell.A smell that would make rotting meat smell like a perfume.A smell that instilled such horror in the woman’s heart, that she couldn’t turn. Then, the knocking began.  
>  
>Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.  
>  
>The demonic knocking made Rani flinch every time.  
>  
>Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.Tap.  
>  
>**12:45**  
>  
>Then came the voices. The broken and mangled voice of her mother.***“ Why wasn’t it you? Why didn’t you die instead? Why was it my Priya? WHY? Aren’t you going to even look at me? You ungrateful little girl. I knew you wanted me dead from the start!”LOOK AT ME!”***  
>  
>Tears.Hot and salty. An already broken heart, breaking again. The beautiful airy voice of her soft-spoken sister.***“ Didi, I know you loved me. Please come and hug me. It’s so cold here. So very very cold. Look at me, please.Look.At.ME.WHY WON’T YOU LOOK AT ME! I knew it. The tumors did make me ugly, didn't they? You lied didn't you? You won’t even look at me now, am I that abhorrent to look at? Just look at me please.”*** Rani’s lips trembled. Her eyes had no tears to shed. It was so difficult to breathe. Her chest was so hollow. Her body was exhausted.  
>  
>**1:30**  
>  
>Years passed, maybe minutes, or were they seconds? Rani didn’t know. The cold lonely wraith of a woman had nothing left to give now. Tears long shed. Snot running down her cheeks. Her glance fell to the puddle of water near the Bluebottle. The promises of the dead faded away. And fear like nothing Rani had ever felt enveloped her. There in the mirror, stood a man. A man covered in darkness. A hand shriveled like that of a hag’s. Its face, mercifully still unseen. He was doing this. That, that thing was doing this to her. She just needed to look at him. That would make it go away.Yes.It would all go away. But her heart now made of glass, kept breaking. Strong, no more. Rani closed her eyes. And let them speak.  
>  
>**2:00**  
>  
>She couldn’t take it anymore. Rani began dragging herself towards the mirror.She.Had. To.See.She could vaguely feel something telling her to run away, but the sounds of her mother cutting her wrists drowned the voice out.  
>  
>**2:30**  
>  
>**Her body was so tired. She was nearly there. She would see the man. And he would make it go away. Yes, the Hollow Man was good. He would save her. He would love her.**  
>  
>**2:40**  
>  
>**Yes, she was nearly there. She was smiling.**  
>  
>**2:45**  
>  
>Rani looked, and the smile vanished. There stood a man with pale skin. Paler than any being should be. His teeth extended from one ear to another. Rani couldn’t sob. Couldn’t run. She could just watch as the Hollow Man stepped out of the mirror and reached for her. Ms. Singh closed her eyes, and let the pain begin.

**3:00**

*Fear my Children,*

*The Hollow Man.*Wrote this a few years ago as a 17 year old. I don't plan on publishing it (So I attached the whole story), but I am working on a few novels right now. I've never gotten feedback for my writing before so I am curious. The style of writing of this story is intentionally different, I don't really know if I should go back to it or not. Anyways, thanks. 

&#x200B;

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1d1J2PX0JZFQvsM5qS115T-uhajZ83Wqls3i-d9ASUD0/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1d1J2PX0JZFQvsM5qS115T-uhajZ83Wqls3i-d9ASUD0/edit)So this is kinda the first thing I've ever written besides some very small things a few years back so I wanted to get a critique of how my opening is. the only defense I'll give myself is that it's the first draft I've written after the outline, So I still haven't gone back and fixed some stuff. I'm still re-learning punctuation since it's been ten years since high school so the only thing I ask not to be critiqued on is punctuation unless it really throws off a part cause I know it needs some work. also the last thing this is just the opening its not a whole chapter it's only about 5 paragraphs but I figured id ask how this is before I continue right after what I've shown the main character is introduced.

Also is this to expository would this be an exposition dump? I was going for a kind of storyteller telling the beginning of a tale vibe with an overview of the setting but I think it might be too expository. 

Here it is:

 North of the mainland of Erisea is a small island called Amuncera or when translated means the steps to the gods. The people on this island are largely unaware of the goings-on of the world. They were Unaware of the Grand wall or of the plague contained within, unaware of the approaching war on the eastern continent or the approaching threat soon to meet their shores. You see for them this day was a day for celebration, and not for just any celebration but for the induction of a new Legunica. 

On this island lies a large mountain and Atop the summit of the mountain was built a single temple for a god. The temple was not built for the worship of the god though in fact there were almost none alive who still knew his name. instead, it was built for the sole purpose of protecting a priceless relic left behind by the long-forgotten god, and It was the duty of the Legunica to protect the relic. 

Once a formidable brotherhood with numbers in the thousands that could rival the top nations’ armies in strength. Unfortunately, faith grew weak and over time men began to lose their faith proclaiming that it does no good protecting a dead gods’ trinket. At first, such claims were few and met with fierce opposition, but slowly over time like a virus, it began leaking into the hearts of even the most steadfast men leading them to hang up their arms until only a few remained. 

Although no longer in service to the nameless god the people of Amuncera still honored and respected those who took on the mantle of Legunica and thus still allowed for the celebration. Even if most no longer cared for why they were celebrating but only there just to enjoy the festivities, and enjoy the festivities they did.

Early in the morning before the sun even rose fully in the sky people filled the village square with their dancing and singing. Colorful tapestries hung on lines drawn from one house to the next each one depicting an old legend, The story of Rysn the young boy who rode a whale to the stars, or another one beheld a beautiful woman with a violet aura gifting a star to the world. The Goddess Uriel gifting magic unto all. 

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

this is my first time sharing my writing with anyone so I'm not gonna lie I'm pretty nervous about your thoughts on it.Hey everyone, this is the first POV chapter for one of my characters (but not the first chapter of the novel), and I was hoping for some feedback. All thoughts are appreciated!

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1knQzX0cdwCRzP0qMF1Xp9yfAv3PbFjenlfrpLCPPRYs/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1knQzX0cdwCRzP0qMF1Xp9yfAv3PbFjenlfrpLCPPRYs/edit?usp=sharing)

Pasted in case there's an issue with the link:

Steam rose around Thalia as she lowered her head below the water’s surface. The temperature was perfect, warm enough to melt away the aches from her body yet cool enough that she was in no hurry to leave. The sounds of the world faded away and were replaced by the gentle hum of the water’s pressure. For a short while longer, she could rest in what had become her favorite place. 

The bath chamber was a peaceful room, the walls lined with lapis-colored tiles that sparkled in the dull torchlight. The pond itself had been crafted for her several months prior as a gift from a visiting Darzai. She had protested at first, arguing that her wooden tub was more than sufficient. She now realized how wrong she had been. Darzai magic kept the water in a perpetual state of purity, eliminating any chance of it becoming malodorous or contaminated. Her own magic kept the water heated, though she expected the spell would eventually expire. The ability to create heat was a simple task even for Elven children, but Ossids faced far greater difficulty. 

Her recent good fortune with Elven spells extended beyond the enchanted water. For the past several days, she had been able to increase her lung capacity before meditations. The magic was imperfect, but it nonetheless extended her time underwater. The problems within her realm seemed to be multiplying by the day, and she was grateful for the additional time to clear her mind.

After nearly an hour, the spell began to fade. The faint burning within her lungs forced her back to the surface—and back to her thoughts. She wiped her eyes gently and pushed several loose strands of dark hair away from her face. She had not noticed the dryness in her throat while meditating, but it was now a distraction. Reaching for a goblet of chilled herbwater, her mind drifted to her predecessor. Enallo was a kind man as well as a skilled ruler, and he had worked hard to make Thalia the same. 

*What would he think if he could see me now, hiding from my problems like a confused child?* Before she finished her thought, she could hear his raspy voice assuring her that she had done nothing wrong. “All rash decisions do not end poorly, but all rash decisions were made poorly,” he had often said. Though she sometimes resented his priggish nature, he was rarely wrong. The stakes were too high for any Ossid ruler to behave impulsively. Every choice needed to be carefully considered—the safety of their realm depended on it. 

As Thalia positioned herself in one of the seats carved into the side of the pond, there was a faint knock at the door. Yerina walked through, her face almost completely obscured by the sudden rush of light into the dark room. The Queen’s Escort was short for an Ossid, albeit still taller than most human women due to her elven blood. Her silk tunic was sky blue and embroidered with the axe of Qimari across the right side of her chest. Around her waist, she wore a thick white sash to represent her home port of Bhen Todur. “My queen, Qoru has returned to the capital and would like an audience.” There was a light tremble in her voice, which Thalia had grown accustomed to in the past three years. She had tried to ensure that Yerina felt comfortable in her presence, but she now concluded that the anxiousness was unlikely to wane regardless of the amount of time they spent together. 

“Send him in.” Yerina turned and opened the door,  revealing the outline of a Deathless Guard stationed outside the bath chamber’s entrance. Within moments, Qoru brushed past the royal guardsman and into the room. The dark curls in his hair looked greasy and patches of stubble were beginning to form on his face, neither of which was surprising given his recent travel.

“The news from Skyguard is not good,” he said.

“I expected as much. Care for a bath?”

“I would love one.” He began to untie the white sash from his waist. Once he had stripped out of his tunic, he walked toward Thalia, who was resting at the end of the pond farthest from the door. Like most of his features, his body appeared to have been much more heavily influenced by his human father than his elven mother; his chest and genitals were covered in dark hair, his legs bulky rather than sleek. 

“Is it warm still?” Qoru asked as he crouched and slid gingerly into the water. 

“It is. At least for now.” Thalia’s scion closed his eyes and spread his arms along the pond’s wall. She recognized that was weary from travel, but his report was nonetheless needed. 

“Skyguard?” she asked.

He opened his eyes and jerked slightly. “Yes. A small town near the port was ransacked badly. Amberdyne, the town is called. At least two dozen raiders were there, and a sizable amount of livestock, silver, and gems were all stolen. It happened when many of the warriors were out on a hunt. The townspeople have mostly fled to Skyguard to take refuge, and it is said that Earl Karassi means to rebuild the town before long.” Even after more than five years as her scion, the formality of his speech was still jarring to her. His elven mother was to blame for that, she knew.

“None of the townspeople took up arms against them?” Thalia asked. 

“There were several reserve legionaries there when it happened, but apparently Earl Karassi has been clear that violence over material possessions is to be avoided where possible. The people banded together in the tavern and the raiders took what they could. It did seem as if the townspeople were quite frustrated at not being able to protect their goods.”

“Aye, I’m sure they are.” Thalia was relieved to hear that no violence had occurred. Trouble with the Darzai High Council was the last thing she needed. 

“Why would they do this now?” Qoru asked. “Crossing the Swordless Valley and raiding an entire town? It is more than brazen.”

“Aye, it’s brazen. I’m sure Karassi’s favored approach is bashing in the raiders’ skulls if they return.” Earl Karassi was not an unreasonable man, but like most Ossids he would vastly prefer arms to helplessness.

“That would be his preference, yes. But he did offer an alternative. He suggested we go to the Darzai High Council. We can present our case and ask for a ruling, for the goods to be returned or the magisters to make proper restitution.”

*One town’s valuables are not worth that risk*.

“What do you think?” she asked.

“The Council is less predictable than it once was. Less fair to us. I would be very cautious to involve the darzai in such a way.”

“Why?” She hoped to avoid the appearance of condescension, but she considered it important to evaluate her future replacement’s reasoning. He had the entirety of the three-day voyage back to Bhen Todur to weigh the merits of Earl Karassi’s proposal. That should have been more than sufficient time for him to formulate a decision.

“If they hear testimony from more than a hundred Ossids and still opt not to intervene, a message would be sent to the Alruths. The word would travel quickly and any ambiguity surrounding Darzai intervention would be gone. We would be forced to either watch on as the thieves rummaged through our goods like dogs in an alley or engage them at arms. If we opt for the latter, the darzai may well intervene against us for improper violence.”

Thalia was proud of him. He was still young, but he had shown on multiple occasions that he was a bright and talented man. More importantly, he was an even-tempered man, a man willing to carefully weigh his options and seek counsel before making vital decisions. She had little doubt that he would be a good ruler when he eventually took her place on the Ossid throne. 

“How would you proceed, then?”

“Right now, raiders know that we would like to avoid violence,” Qoru began. “We have to make them think that we are more willing to kill them than we are.”

“A stronger presence from the legions?”

“I would move three standing legions toward the Swordless Valley and call up several auxiliary legions to patrol the Darzai border. With such a heavy presence, I think any raiders would seriously question venturing into our lands.” Qoru’s proposition matched closely with Thalia’s own thoughts. Relying on the Darzai High Council was a last resort, one she hoped she would not be forced to use until the council members began to view the Ossids more favorably.

Qoru looked at her intently. The warmth of the room had caused his cheeks to redden slightly. “Isildea often speaks of her youth, when the Alruths feared our legionaries and we defended our lands without retribution from the Darzai. Sometimes I wonder if that will ever be possible again.”

“Perhaps it won’t be,” Thalia said with a sigh. “Our most important task is keeping our people safe. Avoiding conflict with the Darzai helps us accomplish that. If we must allow a few thieves to escape unpunished, so be it.”

Qoru splashed water onto his chest and began to scrub lightly with his hands. His expression was odd, his brow slightly lifted like he was deep in thought. “One of the townspeople made a remark. One that I was hesitant to share with you, but one I believe you should hear.”

Thalia’s shoulders grew tense as she closed her eyes and prepared to hear words that she knew would frustrate her. 

“She said that she would rather be exiled from the continent than capitulate to the Alruths.”

Thalia opened her eyes and looked intently at Qoru. “How’d those around her respond?”

“It was only the two of us when she said it, but my feeling is that she is not alone in her thoughts.” 

She understood their frustration. The Ossid Legions were the most skilled fighting force on the continent, yet their people were often so hamstrung by the Darzai that they could not rely on their greatest strength for protection. For years she had promised that conditions would improve only to watch them worsen. Things could not continue like this indefinitely. Her people were too proud, too fearless. Life in Osvera was hard, but at least there they could fight for what mattered to them. She felt nauseous at the thought of her subjects preferring a continent where they would be hunted to the country she ruled. 

“Exile to Osvera is no minor thing. I’ve seen it. I’ve ordered it,” Thalia said. Her damp hair was starting to make her cold, so she slid from the seat and submerged herself under water to fully enjoy the water’s warmth. She returned to the surface moments later, wiping the hair from her face and pulling herself back into the seat. 

“I know. It is only talk,” Qoru replied. “Over-dramatic talk at that. With luck, a stronger presence from the legions will be sufficient to prevent future raids.”

It was clear that he was trying to comfort her, though nothing he could do or say would achieve that end. She wanted to be alone again.

“I take it you are in agreement that seeking involvement from the council is ill-advised?” he asked. 

“I am. I will not make a decision until after the next advisory session, but for now I plan to increase the legions’ presence much like you recommended.” Qoru’s lips formed a faint smile. Thalia’s eyes were drawn to his right arm, where a scar stretched nearly the full length of his bicep. The stitching had been crass, leaving the skin more visibly damaged than it should have been. It had been a gruesome sight for weeks after Qoru suffered the blow. 

“How do you expect Earl Karassi to respond to your decision?”

“He won’t like it, but he’ll accept it. He’s an honorable man,” said Thalia.

“He means to visit the capital within the fortnight,” Qoru replied. “Likely within the week.”

Thalia was unsurprised. Patience had never been one of his stronger qualities. “It’s been nearly a year since I saw Augan. It’ll be nice to see him again.”

“I am glad that the raid happened on his lands.” Qoru paused but his mouth remained slightly open. “Obviously I wish it had never—”

“I know what you meant. He did handle it better than I imagine some of the other earls would’ve.” Vinadas may well have sent his personal guard to chase the raiders, and Uprandr would have marched directly to the capital to scold Thalia for her ineptitude. 

“His scion is odd,” Qoru said as he scooped water into his underarm and scrubbed. 

“She seemed normal enough to me when I saw Karassi last,” Thalia replied with confusion in her voice.

“I thought you knew. He has a new scion now. Janaya left Karassi several months ago apparently.” Qoru began to scrub his other underarm, his interest in their conversation appearing to wane. 

“What is odd about her?”

Qoru ran his fingers through his hair and leaned his head backwards against the pond’s wall. “She was just more reserved than most. Perhaps odd was an unkind way to describe it.”

His weariness seemed to be overtaking him, which she understood. He had never been overly fond of life on a ship. 

“Karassi isn’t the most talkative man either unless he’s been drinking,” Thalia said. “She may be the same.”

“I cannot confirm that. There was little revelry while I was there.” Qoru had given up on scrubbing. He now allowed his body to float, the beads of water on his chiseled torso glimmering as he slowly drifted toward her. 

“Were you aiming to attend the advisory session? Or do you need time to rest?”

When Qoru did not respond, she splashed water in his direction, causing him to lose his sense of balance. Now in the center of the pond where the water was at its deepest point, he was forced to tread water.

“I planned to attend,” he replied, clearly irritated. 

Thalia smiled as he turned onto his stomach and began to swim back toward his original seat. “I’ll postpone it, Qoru. You need rest.”

The queen’s scion turned and slammed his forearm into the pond’s surface, spraying a stream of water into the air. Thalia smiled as she covered her head with her arms and waited for the water to rain down upon her.

“Thank you for the additional time to rest, my queen,” Qoru said playfully as he pulled himself out of the water. He walked around the pond and crouched near Thalia, who realized too late what he intended to do. Having failed to preempt his clever maneuver, she made no comment as he grabbed the large linen cloth and began to dry himself with it.

“Ask Yerina to send messengers to the advisors to let them know that we’ll wait until dusk for the session.”

Qoru nodded. “I will see you in several hours,” he said before dressing quickly and departing from the room past the Deathless Guard. 

Now alone once again, Thalia closed her eyes and returned below the water’s surface. 

\*\*\*

After leaving the bath chamber, Thalia spent the next few hours in her quarters within Haemir’s Tower reviewing trade logs that Dalyor—her Advisor of Trade—had provided the day before. The conflict in Osvera seemed to have depressed commerce in Ossid ports, which she had expected. With the continent in turmoil, Osveran merchants had little room on their ships to transport anything other than grain and various forms of produce back to their continent, all of which could be more efficiently obtained from ports in Phocer or the Free Cities. 

Once the documents had been reviewed and she no longer had outstanding tasks requested by her advisors, she left her chamber and walked across the palace grounds to the Advisory Chamber. Located on the ground level of Qimari’s Keep, the Advisory Chamber was the center of  Ossid politics. It had only two walls and a ceiling, making it feel more like an awning than a proper room. When entering from the east, advisors could look directly through the chamber to see the crashing waves of the Great Sea in the distance. Due to its substantial length, inhabitants were shielded from even harsh rainfall so long as they remained at the great oak table in the room’s center. 

Thalia arrived before her advisors, as she most often did. The smell of lemon tea drifted into her nose as she straightened the white sash around her waist. She selected a silver goblet from the center of the table and began to fill it with the steaming tea. After taking a sip, she walked to the head of the table and sat down. The afternoon sun cast a golden light throughout the room, bringing with it a tranquil pleasantness. She was in no hurry for her advisors to arrive. 

Ilsidea was the first advisor to enter the chamber. The elf was now more than eight hundred years old, though if she were a human she would have appeared to be in her mid thirties. Her ash brown hair was tied into a single thick braid, leaving her elven ears fully exposed. “Good evening, my queen,” Isildea said as she chose a goblet from the table’s center and began to pour tea into it.

“We have much to discuss tonight,” Thalia said. “Qoru is back from Skyguard.”

Isildea stirred the warm liquid with a small spoon before claiming her usual seat nearest Thalia along the left side of the table. “So I have heard. It was a useful trip, I hope.”

“Karassi’ll be here within the week.”

“We’ll have to prepare a few extra barrels of ale then,” boomed a voice from the north side of the chamber. The Advisor of War, Jefron of Dilrum, strolled into the room, a wide smile spread across his weather-beaten face.

“Aye, I suppose we will,” Thalia replied jovially. Even though his role was the most martial of all the advisors, Jefron was often the most cheerful person in the chamber. 

“Tea?” Isildea asked him, pointing toward one of the brass pitchers on the table. 

“Bharrid’s strength! Is this what happens when we postpone the meetings? We serve tea instead of herbwater or ale? I’ll come back on the morrow.” To complement his joke, Jefron turned and walked back toward the chamber’s entrance, where Dalyor and Qoru had now appeared. Seeing them, Jefron turned and walked back toward the table. “I suppose I’ll still take a goblet. Let’s just not make a habit of this.” 

“Come. We’ve many things to discuss,” Thalia called. The open nature of the room and its rectangular shape created a slight echo as she spoke. The advisors began to walk slightly faster,  both of them soon reaching the table and pouring tea for themselves. With the five of them now seated, only Esrona—the Advisor of Foreign Peoples—was missing. 

“Shall we begin?” Dalyor asked, looking directly at Thalia. His violet eyes were piercing, much like his father’s had been. Excepting Isildea, he had the strongest Elven features of anyone on the advisory.

“Esrona’s been invited to this session as well. Let’s wait for her.”

Dalyor nodded and took a small sip of tea. The goblet looked oddly small in his massive hands. The Advisor of Trade was not the largest man in Ossidia—several full-elves and orcs bested him in that regard—but he was nonetheless an imposing figure. 

Thalia heard the sound of footsteps along the sandstone floor just before Esrona came into view. The young Ossid was carrying a leather satchel over one shoulder, as she often did. “Apologies for my lateness,” she said as she got closer to the table. There was only one silver goblet left in the table’s center, which Jefron grabbed and placed in front of the seat to his right, where Esrona quickly sat down.

“Qoru has returned with news from Skyguard,” Thalia said once Esrona was seated. She glanced at her scion, who looked much more refreshed than he had earlier in the bath chamber. 

“A larger than normal band of Alruth raiders struck in a town near Skyguard,” he began. “The townspeople did not resist, and many of their goods were stolen. Earl Karassi has asked that the queen consider seeking judgment from the Darzai High Council to have the goods returned.”

Thalia noticed Isildea’s thin lips twist into a frown. The other advisors seemed similarly dejected by the news.

“Qoru and I are in agreement that the Darzai High Council can’t be trusted with this.” “The precedent it’d set is too dangerous,” Esrona agreed. 

“Is anyone else of a different view?” Thalia asked.

“There are steps we can take to prevent future raidings of this magnitude,” Isildea said. “I do not think Earl Karassi’s proposal is an ideal option.” Her voice was as calm and measured as always.

Thalia’s eyes were drawn to Jefron, who pushed his long, sand-colored hair from his face and leaned in toward the table’s center. “The Axebearer Legion is primarily charged with that area. ‘Tis my understanding they’ve been quite compact of recent. It may be enough just to spread them out a bit, make the legionaries' presence more felt.” 

Thalia was relieved that her advisors seemed to be agreeing with her instincts, though there was always a subtle fear within her that they simply said what they thought she would like to hear. Enallo had warned her of such dynamics, which were often present in human societies where wealth and status could be earned merely by parroting the correct words. All of her advisors had voiced disagreement with her decisions at one point or another, and she viewed this as confirmation of their willingness to speak freely in her presence.

“Yes, that’s the approach I’m inclined toward. We send more legionaries north and make clear they’re to be dispersed efficiently. At the least, it’d make it far more difficult for the raiders to reach our towns without being discovered.”

“Raiders do not always present as raiders,” said Dalyor. He often tried to minimize his smugness, but if he was attempting to do so now he was failing. 

“Aye, they do not. But if they pass by scores of legionaries on the way in, they’ll know to expect the same on the way back.” Dalyor took another sip from his goblet, apparently content with the queen’s reasoning.

“Are we seeing increased raiding from the Alruths?” Esrona asked. Sunlight reflected off of the jade stone she wore around her neck. 

“That doesn’t appear to be the case,” Thalia replied. “This is the first reported in several months, but it is on a larger scale than those we’ve seen in the last years.”

Thalia glanced at Dalyor, knowing that he would have something to say in response. She was right. “As long as the raiders are not punished, we’ve to consider that this will continue if steps aren’t taken.” He crossed his arms across his broad chest. 

“*Dhug*, we’re taking steps.” The room grew silent, and Thalia worried that she had been perceived as unnecessarily combative. Dalyor seemed unoffended, his face expressionless. “Qoru, ask Syndra to prepare a deployment report to be discussed with Jefron and myself tomorrow,” she said in an attempt to restore the conversation. The Advisor of Logistics had a great mind for detail and information. In less than a day’s time, Syndra would compile options for legionary deployment in the north based on the legions’ current location, the temperament of its legate, and other relevant factors. When all options had been considered and all potential problems weighed, Jefron and Thalia could quickly set the plan into motion. 

“Perhaps we should discuss Brulgeac now, if no one here has anything more to offer about the raid.” Isildea began to unravel a small scroll. “I received this report shortly before this session,” she said, glancing down at the parchment. “The dwarves are in dire trouble. It looks as if Uveam’s luck has finally run out. There was a battle last week, this one an even more decisive defeat than the first. It is said Uveam received a substantial wound.”

Thalia felt a pain form in her stomach as she heard the words. She had known that her father’s host was advancing fast toward the Kingdom of Brulgeac, but the last report she received indicated that the King Uveam had led his people into the mountain, where they would be safe at least for several months. Even her father did not have the war prowess or numbers to successfully invade and occupy Brulgeac, one of the most powerful dwarven kingdoms. The Brulgor Mountains were vast, the city itself impregnable. *Why has Uveam met them again in the open field?* 

Jefron looked up at her, his eyes somber. “He’s tough, that man. I’d not bet against him even now.”

The room fell silent but for the faint crashing of waves in the distance. After several moments, Qoru began to speak. “We could send legionaries. Bolstering his ranks may well buy him time.”

“This conversation has already been had. Multiple times, if I recall,” Thalia replied. She knew Qoru meant well, but his asking of the question only served to remind her of how little ability she had to help Uveam. “Where would they land? The elves control nearly the entire coast. Even if we were able to push Sarfir back, our legionaries would never be able to cross the country again to reach the sea.” Though her words may have been too harsh, she knew she was right. There was no way for legionaries to aid Uveam and return safely to Ossidia.

“Could be possible to remain there with the dwarves, at least for a time,” Jefron said. 

“We’ve worked for centuries to carve a home beyond that place. Sarfir’s host numbers more than a hundred thousand in elves alone. We’d have to send a third of our legionaries to have any real impact.” Thalia was making her argument to the advisors, but in a way she felt the person she most wanted to convince was herself.

“I understand how difficult this is. *Dhug*, I shouldn’t need to remind you why it’s difficult for me. But it’s what we must do. Uveam understands.” As she spoke, her advisors each looked forward at the table, avoiding eye contact with her. 

Isildea looked up at Thalia, her wrinkleless face inscrutable.  “We could send word to King Uveam, my queen. Inform him that he and his people are welcome here in Ossidia.”

“You truly think he’d come? Forgo his ancestral home?” Esrona asked. Thalia knew Uveam well enough to know that he would never flee from the Brulgor. He would stay and fight until the end.

“I do not, though people sometimes act in unexpected ways,” Isildea responded. 

Thalia looked toward Esrona. “It’s worth doing nonetheless. We’ll try to find a bondzen willing to help us send a message as far as Skyguard. We may as well go ahead and send a messenger on the next ship north too. If we can’t find a Darzai, we don’t want that time to’ve been wasted.” Esrona nodded, as did Qoru, who would likely be the one to have the message sent.

“What do we know of the rest of Nerima? Our ledgers suggest Sarfir’s war is impacting trade. I’d imagine Phocer is gaining the bulk of what we’ve lost.”

“The Phoceri have increased shipments of weapons to Osvera, presumably to aid Sarfir’s war effort,” Isidea said. 

“Indeed,” Dalyor put in. The Advisor of Trade rarely allowed a comment to be made about his area of responsibility without responding in some way.

“You’d think they’d have enough *dhugran* steel on their own continent,” Jefron growled.

“As long as the dwarves control most of Osvera’s mountains, it will always be an issue for them,” Isildea responded.

“I’d wager the darzai are none too happy with the Phoceri’s kindness toward the elves.”

“Not kindness, greed,” Esrona said. She tucked several strands of hair behind her ear, exposing its slightly pointed tip.

“D’they even know?” Jefron asked. 

“You know how the Darzai feel about the coast. The elves once got an entire army onto the continent without the Darzai noticing,” Dalyor said, causing the other advisors to chuckle lightly. 

“Even if they know, they aren’t likely to put a stop to it,” Thalia said. “As long as the elves stay in Osvera, the High Council’ll permit trade with them.” 

Does anyone else have suggestions on aid to Uveam? We need to do all we can for them. We just can’t commit suicide to do it.” 

“I have a thought,” Jefron said. “I doubt you’ll care for it.”

Something about his manner gave Thalia pause. 

Leaning inward so that all could clearly see him, he began to outline his plan. “I sail ‘cross the sea with five thousand legionaries. We’ll disguise ourselves as best we can and use merchant ships. We can’t defeat them, but we can fluster the *dhugrans*.” Jefron paused and looked toward Thalia. The queen felt a sense of pride—of raw determination—but she was unsure what emotions her face was expressing.  

“All it’s likely to take is one great strike at a trium before Sarfir’s called to heel,” Jefron continued. “He currently commands more than half the elve’s western forces.”

Thalia wanted to support this plan, to provide some type of aid to Uveam against the brutality of her father’s onslaught. Still, she saw no good way to do it. “This presents the same issue. How’ll you return? Even if you manage to delay Sarfir long enough for a re-grouping by the dwarves, snuggling that many Ossids back to Nerima will be near impossible.”

“We’ll stay with the dwarves.” Thalia thought she saw tears beginning to well in his amber eyes. “We’ll fight with them or die with them.” The other advisors said nothing. Disbelief was plastered across Esrona’s face. 

“I can’t command legionaries to do this,” Thalia said. This plan amounted to a death mission. She could not call herself the Queen of Ossidia if she was willing to spend her people’s lives in such a way. 

“You will not need to, my queen,” Isildea said. Thalia understood her meaning immediately. The pride of the Ossids—combined with a general disdain for the Elven Triumvirate and a fondness for the Dwarven Realm—meant there would be no shortage of volunteers. She thought back to her conversation with Qoru, to the woman in Skyguard who would rather be exiled to Osvera than stand idle as her people were disrespected.

“You’ve been weighing this for some time?” Thalia asked, looking toward Jefron.

“Aye, I have. I need a good fight.”

“I won’t stop you.” Jefron’s face relaxed as she said the words. A muted form of the broad smile she had grown to love spread across his face. 

“My queen, I believe the logistics of the plan could be improved significantly,” Isildea said. Dalyor and Qoru nodded to signal their agreement with her.

“As do I,” Thalia replied. “We’ll start the preparations at once.”* What would his powers as a good character be?

* What would his powers as an evil character be?

**[Please answer all of the above and post that before trying to take his actual lore into account, I just want your guys' interpretation of this man first.]**

*The King of Blood is a Dreadknight, one of their highest ranked and the most powerful to ever live, after the Night Crusade, humanity had been pushed back into the heartland they had recolonized after the Niraut themselves took over Earth and killed every human on the surface before renaming the planet. He is considered by all of Nirautta to be the ruler of humanity, and not a single one of them doesn't wish death upon him, in reality however, his role as the King of Humanity is far more immaterial than it is authorized, he ultimately views his power as a tool, not a thing to strive for in of itself, magically and politically. He and the remaining Dreadknights allow humanity to do whatever they wished as long as the people or the leaders of the Republic(s?) they established didn't jeopardize the fragile stability of the territory he fights to protect, the borders of which are in a state of constant skirmish.*

*The Niraut have never stopped trying to attack and destroy humanity, they make constant incursions onto his territory, and everytime the Dreadknights answer with swift, merciless, and extreme force. This curbstomp was previously not possible, as the strongest Niraut had been an even match for a single Dreadknight, however, The King of Blood has a unique ability that was the origin of this moniker. He has the power to borrow the spare strength of any living thing he can think of and add it to his own, this power doesn't usually amount to much, but when connecting with his fellow Dreadknights is when his might reaches its true peak. He can borrow power, but that is of little aid to the rest of mankind, and so in a desperate bid to halt the collapse of their land, The King of Blood infused into the veins of all surviving Dreadknights his blood, thus allowing them all to draw on the collective strength of all the Dreadknights. Though they were not more pwoerful than him, this infusion of might was enough to stop the invasion, for a thousand years The King of Blood reigned, slowly expanding his borders, and recaptured most of their castles lost during the disastrous latter half of The Night Crusade. The emptied lands were repopulated by a resurging humanity.*

*The King of Blood's power grew with every new Dreadknight that was chosen from humanity, and this power in turn increased everytime a Dreadknight devoured a Niraut's lifeforce...however, maintaining this spell keeping the Dreadknights this powerful for this long has taken its toll. A thousand years have passed after he rose to power, The King of Blood is dying, the resting periods he enters grow longer and more frequent, the Niraut's centuries of attrition are beginning to pay off, and they suspect, rightly so, that once The King of Blood perishes, the power he gifted his fellow Dreadknights is soon to follow.*Hi! My story is basically a Cinderella retelling, sort of Cinderella + Pirates of the Caribbean. It is about a girl named Ashen who is trying to find her family and keep them together. 

All feedback is welcome, but I’m specifically wondering:

1. What are the plot and character promises?

2. Did you enjoy it? Would you keep reading?

3. Was there anything you really liked or really disliked?


Thank you!



——


https://docs.google.com/document/d/1OuDmHc8xiMLLSuXGbUkkBDRPcgNFNpiunO6rUh6uycc/edit?usp=sharingAnyone like tournament arcs? I've decided to have a go at it myself. It helped me flesh out my world, provide an end reference for my greater narrative, and create characters that can be slotted into the story right now.  

Basic pitch of the setting is: the Chinese Boxer Rebellion, but the Kung fu guys beat foreign guns with the power of Wuxia. The setting is a rough analogue of our world, and I mainly use references here as a way to communicate characteristics. This not just China.

So far I brainstormed a number of character concepts. Nothing quite set in stone. I'm here to see if the roster sounds interesting, isn't problematic, and maybe get ideas for something better. 

Also yes, one box is incomplete. I am parsing through different ideas for the 'Tai Chi' contestant.

[Here's the chart](https://imgur.com/a/HBLy5oE)Hi everyone! I welcome any feedback/critique on my first original story that I've been planning for a while now. I'm an amateur writer, self-critical (who isn't? haha) as well as a non native English speaker. 

I keep telling myself I won't care anymore about perfectionism once I at least get the first few chapters down on paper, but I keep re-adjusting the prologue (which takes place in the MC's childhood). 

What worries me about the prologue, I think, is that it takes around 3 pages to get to the inciting incident? I'm unsure whether it's gripping, but I was going for that world-building/relationship-building start. A part of me even wonders if I should include the prologue at all, but then another part of me insists I should, for it adds a few emotional layers to the story and helps smoother transitioning into Act I.

I would be grateful if you could let me know what you think and share some constructive feedback. Thank you so much in advance.

Link can be found here: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IWAdcgMv\_XCubRSjxs-a-0q7gX2QxKJ-JpjLvOpsr6I/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IWAdcgMv_XCubRSjxs-a-0q7gX2QxKJ-JpjLvOpsr6I/edit?usp=sharing)Hello, I wanted to know if I could have some assistance on coming up with a special power for my female protagonist . I’m writing a story , & she’s this sweet & curious yet spunky & cool girl . Very down to Earth , can mingle with about anyone if comfortable enough . She’s smart & crafty , enjoying art , dancing & gardening in her free time . As well as meditation , as recently she’s been trying to discover herself . This doesn’t mean she isn’t ditzy , occasionally getting easily distracted . & Though she’s sugary , she can be sour . Her hometown is crimefilled , so she’s learned to keep a fierce look to her initially to keep people away . She’s also capable of thinking of sneaky ideas & breaking the rules when it’s convenient enough for her . When she meets the male protagonist , they’ll have a serious competitive rivalry for a long time . She can be silently stubborn . 

I didn’t say much until now because it’s not too much of a big factor but she’s an Angel . Similar to the Goddess concept of Seven Deadly Sins . But everyone has life energy , which manifests into a Talent , or “special power” if you will . I’ve drawn up multiple ideas but have thrown them all out for her . They don’t really fit what I’m going for .

Talents are the manifestation of your personality, experiences, beliefs, will & nature . Sure some can create their own due to this , but others find their power through hardship & whatnot . But everyone’s born with 1 . Feel free to tell me if I’m juggling too much at a time .

I wanted something that’d really signify a sort of pureness . Similar to how Elizabeth from Seven Deadly Sins’ empathetic power suited her . Or (SPOILER WARNING) Anghalhad’s lie detector power is said to be a gift from God . Sure , she’s not that pure saint right now , but she has the potential for it .

Any feedback on things would be much appreciated .Hello!

As the title says, looking for a short critique of my story, Larry Died. Grammar, enjoyment, delivery of certain things. Comments are enabled.

Larry works in an office, Larry Died. Very short (for me) under 1500 words. Very light on apparent fantasy elements. But it is there, I promise.

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yKqjuEIF7guwY1iQisBYRgW8RAA\_zWa6RgN8OCaDumM/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yKqjuEIF7guwY1iQisBYRgW8RAA_zWa6RgN8OCaDumM/edit)

Thank you!I'm writing this short fantasy story for a competition, and I would like some feedback/critique is anyone has a spare minute or two.

This is still a rough draft, and needs indenting along with other structural edits, but I'm hoping that together we can identify any glaring mistakes or plot-holes that I'm too close to my work to visualize.

Anyways, links below, and your opinion is greatly appreciated, as is your time.

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oVNBrzOUlY5iDBI8Tyx0W9ayvSsKNBZGTFgJyRMkgb0/edit?usp=drivesdkAs I stood silently, I felt the tension in my neck heighten. The hallway was dimly lit and felt unforgiving. I traced my fingers along the stone wall, procrastinating my visit with Rin. I hated it here, but I could appreciate the medieval feel the house gave off. Although, most of the time I felt like a child locked in a dungeon. 

I padded across the floor about 30 feet until I reached the study’s doors, the whole time my footsteps sent out tiny echoes through the wide hallway. The doors had two large iron handles with a bear’s face etched into the area above the keyholes. It was my favorite feature of the house, and made me reminisce about the times I visited my dad when he worked. I put my hand on the doorknob, and although I loved the breeze on my toes, the cold that I always felt coming from these door handles made me shiver. 

I stepped into the study greeted by the warmth, and orange glowing light from the fireplace built into the far right end of the room. The study walls were lined with shelves of books of almost any genre, reminding me of my fathers love for knowledge. In the middle of the room, positioned closer to the back wall, was my dad’s desk. In the black leather and velvet chair behind his desk, sat my demon of a step mother, Rin Everhurst. She was puffing on my fathers prized pipe. My father never believed in tobacco use, because it had no medicinal properties at all. 


My dad’s name is Kai. He’s where I got my name, Kaia, from. My mom passed away when she gave birth to me, so I never really had a positive mother figure. My dad brought home some girlfriends from time to time but they never lasted long. He met Rin at a Darkmoon council meeting when I was 14. I hated her immediately. 

My family was descended from a long line of pure blood Night Children. Or, otherwise known to the human world as werewolves. We came from the Harpin bloodline. My 6x great grandfather, Scylar Harpin, turned on the first Harvest moon after his 18th birthday. He then came to lead the strongest and largest pack in the werewolf world, the Sylvynn pack. In his successful lifetime he was never bitten, was one of the first wolves to transform on command, and became a huge mystery to every Night Child who’s uttered his name. That’s what made our bloodline so pure and important. Unfortunately, I’m the only one in my family who had never transformed. Which had been complete and utter humiliation especially since my dad was head of the Darkmoon council. It’s the council of all alpha werewolves from each pack across the nations. Leaders got together to discuss war strategies, discuss economics, and make sure rogues are kept in check. 

My stepmother Rin came from another pack named the Fyrus pack. A mix of many different bloodlines, some important, some brand new. I personally think they’re a pack of mediocre scavenger dogs who have nothing to do but take advantage of everyone around them. Which is exactly what she did to my dad. 

Although I disliked Rin she was exceptionally beautiful which was.. secretly irritating. Her hair was reminiscent of a deep jet black color. Hanging thickly, it fell close to her butt in perfect beach curls nearly every day. When she looked at you, the first thing you’d notice was that her irises held a light mint green, lined with long, curly, black eyelashes. Her lips were plump with a deep rosy pink that allowed her to never require lipstick. Not only was her face perfectly symmetrical with cheekbones sharp enough to gut a fish, her body was literally the epitome of hourglass. It’s no wonder my dad had become wrapped around her perfectly manicured finger.

Speaking of a perfectly manicured finger, as soon as I closed the door to the study behind me, she slowly stood from the desk and silently pointed at me. I stayed completely still not knowing why she’s pissed, just understanding that I’m in for a world of hurt. 

Finally, after what seemed like eternity of listening to her heels click across the floor, she was standing only a foot or so away from me. She reached up caressing my cheek, and tucked one of my dark blonde curls behind my ears.Once upon a time, there was a tower, a great tower of ice, and in that tower there lived a race of monsters, who from the magic of the past built therein a weapon of the mind. With that weapon they turned humanity disunited, and the monsters thrived in that disunity.

To cut a long story short, there was in time a Sorcerer, who being so clever managed to resist the weapon, and even freed others, his warriors, who together ambushed the monsters, being no longer afraid of their shadowy forms. The Sorcerer meanwhile broke the tower, slew the dragon, built the new city etc.

But oh no, because then one of his lieutenants went evil, corrupted by a magic mirror in which you see your own delusions, his being that the Sorcerer was a tyrant, and has imprisoned us rather than set us free.

He was, this Prince, always a bit of a conspiracy theorist. The mirror just showed him the confirmation he needed.

So deluded he was that he thought he could see in the mirror the future, a win for himself and his followers, but when the Sorcerer's warriors came crashing down on them, and they fled to the far corner of the world, then the vision in the mirror changed, and he sees now that the defeat was just part of a plan, a clever plan, a long plan…

Many are drawn to the Prince, not by his personality but by his conviction, for he does not doubt himself, and knows everything. He came back with many armed followers, to free the rest of us, and the glittering city of the Sorcerer he finds and destroys, killing the Sorcerer, who had stayed behind to allow his warriors to flee. But revenge is their way, and the warriors ambush the Prince, who escapes while his followers die for him.

This is pretty much the cycle: The Prince builds an army of followers, invades, everybody runs for the hills, the followers breaks some things, the warriors ambush the followers, the followers get whittled down and ultimately are all killed. The people mostly survive, actually, because they as a warrior race are used to being on the move, and out of their hiding places they emerge to rebuild their homes. But also as a race they are vulnerable to ignorance, and always there are those who would go astray…

The Prince has never left his fortress since the warriors tried to kill him the first time, and he always delegates command of his armies to another. Instead, he mostly sits frozen in front of the mirror, perusing it for secrets of the enemy (really just his own thoughts), passing on what he finds to his followers.

And for sure, many of the Prince’s enemies have searched for his fortress, but the wastes are vast, and a fortress hidden by magic is more than just invisible.

Many cycles later, things have taken a dark turn. Cities are devastated, and their people dead, because the Prince has stolen a very dangerous weapon, being one that can strike without warning. His followers are everywhere, they are many more than before. Warriors fight their doppelgängers, and they wonder how this is possible.

Earlier, the king had traced the location of the Prince’s fortress, and sent off his relative, the Princess, and her warrior children to take their shot at the Prince. Even deep into the wastes, she is well aware of events back home due to seeing them in her dreams, but doesn’t turn back because now there is a blood debt.

She is however nervous about the fate of her husband.

The Prince’s fortress is a network of ice caverns, underground and shielded from the lethal sunlight on the surface, hidden inside space warped by magic. As is tradition when breaking into fortresses, the Princess and her children sneak in rather than fight their way in, but still manage to get lost in the winding tunnels, because the Prince knows they are here, and is warping the tunnels themselves with magic also.

Everyone ends up separated from each other. The Princess, alone, gets ambushed by her doppelgänger and knocked out. Her children simply wander the tunnels, lost.

The Princess wakes up, hands tied, and sees a giant mirror, floating in the air, and staring into it is a man in a chair. He does not look like he does in the stories, she thinks, not being surrounded by dark clouds or flies. He speaks to her.

“Long is the war you are fighting,  
Close is the peace you are wanting,  
Real is what you see in the mirror,  
Peace we can make together.”

[I also drew him](https://preview.redd.it/9d862toc8td81.png?width=360&format=png&auto=webp&s=a8e669e484ec89dcda06bc5709bf4e837c7230b6)

Thanks for reading. My question then, is whether or not the Prince is familiar to you, whether you've "seen" him before in real life, namely if he is anything like the conspiracy theorists I'm modelling him after. Other critique is welcome also.Hello internet. I recently wrote a short story based on a horror story randomiser, which gave me the words 'board game', 'cult' and 'forest'.

I've never put anything out for feedback since some childhood rubbish on fanfiction, so any feedback would be appreciated

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oV\_f8JE7h9HClgtkRAZbiJD2FtGONzeQ9Z\_kuyyeTnY/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oV_f8JE7h9HClgtkRAZbiJD2FtGONzeQ9Z_kuyyeTnY/edit?usp=sharing)So not long ago I posted about a magic system that I'm making that was in the works, where the main gimmick was that each element was associated with one of the seven deadly sins as well as one of the seven heavenly virtues, and after giving it some thought I said F it and just went with seven basic elements now this may be a bit too cliche but I hope what I came up with can make it different enough

FIRE( Wrath/Patience) Victory  
AIR(Sloth/Diligence) Freedom  
WATER(Envy/Kindness) Justice  
EARTH(Greed/Temperance) Wealth  
NATURE(Gluttony/Temperance) Knowledge  
ICE(Lust/Chastity) Love  
LIGHTNING(Pride/Humility) Fate

Now in terms of how it occurs in the world, I decided to make the flora and fauna be influenced by this magic (because in a world full of magic why do you still have normal trees and animals and even normal humans) so yeah maybe even my humans will have some physical differences maybe lizard-like or wolf-like can't decide. The elements also exist as minerals and metals so they can be used to make weapons, armors, buildings, and even vehicles  (trains/ships/airships ETC) this give people that don't have elemental powers (meaning that their bodies don't generate elemental energy) a chance to fight as well, just not as strong but more versatile.

now as to how the actual magic work, I looked at the red mage from final fantasy, for those who don't know the red mage can use both white and black magic but more specifically in FF 14 the red mage builts up black and white mana to use their melee combo so I decided to go with that. I also made three tiers of magic (just like FF lol)

the first tier of spells is what for now I'll call quick spells. These are the most common types of spells they have no chant or casting time so these are your basic attack and though not as strong they make up for rapid casting. the second tier starts the gimmick of virtue spells and sin spells. Basically, your right-hand cast virtue spells, and your left-hand cast sin spells. Now both types of magic can do DPS damage, still, sin magic has more AOE attacks and does more damage, while virtue spells are more single target and have more of an arena control effect, they also have exclusive spells, virtue has healing, and buffs while sin has status effects and debuff. As for casting time you just have to recite the name of the spells do a simple hand gesture with the respective hand and viola. Now for the third tier, we have combined spells, as the name suggests these use both virtue and sin energy to cast a huge elemental spell these are the rarest spells those who have magic have 2 combine spells at most since these spells required training, as well both sin and virtue energy to cast, so your hands are busy moving around, they have at least a 10 second casting time and the stronger the spell the longer the cast which is why they are rare. (also you don't have to recite any spells tiers out you can just say it in your head and it works but you have to move the corresponding hand)

Now keep in mind that one cannot simply use one type of spell, as the full power of the elements requires a fine balance between both virtue and sin, If one does not use the spells carefully it's impossible to use combine spells and long story short using too much sin or virtue spells you become the sole embodiment of said virtue/sin, basically sin=jackass virtue=smartass, now don't worry your body will tell you when your losing balance but you can simply ignore it and go gun-ho with either sin or virtue, the side of your body that you overuse can mutate but hey you do you.

So yeah that's what I have so far. I still need to think about how will people acquire these abilities if by chance or godly blessing and the ratio between magic users and regulars but it'll come to me eventually if you have any comments suggestions or you think I'm a little over ambitious let me know. All help is appreciated.Been redoing this so much, I don't know if it makes any sense anymore. 

This is the first chapter that used to be two chapters. I haven't done line edits. Please, let me know if it works as a first chapter and if it makes any sense. 

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1avOq5PPtvN3pDffocL6RTylhVbpYr-YEuCjbljleiLM/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1avOq5PPtvN3pDffocL6RTylhVbpYr-YEuCjbljleiLM/edit?usp=sharing)Thanks to everyone who takes a look.

I enjoyed writing short stories in my teens but it's been about 25 years since I wrote a fiction piece for anyone else to read. I have written plenty of words; they're just all in grant apps and biology journals. 

Recently I've begun to find stories itching at me again, but I've never trained in the form or style of fiction. I've begun with a couple very short pieces and would love feedback: is the premise accessible or engaging? What would make the characters or atmosphere more real? Is the style too fragmented? Did...you...like it?

https://docs.google.com/document/d/16U7D917QFx1uAmc0Xm2uqmE0EgbLrgegZe9MBwGYp14/edit?usp=sharing

ETA: This is a lovely community. Thank you to those that read it, and for your thoughtful comments.It's my cake day So I might as well use it. I've been debating if I should make a post like this or just go for it and see what happens. But I've really been committed to writing a sold, marketable title that I can make a real go of self publishing so I want to do a lot of research and find a project I can do that with. So here goes

The Winter Hunter

Cailean is serving in his first year as a Winter Hunter. A monster hunter who train all year to protect humanity when the Winter Comes and the monsters emerge from the wilds and prey on travelers and villagers.

Every year, at the changing of the seasons, the Sun Druids cede their power in a ceremony to the Dark Druids (or kings, still feeling this bit out, the point is, two families, one rules in spring, one rules in winter)

After the first chapter, (Cold open, vicious battle with a monster in the forest, something exciting that establishes that while Cailean wants to be a Winter Hunter, he needs a lot more training and is still fighting his own cowardice) His whole arc is going to be a coward who took on a deadly job to try and prove to himself he could be a real man. so we establish his goal.

After they bury their brothers who died (one of whom died saving Cailean) he has a dream of the "Red Lady" an ancient goddess of war and death who if she appears in your dream is a premonition that you will have a glorious death in battle soon.

The Ceremony is held for the Sun family to officially transfer their power to the dark family. It's just a legend that this matters, and its an excuse for a big city wide celebration to have one last fun blow out before everyone hunkers down for winter. Things go bad, a pack of vicious, once thought extinct, breeds of monsters attack, kill every member of the Sun family and attempt to kill one of the Sun family's handmaidens, gwendolyn, before Cailean rescues her (They met at a hotspring prior) and they get out of the city.

Come to find out that she is an illegitimate daughter of the Sun King and now the apparent last heir of the Blood of the Sun and if the legends are true could be the only hope of bringing back the Spring Season.

So it's basically a road trip story, Cailean is going to get Gwendolyn to the famed Winter Hunter fortress to protect her until the next equinox  when she can assume the Sun's rule again and bring back Spring. (I know this plot device may be really klunky i'm still working on it, definitely open to suggestion and tweeks)

Cailean continues to have visions of the Red Lady telling him about his destiny and how glorious his death is going to be. He escorts her across the land, fighting monsters, growing his skills, his one big talent is that while not the best fighter he's got a sharp mind so has studied monsters inside and out during his training so he uses his mind to out think monsters and win by his wits (All while fighting the knowledge that he is apparently destined to die in glorious battle)

Travel across the land, fight monsters, and humans who seemingly have a motivation to bring an enternal winter (I have a motivation for humans to want this that I wont spoil but I think is really good) they bicker at first, but grow to relay on eachother, and care, and yes eventually fall in love (Because of course)

All till our climatic final showdown, theres no way out of this for Cailean, monsters on all sides, the spring coming at sunset, he has to fight as one man against an epic horde of monsters besieging Gwendolyn. They share their first kiss, he arms himself to the teeth to charge into battle a fully realized man accepting his destiny...

"Have at me, Red Lady!"

Does he live? Does he die? Wont spoil but I honestly could do either of them (Though I am leaning towards one way)

This is absolutely first and foremost a stand alone book, I have no grand plan for a fantasy epic series. Lately I've been really focused on writing one book, one complete story, say everything a particular idea can and leave people satisfied. It's part of my marketing, i think people are tired of getting invested in series just for authors to drag their feet on giving people the ending they're paying for.

So that's the pitch. Again still tooling around with the whole people responsible for spring becoming winter dynamic. Figure that act two will be a greatest hits of loosely based Celtic mythology monsters of the week with each developing the pair a little more as they make their journey.As a kid, Wizardology or Dragonology or simply the Harry Potter Lexicon or Quidditch through the Ages or Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them interested me. 

Did you find those fantasy non-fiction style books entertaining? And would you have without a series of novels before it? Or published alongside a novel?

Is there a place in publishing for a book of worldbuilding?

Like “A Guide to Magical Transportation”?

Written in a non-fiction social history style?
(Like a Time-Traveler’s Guide to Medieval England in writing style.)

With chapters like:
Flying Pegasi
Giant Eagles, Hippogriffs, & Griffons
Dragons’ Doomed Demeanor
Winded Ships
Canals
Flying Reindeer, Flying Elephants, Peryton, & Other Exotic Flying Beasts
Aerial Beings: Self-Locomotion
and more.

Here’s an excerpt example:

Flying Pegasi

The pegasus is man’s best friend, domesticated since at least the third millennium before the fall of magic. Without this majestic flier's ability to transport both beings and burden since the dawn of time, we could have never traveled so far or so high, warred on different continents, or looked down on those beneath us.

A close cousin of the horse, the pegasi is almost identical in its temperament and stature, but with great wings spanning twenty to thirty feet extending from the withers. The Great Hummingbird Harry, who won the Wimblefly Cup for four years in a row from 1799 to 1802, was known to have the largest wingspan on record, of thirty-three feet and three inches. Alternatively, some say King Wizziam the Conqueror's famed warhorse, Fleet Flighter, once possessed a broad wingspan of thirty-six feet, but due to being both captured and perishing in the same battle and ultimately being found half-burnt in a field this claim is unconfirmed and widely debated in the Royal Society of Pegasi Pedigree, as the warhorse's previously sired offspring failed to produce such impressive wingspans.

For millennia the pegasi was ridden, and often used for carrying cargo by using ropes strapped across saddles and hanging down. These ropes were tethered to large baskets or pallets carrying cargo underneath during flight. Pegasi are often used in many practical occupations: transporting construction materials between boroughs in Victoria’s capital city, Tipton; helping village farmers bring produce to their nearby market towns; lifting skiers up mountains; and pulling flying carriages cross-country.I wrote a short story (\~800 words) while taking a break from another project. Thought it would be fun to share, and if you want to give any constructive feedback you are welcomed to. Otherwise just enjoy the story of a little dragon named Carrot.

:)

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Bj782JYnOTzghw\_JZkEARR5aDY8lG41nUOv\_j-3euzI/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Bj782JYnOTzghw_JZkEARR5aDY8lG41nUOv_j-3euzI/edit?usp=sharing) **The invincible king of Amarog**

Far beyond the Great White Mountains, flanked by the beautiful shimmering Lake of Sillicis on one side and the dense dark pine forest on the other, lies the famed kingdom of Amarog.

It is said that this kingdom is so picturesque that as if God has taken all the time of the world to paint each detailing of this kingdom with His own hands. But Amarog is not only known for its unique beauty, tales of its great rich and prosperity have travelled all round the world and attracts all kinds of people like merchants, travelers, vagabonds, artists, writers, and poets alike to visit these famed lands from different corners of the world.   

People believe that Amarog could amass such dizzying affluence only because of the sheer brilliance of their beloved ruler King Freki. He has ensured the residents of the kingdom are well off and it is believed they’re also very content with their lives in general. Happiness and peace flows through the streets of the huge kingdom of Amarog. King Freki commands complete support and acceptance from each resident and is highly respected by one and all.

But among all these unbelievable tales of pomp and grandeur of the great Amarog lies one more very interesting fact of the kingdom. As you enter through the gigantic gates of the city, you’ll be welcomed by a huge sign board where 2 lines are written in big bold alphabets:

“The Royal Challenge of Amarog: If the reader of this board isn’t happy with the rule of King Freki and thinks she/he can be a better ruler than him or merely wants to grab this land’s great riches out of one’s greed is most welcome to challenge the King for his crown. The challenger will have to defeat the king in a task of her/his choice BUT the King gets to choose the time and place. \~ duly signed by the king of Amarog”

Every person reading this for the first time gets bewildered by the sheer boldness of the statement. It appears as if the king has no love for his beloved throne. But why? Also how does choosing the time and place of challenge even make any difference? Lot of people just laugh it off thinking it as a gimmick of the clever king just to make his people believe how open he is with his governance. Or maybe it is to just show off his confidence by openly challenging anyone, so that his people’s faith in his ability as a ruler is reinforced. But even if it’s a trick, isn’t it too risky? Maybe the old king has gone mad!

But the most unbelievable fact still, is despite having the Royal challenge, Amarog hasn’t seen a new ruler in the past several years, at least since the lifetime of the oldest resident Mr. Adams. Or so he claims. By the way, Mr. Adams celebrated his 89th birthday last week! Maybe age is just catching upto him, but the point is no one cares about how long Freki has been the king. As everyone is too fond of and used to having him around. 

But Amarog was not always this perfect, its people has gone through their own fair share of decades of horror and peril. Several years ago there used to be wide-spread poverty in the suburbs, several people used to live like destitute on the streets, struggling to get one hot meal for the day. Occasional outbreaks of pandemics plagued the city which almost wiped out half the population of Amarog on one occasion. This followed violent riots by the lower section of the society for their rights and almost dismantled the stable rule of king Freki. On several occasions foreign invasions also took place to rip the state off its riches. But the legendary king of Amarog has stood tall and out of his sheer brilliance and courage has been protecting his people from every adversity. He has been successful in bringing peace, harmony, and prosperity during his long rule over the kingdom. Freki’s dedication, commitment and intelligent decision making has earned him the unconditional support from his people and rightfully so. 

Freki was a reserved man. While the ageing ruler still took regular strolls around his city to talk to his people and got to prompt action to help them out, he chose to keep his personal life completely private. 

People flocked around him to catch a glimpse of and greet him, as he walked through the busy streets without any security. He had flowing winter white hair, his bushy silvery beard tip tied to a small golden ring, milky blue eyes and wrinkled facial skin. His favorite golden embroidered bright grey robe covered his frail drooping body as he walked supported on an intricately designed handstaff, in small heavy steps support. He almost seemed like a wizard. He didn’t stay in any royal quarter surrounded by servants but chose to live alone in a modest independent house situated in the city outskirts. He woke up early, attended his courtroom meetings, took strolls around the city, and came back home in the evening. This was his routine. He had no family nor friends. No one knew why he kept such a low profile. There were rumors that he can be hiding something. Maybe he possessed some supernatural powers that he wants to keep to himself, else how can he still be undefeated in all the Royal Challenges in the last several years? And now he was old too. He can barely walk straight, how will he defeat someone in the open challenge? People wondered there must be some secret to his invincibility. But no one could really ever find out as all the challenges take place in some lonely, deserted place, by the order of the king, the only condition he had inserted in the Royal challenge. Time and place. Who knew these 2 factors can be so dreadfully powerful!   

One fine morning, as the daily hustle bustle was just picking up in the city, suddenly black storm clouds began flocking the otherwise bright blue sky over Amarog. A strong gust started blowing through the bustling streets of the city. As people started scurrying for cover, three little red birds sitting on the thick grey city walls, oblivious to the impending danger looming over the city, happily chirped and played away among themselves. A tall young man appeared in his bright red shiny armor and slowly rode into the high gates of Amarog, on his pitch-black horse. His mere presence itself was so discerning that every passerby literally stopped their ongoing activities in the midway and simply kept staring at him.

The stranger rode straight upto the board which mentions the Royal Challenge, got down from his horse and roared at the top of his voice: “I am Agos, prince of Noche. I hereby want to declare that I want to challenge the King of Amarog for his crown through a fight unto death.” 

The onlookers gasped in utter fear and started mumbling among themselves only to be jolted back to their senses by Agos’s sonorous voice: “I demand you to take me to your king immediately.”

Agos was at once presented at the court of the King Freki and they faced each other in the midst of hundreds of onlookers. Among them some were the noble lords of the city and others were merely the common men and women who have gathered to notice this grand spectacle. The gigantic court room of Freki was so jam packed that people who were farthest down the aisle, started jumping from above the shoulders of others to catch a glimpse of this Royal Challenge. But from that distance all they could see was an obscure image: A strong able sturdy young frame facing a small fragile drooping structure. Such was the stark contrast!

The young prince roared once again in a voice full of youthful vigor and confidence, "I want to challenge you to a fight with bare hands unto death. In case I defeat you, which I will, I shall be proclaimed the new ruler of Amarog. Do you accept my challenge King Freki?”     

The old king appeared unfazed by the daunting being standing in front of him. He was busy fiddling with the heavy gold chain that he wore around his neck and answered in a shaky but uninterested senile voice, “Of course, isn’t that the rule of this great land?” A devilish smirk appearing on his wrinkled face.

Agos almost trying to hide the disbelief from his face, angrily retorted back, “Are you crazy old fellow? You think this a joke? Don’t you fear death?” 

Suddenly the court fell silent. All the murmurs stopped abruptly as every gaze in that courtroom was fixated on Freki. But to the utter dismay of everyone, Freki burst into a feat of boisterous laughter! The sound of him echoed down the enormous hall till the very last spectator. Drawing intermittent gasps of breath, Freki almost squealed out, “Meet me in the forest 7 nights from today at midnight. If you don’t show up, I’ll find you and have you hanged from the Royal Challenge board!”

Agos with his ego hurt and feeling completely humiliated, trembled with anger, and screamed, “You will die in 7 nights Freki, do you understand that? I will kill you with my own hands. Count your days while you can, you old fool.”

7 nights passed and the judgement day finally came. Agos was waiting alone at the desolate pine forest far away from the gates of Amarog, dressed in his usual battle gown and warming up, practicing his favorite battle stance. He looked focused and up for the challenge. It was sharp midnight, the moon shone like a bright white sun in the middle of the cold dark sky, lighting up the whole pine forest with a soft silver hue from above. It seemed as if someone has covered the forest with a silver blanket. The forest grew even more silent with each passing minute with the silence only occasionally broken by the wind howling past and the rustling of the pine trees. The moment was captivating.

Agos kept waiting with no sign of Freki. He wants to get it over with after the humiliation Freki inflicted upon him in front of all the people whom he will rule from the next day, he thought. All kinds of vengeful ideas flooded his mind and it slowly made him grow restless but still Freki was nowhere to be seen. He almost abandoned the grounds and decided to confront Freki in his quarters when he heard a heavy thump just behind him in the forest.

In a reflex he glanced over his shoulders and saw a tall black silhouette standing underneath the trees in the darkness. He couldn’t make anything out of it. He gathered himself together and shouted at the gigantic shadow, “Freki don’t try tricks on me, come here and face me right now. I’m here to…”

Before he could complete his last words, the shadow moved. And the very next instance Agos couldn’t see it anymore. As he started looking for it in every direction, he suddenly felt a warm breath down his neck.

Agos slowly turned around to find an enormous hairy monstrous creature with sharp white fang-like teeth and big shiny claws, taking quick breaths, looking straight down at him with its fiery red eyes. It appeared as a wolf to him, but it was standing on its two legs and it was enormous. 

It was full moon that night and a terrified Agos couldn’t help but notice a shiny gold chain hanging around the neck of that diabolical beast, which he recognized at once, but maybe it was too late for him.Hello friends I'm an amateur writer and I've written short stories before but have never attempted to write a novel or novella. Well I've written a plot outline for my first novella and I'd love to get some feedback early in the process. I'm hoping you can help me iron some early issues out, but also curious to see if these two point of view characters seem interesting or worth following.

I've tried hard to avoid dumping too much info out of the gate and opted to go for a robbery for the first chapter in an attempt to grab the readers attention early while establishing one of our two main characters. The second chapter is our second main character a prince partaking in a magic lesson. I was hoping this would be a natural way to share a bit more setting info without overdoing it but I am a bit worried it's ham-fisted.

Please let me know what you think and constructive feedback would be amazing to help my progress. Thanks in advance. Here is the first two chapters on google docs if that makes for an easier read: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eVn0mnlENN2iUotiS1XtyxI26mMwpEH0heng9HoVDzM/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1eVn0mnlENN2iUotiS1XtyxI26mMwpEH0heng9HoVDzM/edit?usp=sharing)

Here is the first two chapters if you prefer reading on reddit.

**The Shattered Alchemists Mask**

&#x200B;

**Chapter 1:**

The biting winds of winter roared around the woman dressed all in white, yet beneath her alchemist's mask her face showed no signs of discomfort. Her gang of masked warriors shifted nervously in the snow capped mountain pass. A tall and thin man stepped up beside her as she scanned the long and winding road.

Without looking away from the horizon she asked the man. “How’s your sister holding up Mouse?”

“Well Luna, she’s still bed ridden but the medicine you made for her has kept her mostly comfortable. Physician says she won’t make it through the winter without another surgery,” Mouse sniffled, as much from the cold as from the icy bite of the inevitable.\`\` The worst part is my mum spends all her time in the damn cathedral praying for her.” Mouse said.

Luna removed her ceramic alchemist's mask and turned to look him in the eyes before speaking in a soft but hopeful voice. “After this raid we’ll finally have enough Amethite. We’ll make the exchange with the elves and have enough coin to solve all of our problems. You have my word that your sister will be taken care of. In fact, the Blind Alchemists will improve life for everyone in the slums.”

“You’ve got a heart of gold, we’re all proud to be called Blind Alchemists and you know we’d follow you to the gates of hell.” He said.

“Someone’s got to take care of you lot, eh?” She spoke laughing and hitting him in the arm playfully. “Ever since the Church of Embers took root in Cloudreach and began pumping our streams full of chemicals things have gone to shite. Once we take care of our own, I plan to do something about it.” Luna put her mask back over her face and looked back and forth between her rusty copper pocket watch and the sun swiftly setting behind the horizon.

“It’s time.” She said quietly as she flashed a hand signal to her men hiding on the other side of the road. The gang of masked men rubbed their hands together and readied blades and bows.

The silhouettes of four large and thundering horse drawn carriages revealed themselves in the twilight of the setting sun. They raced down the icy road unknowingly towards the hidden gang lying in wait. Luna breathed in deeply as the carriages were nearly upon them. The sound of her rhythmically thumping heartbeat was entirely drowned out by the symphony of crashing hooves and roaring winds.

The click of the tripwire being triggered by the first carriage was inaudible over the cacophony of noise. A deafening explosion of emerald hued flames erupted from beneath the carriages sending debris and horses in all directions. The carriages tumbled end over end haphazardly before sliding to a stop in the snow.

“Now!” Luna roared, raising her rapier up towards the sky.

Disoriented caravan guards climbed out quickly from the wrecked carriages drawing swords and axes. The Blind Alchemists spilled out from their hiding places and washed over the carriages, the clash of steel echoing through the mountain pass. Luna smiled, everything seemed to be going according to plan and the intel she received looked correct in regards to the caravan being lightly guarded. As she scanned the battle it was obvious that her gang would make short work of the surprised guards.

Just then, a gaunt dark haired man in a red tabard marked with a raven stepped out of a carriage. He brushed his long hair out of his face, taking in the battle around him with an eerie calm. The man emptied the contents of a pouch into his hand and began motioning his other hand over it.

Luna’s face went pale beneath her mask. She gasped aloud. “Amethite.”

Three small crystals in the dark haired man's hand glowed to life. The illuminated crystals hovered in the air above his palm for a long moment before transforming to ash and falling to ground. The man’s eyes glowed an unnatural, overly saturated purple as he dropped the spent amethite and drew two viciously curved hand axes. He roared as he jumped into the melee and began cutting down the Blind Alchemists with ease. The way he moved was graceful like an eagle but he struck out with his axes with the strength of a gorilla. It was entirely inhuman.

“No!” Luna cried out seeing her friends fall one by one before her. She charged through the snow towards the man, drawing an alchemical flask out from her cloak. The oily liquid sloshed around inside the container as she sprinted to action. The dark haired man swung one of his axes out parallel to the horizon separating a Blind Alchemist's torso from his legs. With eyes like a violet furnace, a terrifying laughter erupted from him as he threw his other axe with an unbelievable force that saw it cut right through two masked men and bury itself easily into the granite mountainside. The dark haired man grinned, pivoting and lunging towards a horrified and helpless Mouse.

Tears of panic running down her masked face Luna threw the flask of tar colored liquid at the feet of the axe wielding man. Green flames erupted engulfing him within seconds. He turned menacingly towards Luna and sprinted towards her with an unbelievable quickness. The sight of the dark haired man ablaze but still charging headlong towards her combined with the smell of his burning flesh gave her the impulse to spew her stomach's contents all over the snow but her survival instincts kicked in. She jumped away from the charging madman while attempting to draw another flask but the man was much too fast.

He looped his weapon around roaring and the viciously sharp steel bit into her bicep sending the flask tumbling out of her hand. She cried out as searing hot pain sent shockwaves up her arm. The man paused a second to leer at her, flames still dancing horrifyingly all over his body. His dark hair had mostly burned away leaving a scarred and chewed up mess of flesh. He didn’t seem to care at all.

Luna pushed herself off of a large snow covered boulder into a surprisingly graceful roll, especially given that her body felt like it would soon shut down from blood loss. She scooped up the flask from the snow as she tumbled, throwing it purposefully at the feet of her enemy with every ounce of her remaining energy. It shattered causing an incredible alchemical reaction, a tangle of roots erupted from the ground beneath the once dark haired man. He roared and flailed as the vines wrapped around him immobilizing him despite his thrashing. Eventually his thrashing subsided and his eyes faded from a magically illuminated purple to a lifeless white.

While ripping a strip of her cloak off and wrapping her wounded arm with it Luna instructed her gang between heavy breaths. “Gather up all the Amethite. Pile the bodies of our fallen brothers. Burn them and gather their ashes so we can offer them to their families. Their sacrifice won’t be for nothing.”

The battered gang looked up at their leader for a second, unable to believe what she had just done, then they set themselves to task. Nightfall had taken hold of the mountain pass and the once chaotic scene became calm. The aftermath of the battle was illuminated only by the still burning body of the once dark haired man.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

**Chapter 2:**

Prince Cassian looked out the window of the tower, pondering what life might be like for the citizens of Cloudreach far below. The lantern festival had started the previous day and the colorfully decorated streets were already crowded. People came from all over Enthamere and even the lands beyond to enjoy the festivities. Despite having anything he desired within reach he still fantasized about living the life of a common man. He thought of walking the streets unnoticed, of setting off on adventures, of buying his own bread from the market, no unbearably heavy expectations to weigh him down.

Cassian was certainly appreciative of his royal upbringing and the many years of world class education he had received. He just wished he could silence the pessimistic voice inside that promised him he would never be half the man his father was. Of course it would’ve been simpler if his father was anyone else. Perhaps a baker or a ferryman would’ve been preferable to the young prince.

A squat man with a gray beard that nearly touched the floor sat across from the prince reading aloud from a massive tome. “And so, King Denethor of Enthamere ushered forth the most prosperous time in our kingdom's long and storied history. In the deepest mines beneath the tallest mountains, the king discovered deposits of the crystal called Amethite. He immediately knew it was special and as such he brought it back for experimentation. Little did he know the violet crystals would change Enthamere and the world forever. The amethite could be harnessed to accompl...”

“Yes, I’ve heard this story a thousand times, Eldan.” Prince Cassian interrupted, eyes still fixed on the hustle and bustle of the streets far below.

The old man slammed the book shut in earnest frustration. “Indeed young lord, I imagine you have. So then, tell me the applications of Amethite?”

Cassian bounced to his feet, turning to face his teacher. “Well, the crystal can be used as a source of energy. Like it’s often used to keep buildings or ships afloat in the sky. Or it can be consumed to grant the wielder incredible speed and strength for a short time.”

“And what of the stone sickness?” Asked Eldan.

“The stone sickness is what happens to those not properly trained to use the Amethite. The sensation provided by the crystal can overwhelm one’s senses, resulting in vomiting, or loss of consciousness, or if used too often the mind of the user may even be lost forever.” Recited the well educated prince.

Eldan nodded his head vigorously. “Excellent young lord, but what about the application you’ve forgotten? The focus of our studies over the past months?”

“Well obviously *you* know it can be used by those well versed to perform all manner of wondrous things Eldan. Now please, show me again?” Cassian asked, beginning to pace around the large chamber.

Eldan smiled at the prince before reaching into a fold in his baggy and ornately patterned cloak pulling out a handful of small purple crystals. He closed his eyes, breathing in deeply. The amethite hovered above the old man's hand glowing vividly as he gestured with his other hand towards a decorative suit of heavy steel armor. The suit of armor vibrated for a second before it came to life walking across the room and patting Cassian on the shoulder. The armor walked gracefully as if a man was inside of it.

“You’re incredible Eldan.” Said the prince.

Eldan winked at the prince, waving his hand and the suit of armor returned to its idle position near the door. “Now it’s your turn my young lord.”

Prince Cassian stepped up next to his teacher and cracked his knuckles before emptying a small pouch of amethite into his palm.

“Remember to clear your mind young lord. You must be like the galleon in the storm cutting through the waves. There can be no resistance or doubt, you must flow with the energy.” The bearded teacher instructed calmly but clearly passionately.

Cassian's brow scrunched as he concentrated intensely. For a long minute nothing happened and frustration began to well up inside of him. Eldan put a hand on the young lord's shoulder and reassured him. “Breath Cassian, the amethite doesn’t control you, you control *it*. Be like the galleon, ever flowing with the waves.

”In the rear of the chamber King Denethor quietly entered the chamber unnoticed, leaning against an intricately carved pillar. The king brought his hand up to his chin observing the lesson quietly when the suit of armor began to buzz rhythmically. Cassian with sweat beginning to drip down his forehead breathed deeply when the amethite finally raised out of his palm humming and glowing vibrant hues of violet. The armor came to life creaking inelegantly across the hall causing the prince and his father to each smile. Cassian teemed with confidence as the armor crept across the hall metal scraping against the marble floor.

The prince noticed his father watching and for just a split second lost his concentration sending the suit of armor crashing to the floor. The young prince cursed under his breath, disappointed with himself for losing focus, especially with his father watching.

Eldan’s laugh filled the chamber as he put his hands on his hips. “Don’t be hard on yourself young lord, this is the best you’ve done yet!”

Cassian’s father approached and put his arm around him pulling him in. “You’re too hard on yourself son. There exist men who try all their lives to harness this power to no avail. Eldan tells me you are improving more and more each week. You’re only seventeen, you’ve got plenty of time to master all of this yet.”

Cassian sighed with eyes locked on the floor before replying. “I know. I get it. I just want to make everyone proud.”

The king patted his son on the back guiding him up a massive spiral staircase. Upon reaching the top of the floating tower they were greeted by a three hundred and sixty degree view of the capitol city. Cloudreach buzzed with life. Columns of travelers spilled out of the gates waiting to gain entry. The markets were booming with vendors selling every type of ware imaginable. The breathtaking snow capped peaks could be seen on all sides behind the capitol city's massive walls.

King Denethor filled his lungs with the chilling mountain air arms extended and began pointing out areas to his son. “One day all of this will be yours to rule Cassian. From the largest floating spires and the bustling markets, to the smallest mountain villages. All of it will be under your command. These people will look to you in times of need and you will protect them. Just like the walls and mountains have always protected us.”

The prince looked out over the edge of the tower and imagined being a bird soaring weightlessly through the sky. “I will become strong so that I may be that rock for our people, I promise this to you.”

They stood together quietly for a time atop the tower admiring their kingdom. “Your mother would be proud of you if she was here to see the man you’ve become.” The king said softly.

Cassian found himself at a loss for words. *Would she truly be proud of him if she were still alive?* He thought.

“Can we go down to watch the race father?”

Denethor looked out over his city for a long moment before sighing and answering. “Unfortunately, the senate is scheduled to reconvene and requires my attendance. If I don’t impose the planned sanctions over the Church of the Ember they will spread like weeds throughout Enthamere.”

Cassian rolled his eyes, clearly disappointed at his father’s answer.

The king continued. “I don’t want you to go out into the city during the festival Cassian. It’s too dangerous right now with so many outsiders inside the walls for the celebration. Not to mention an increase in reports of violence committed by gangs from the slums. It’s just not the right time.”

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

If you made it this far thank you so much for your time!Do you want to talk with the r/FantasyWriters community about an off-topic subject for the subreddit? If so, welcome to the weekly Open Thread! Here you may open discussions or ask questions unrelated to fantasy writing. Most topics lacking a home elsewhere on the subreddit can find one here. 

Subjects must be kept safe-for-work. Comments will be held to the standard of conduct we enforce elsewhere on the subreddit, those key tenets being:

1. Be respectful.
2. Don’t be rude or hostile.
3. Don’t copy or plagiarize.

It's possible that our automated bots *may* take down comments with links in the thread if they are unauthorized for the rest of the subreddit. Moderation will fix those instances if we see them occur.

This post will stay pinned as a top post until a new Open Thread post replaces it next Monday. Enjoy!Hi everyone, another attempt at my first chapter.  Would welcome any thoughts you have here. Should I continue on with this story?

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/18dij4ucQpBr8HPp5\_4cyTuJcPDRI8T3p3boban-tUcw/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18dij4ucQpBr8HPp5_4cyTuJcPDRI8T3p3boban-tUcw/edit?usp=sharing)I've been working on this novel for quite some time now, and have finally decided to share its blurb with an audience so I can receive some feedback on it. I just would like an honest critique on it and what changes I should make for the story to sound more appealing.  
I've titled it *The Higlon* and this is the blurb of the first book, *Into the Blue*.

The Blurb:  
 

The Lord of Ognor, Malanphis, is amassing an army of war unlike any ever seen for one single purpose: to conquer the continent of Rhitournya. His threads of hate spread ever wider throughout the East, influencing the Fine Folk of the land and bending them to his will or causing them to flee from his tyranny. He will succeed in his grand plot for sovereignty unless kings, queens, ladies, and lords can band together to stop him.

Jeff Shaws and his cousin William find themselves in a company of unlikely fellows, assembled and led by the Wisely Arthur Alexis. The higlons must leave their home in Hastrogne and make a daring and death-defying journey across the realms and regions of Rhitournya, rallying the Fine Folk to the Polluted Country that is Ognor. There they must overthrow the Lord Malanphis from his throne before he can unleash his wrath upon the continent. 

But this second battle for the dominion of Rhitournya and the continuation of the World War is only a part of some larger and far more elaborate scheme, devised by the most horrible entity in existence that will concern all the Rulers of Rhinya and their allies and friends in the End.I'd be happy to get any comments about this. If anyone is interested, I also have the first chapter.

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dWd8RkuxFrL44whdqV1btiiLgewVBlJdliytmQBRItQ/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dWd8RkuxFrL44whdqV1btiiLgewVBlJdliytmQBRItQ/edit?usp=sharing)

EDIT: The colored dialog text is for ease of writing.I've been struggling with my blurb for ages - is it interesting? Does it make you want to know what happens? I would appreciate a critique.

Here it is:

Leon never wanted to be a murderer, nor helplessly watch a fiery beast abduct his mother—yet thanks to his bizarre abilities he finds himself scrambling to save her with scorched blood still dripping from his hands.

Leaving behind a lifetime of sparring on Oovad’s black beaches and healing its people, Leon hastens after his mother’s ever-ebbing trail which leads him straight into the cruel and ancient world of Oov—a world he never knew to exist.

Ruled by magic-wielding Zons and plagued by endless wars, Oov’s brutality hinders Leon from reuniting with his mother. That is, until he chances upon Barnaby, a lousy drunk, and Ulver, a cold-blooded warrior. The trio agree to help each other avenge what they’ve lost to the Zons’ tyranny, but they quickly learn that they’re not the only ones scouring the land.

A wickedness prowls in Oov’s shadows, impatient for seizing what it lost twenty-one years ago—one who wields red flames. The very same kind, in fact, that erupt from Leon’s skin.Hi All,

I'm in the process of writing the first book in a trilogy but I am seriously struggling with the overarching plotline that ties all three books together. I am so in love with these characters, this world and this series but I can feel that there is some overall cohesiveness missing from the story. So my question to you all is how do you figure out these huge plots?

Book One: Told from the POV of the female protagonist who is an Apprentice under the Master of Magic. Each Kingdom has royalty and also a Master of Magic who helps the people/royal family, sometimes these Masters are good, sometimes they are bad, sometimes their skill level is unbelievable and sometimes it's surprisingly low. This girl is the sole Apprentice and is an incredibly impressive user of magic despite never really experiencing the world as her Master states she's too valuable to lose being the only Apprentice. Long story short there is a sleeping curse plaguing the kingdom and after her Master falls ill she leaves her home to search for a cure. Along the way she hires a traveller to help her find her way. This is our male protagonist, he has had a horrible curse put upon him that restricts his magic use but he maintains he has no memory of how this happened or what he had done to deserve it. We find out a huge twists at the end and it puts the female and male protagonists in an impossibly hard situation where they have to decide whether his past actions were excusable or not and how this will impact them going forward. Her Master dies due to the curse. She does not solve the curse but finally realises what happened and now has all the information she needs to sort it out.

Book Two: The two join forces again with another pair of characters, despite the public concern that the male protagonist  is an untrustworthy companion to put an end to this curse once and for all. The curse has now been cast a second time and is killing a new group of people in her kingdom. Told from the male protagonists point of view and features his perspective on the fallout of what we learnt at the end of book one. They once again journey across the land but they go much further this time and work with another kingdom to help bring in the Master (not her Master) who is cursing her kingdom (who happens to be related to the male protagonist). This ends with the female protagonist being given the opportunity to decide what to do with the fate of the male protagonist and she chooses to pardon him despite public outcry as she believes that without the influence of his Master he never would have made the decisions that lead him to be cursed.

NOW here is where I'm struggling. I have a very solid vision of these first two books but the third either A. shouldn't happen or B. does not really have a solid plot that I can get behind. However I feel the ending of book two can't just be some happily ever after BS.

Book Two (potential end to jump off Book Three): The queen of the kingdom of which the female protagonist is now the Master of Magic has decided that her judgement is clouded when it comes to the male protagonist and rejects her decision and instead sentences the male protagonist to be sent to some horrible place. The female protagonist is forced to stay and fulfil her duties due to a binding contract she signed at the end of Book One.

Book Three: The two protagonists must once again find one another and then after that I'm out of steam for ideas? I wanted to maybe make the Queen evil but that seems boring. I was maybe going to bring her Master back but that seemed dumb. We still have the villain from the first and second book and it could very easily make sense that he is in kahoots with the Queen and is maybe trying to get her out of the way but maybe that's too big? I am flat stuck. All I know is I love these characters and I want to do them some justice.

Any advice on how you resolve huge plot holes like this would be amazing. I feel I can't start really writing until I at least have an idea of how this will end.I'm writing a novel set in the world of Norse mythology. As a part of the process, I'm writing one short story for each of the nine realms. I'd love to get your critique. Find below a story from the dark elven realm.

# Svartalfheim

The storm whips at the ocean and blows dark clouds in from the sea. It raises waves that dash on the longship's prow. Salt and foam spray on the wooden shields fixed along the ship's railing. Sideways rain lashes at the crew of eight sworded men clad in chain mails. Lightning flashes far out to sea and rolls a clash of thunder in from the storm.

"Lower the sail!" Erik shouts from his place in the prow. Two of his men go to work on the ropes. The rest find oars inside the hull and start to row.

Erik takes the oar in front and on starboard. On the portside oar in front sits Grell, a tall man with grey hair that washes down over his eyes. The rain flattens his beard against his armor. He nods to the cliffs ahead and on their starboard and says, "There's another."

A clay hut perches on the rocks above them. The wind blows on its walls and resounds with deep howls. A handful of these small, shoddy shelters spread over the coastline. "No room for treasure in that," says Grell.

Erik looks over his shoulder. "We're not coming for the farms," he says and turns back with a relaxed smile. "We're coming for the hoard." Rain mats his hair, but it still looks golden blonde.

"It's not about the hoard," says Grell.

"It's about going deeper," says Erik. "We sail far from the world. Have you ever heard a story of men who sailed as far as this?"

"No one has."

"Then you know that no man has claimed the riches in this land."

"All we see is rocks and clay," says Grell.

"There will be gold," says Erik. "This is an old and great people. We will sail deeper until we find it."

"I said it's not about the gold."

"But there will be gold," says Erik.

"Why do you know that?"

"Because I told her."

"You told Svanhilde?" says Grell.

"When I left,' says Erik, "she carried my youngest boy and walked with me to the boat. She cried and told me I had to stay and watch him grow to a man. I told her I was bringing his inheritance."

"That is how you know we will find a treasure?"

"Ja," says Erik with a determined frown. "I told her we will find it, so we will."

"You may get lucky," says Grell. "No one cried when I left, so I didn't need to make any promises."

Erik grins at him. "I'm sure the outlander whores were sad to lose a source of income."

"They're more hopeful than me that we'll find anything," says Grell. He nods over his shoulder. "If there is anything in this land, we're getting closer."

Erik follows his nod and looks ahead. Through the thick rain, he gleans an opening in the cliffs. As they row nearer, the huts on the rocks grow clearer. They're built of grey clay in bulky cone shapes. None are tall enough to stand in. They have no windows, but in seeming random spots they have holes the size of a man's hand. The gaps are too dark and small to look in, but something can watch from inside. From these holes rises the howl of the wind.

Erik stands and leaves his oar dragging in the water. He draws his sword and points it where the sea foams and washes between the cliffs. "Turn into the land!" His golden hair whips around his head. He grins and shouts at his men. "We will sail deeper until we reach the center. There we'll find the treasure and take it from those who live here."

A warcry rises from his men. They draw their swords and clash the flats of their blades against the shields fixed on the railing. Erik holds onto the wooden dragon's head carved in front of the prow and grins back at them. He feels a heavy lump rise in his throat. The men would not notice a tear in this rain.

A wrenching wave grips the ship. Erik fumbles for balance and sits back down by his oar. The ship veers into the waters that churn in the strait between the cliffs. The waves rage and toss the men inside the hull. Their armors clash against each other.

The world outside the ship blurs with rain and seafoam. In the brief moments when the ship stops rumbling, Erik glimpses the clay shelters. They cover the cliffs around and above them. The ship tosses too fast to see anything inside the little holes that cover the huts' walls.

The strait opens to a wide inland lake with clay huts on every bank. The rumble lessens, so seamen's legs can keep steady on deck. On the opposite shore lies a long beach in front of a jagged mountain range. Clay spots are visible in its valleys and gentler slopes. Wind-howling surrounds the Northmen, as they pass through the lake.

When they approach the beach, they see through the rain a single crooked figure. Draped in grey cloth, it leans on a dead tree branch that stands taller than itself. Pointed, dark-skinned ears stick out from the shawl that covers its head and face. It watches through a thin slit in the wrapping with eyes too dark to see from outside.

The rain fades to a drizzle, as the ship crunches onto the grainy beach. The crooked stranger does not move. Erik looks around with longer vision in clearer air. From some of the huts along the lake's bank behind them have come more of the short, awkward figures. They stand in small groups and watch the sailors. Their mouths don't seem to move behind their shawls. In the absence of the rain's splashing, the howling from the huts grows louder.

When Erik turns back to the beach, the lone figure stands taller and straighter than before. Its ears have retracted and hidden inside its bindings. The skin on its hands has turned from dark to pale grey, almost a human color. It waits for the men to come.

"This is not like the eastern village raids we have done," says Erik without looking at his crew.

"It is further away," says Grell, "but it always works the same." He grabs his shield off the railing and jumps onto the beach.

Erik forgets his shield and jumps after him. He sprints past Grell and stands in front of the stranger with his hand on his sheathed sword's handle. Grell lines up by his right hand with a wide grin. The rest of the men follow. All are bulky, armed, and taller than the stranger. They stalk behind with raised shoulders and cast uncertain glances around them.

"You," says Erik to the hidden figure. He squints and tries to see inside the wrappings, but it's too dark. "Where is your leader?"

The darkness withdraws from its eyes. Two grey pupils appear inside the shawl. The stranger unbinds its head and reveals a broad, pale human face with short, grey hair and no beard. It opens its mouth. All the Northmen fall silent. The stranger speaks. Its language is like the Old Tongue, but with harsh sounds in the back of its throat. The men do not understand.

"This is stupid." Grell draws his sword. He strikes with the pommel on the stranger's brow.

The cloaked one steps backward and flails its arms in front of its face. With shock-wide eyes, it sticks its tongue out and gargles in a pitch that rises to a thin shriek. Grell points his sword at the stranger's throat. "Show us where you worship your god," he says. "Show us the offerings you have made for him."

The cloaked one settles and lowers its arms by its sides. The skin on its forehead sheds no blood, but it turns dark grey at the point of impact. It frowns, turns around, and starts to walk towards the jagged cliffs beyond the beach.

Erik slaps Grell on the shoulder. "Man," he says, "your diplomacy does not fail." He turns to the men and shouts. "Come after the strange one! He will lead us to the treasure!"

The men walk in a train up from the beach. More of the crooked figures duck out from the clay huts and watch them leave. The wind has vanished with the rain, but the howling still comes from the shelters and blows air out from them. It seems to fade in the lakeside huts and rise deeper in the mountain.

The cloaked one leads them into a wide crack in the rocks with a sandy uphill path in the bottom. They walk higher in the land, while the howling grows from a deeper source. Atop the rock walls on both sides stand the crooked creatures. From behind cloth wrappings, they stare down at the Northmen. The path branches into tunnels and clay chambers, but the men follow the stranger higher.

They emerge from the mountain near the peak, below the rim of a vast crater. The floor is a clay plateau covered with clay carvings. The carvings show a single serpent that spirals from the center out to the plateau's rim. Along the edges stand the cone-shaped clay huts. These are so filled with holes that they are transparent. Instead of floors, they have pits that lead into the mountain. From inside them rises a loud, windlike howl.

Surrounding the plateau stands a mass of crooked creatures. Their faces are not covered. Each deformed in its own way, they have twisted noses, cleft mouths, or clumped eyelids. Their skin is dark, almost black. They have long, pointed ears. They bustle around and watch the humans. They chatter and laugh, but the howling smothers their voices.

The cloaked one walks to the plateau's center. Erik runs in front of his men and stands facing it. He shouts over the chanting from inside the mountain. "Is this where you worship? Is this where you have treasure?" A strong gust rises from inside the transparent huts. It blows from all around and flutters his hair around his head.

"It is not about the treasure." Grell walks up next to him.

"We have come to the center," says Erik. "This is where the gold is."

"There is no gold."

"Then what is it for?" Erik grabs Grell by the collar and shakes, so his chain mail jangles. "What did we come for?"

"It doesn't matter what we find in the center," says Grell. "What matters is that we are the ones who found it."

"But what is going to happen to us?" Erik lets go of Grell and clasps his hands to his face. "What is all this?"

"It doesn't matter what happens to us," says Grell. "What matters is what we do."

With a single motion, he yanks his sword from his belt, lunges at the cloaked one, and stabs its gut. It grunts and clasps its hands over the wound. Its cloak does not stain with blood. Darkness swims in its eyes and covers them. It looks back up to Grell with a devious smile.

The cloaked one stands straight despite its wound and claps the palm of its right hand on Grell's face. The Northman lets go of his sword and jerks back, but can't separate himself. The same darkness swims in his eyes and turns them black. The cloaked one lets go and stands back with the sword stuck in its belly.

Erik raises his sword and shouts, "Attack!" His men clash their steel on their shields and roar at the cloaked one. They start forward, but when they hear Grell's scream, they fall silent again.

The grey-haired man falls to his knees and arches his back, so his chest presses towards the sky. Something bulges up from his torso inside the chain mail and stretches it upwards. Its iron links screech against each other. Grell closes his black eyes and howls in pain. When his breath runs out, his voice drowns in the noise from inside the mountain.

His armor springs open. Iron rings fly around him and clutter on the ground. When the metal falls from his torso, it reveals the mutilation that tore it. White bone from his chest curves out from the red meat inside. His ribs crack outwards and rip apart the cloth and iron from his front. His chest cavity is bare. There lies his heart. It pounds a loud, rapid beat.

"No!" Erik falls to his knees and watches his friend. He does not look inside but watches the pain twist over Grell's face. The Northmen scatter. They run away from the sight of the mutilation.

The dark elf crowd draws in on them. A sworded man can cut down one or two deformed creatures, but the mass swarms them. They disarm and strip the Northmen, bind them in their cloth wrappings, and haul them to the plateau's edge. They leave the men next to the huts at the plateau's edge and make them listen to the breath from inside the clay pits.

The howling from the mountain stops. Its force rustles the air for a moment, but it settles. It leaves a heavy silence broken only by the cries of cowed men. The cloaked one stands in front of Grell and pulls the sword out of its own belly. It reaches into the man's chest and grips the heart. Grell twitches but cannot snap out of his trance.

The cloaked one lifts Grell's heart from his chest. Its veins stretch and hold it back. The creature lays the edge of Grell's sword against the pipes of his heart's blood.

"No!" Erik crawls to the creature's feet and clutches the cloak above its knees. "He's my friend."

The cloaked one cuts Grell's heart out of his chest.

"No!"

Grell falls backward from his kneeling stance. He crashes on his back. His ribs crack further outwards and expose his lungs. The blackness fades from his eyes and leaves them empty.

Erik crawls over his dead friend. He dares not touch the open chest. He curls his fists in his lap and cries. He whispers to himself. "I'm not built for this. I'm not here. I'm going to disappear and lie down in the grass on the hill below the farm."

The cloaked one lifts the heart to its mouth. Its jaw shifts and widens its gape. It eats the whole heart in one bite.

Erik draws back from the corpse and looks up to the cloaked one. Its face starts to change. It grows taller. Its skin gains more human color but stays pale. It grows grey hair and a long beard. The stranger wears the same robes but looks like Grell.

It speaks in the northern tongue. "Your friend is not lost."

At that moment the howling starts again, but it does not come from inside the mountain. It changes direction, so the wind draws inward through the clay shelters at the plateau's edge. The huts riddled with holes seem to suck the air into the stone like the mountain is inhaling.

Erik pushes off the ground. The fresh wind starts to blow his blond hair around his head. Still kneeling, he straightens his back and looks up at his dead friend's visage. "What am I supposed to do?"

The cloaked one looks down at him and says, "You don't need to think about that anymore."

Erik doesn't protest. He finds his kneeling stance uncomfortable, so he sits down on his butt. He leans on his hands on the clay behind him. He can't think about anything anymore.

"Your new god will think for you," says the creature, "and you will act his bidding." He claps his palm on the man's forehead.

Erik feels another will inside his conscience. Dark power swims there and dissolves him. His ego trickles into a void pit. The power stiffens his body and covers his eyes in a dread haze. The world outside his body disappears. He stretches his arms out to the sides, arches his back, and pushes his chest skywards.

All his ribs crack along his sides. He can do nothing to react to the pain. All he can do is observe it through the new will in his mind. His bone cracks through his armor and opens his chest. The air stings on his insides. His heart lies bare.

"Behold." The voice comes from the will inside him. "This is your new god and your home."

The darkness clears from Erik's eyes. He sees the monster that towers up from the crater and looks down from above the peak. It is a great wyrm with a face broader than the whole plateau. Its teeth are sharp and long as a man. Its eyes are so dark they do not reflect light. Its limbless body extends up from the crater and down into the mountain's depth. Thick grey scales with a faint blue tint cover the crimson skin that lies underneath.

The world serpent stops inhaling, so the wind fades. The air flickers and settles. For a moment, Erik hears the defeated grunts of his men. When the monster starts to exhale, a howling noise from inside it deafens all else. It no longer comes from the huts but from its gape. The sound hypnotizes Erik. When the monster stoops towards him, he drowns in the darkness of its eyes.

The wyrm eats the heart out of Erik's chest. He collapses on the ground next to Grell.

Erik awakes inside the same darkness he saw in the serpent's eyes. He is together with other creatures in the void. They are too many to count. Many of them are human. Some are lower than human, some higher. He can't imagine an existence without them. Deep inside is an ancient will that is master of all.

He feels that his new body is great. It is impenetrable and as long as the world. He and all the creatures move as the ancient will demands. His new eyes open. He sees the clay platform below the crater's rim. Beneath him lie two heartless Northmen corpses. He does not recognize them. His people have bound six new offerings around his altar. He will have a feast.So, in my story there is a thing where some magical people know how to create beings. There are dragon riders that use this method in particular where their ancestors experimented with DNA (basically using chunks of meat/limbs/blood until they perfected it) of a dragon and created a clone that has no personality or intelligence outside of what is programmed into it via magic. It isn't an animal, and it is only alive when its rider is either touching it or uses magic to control it remotely. They do this to conceal from enemies that the breed of dragon they'd been using actually went extinct due to inbreeding, constant war, and just a bunch of mess on their part. They then embrace customizing them to the rider's needs, and create new "species" of homunculi only they're not "little people" but are basically the same concept.

And then, I wanted to have a warlock in the story had a horrific accident with an experiment, and all of his students except one died. He used their bodies in another experiment and it's explained as basically him using necromancy and what he knew about the method the dragon riders use and brought his students back to life as familiars. They're part animal too, which he did partly to see what would happen and partly to replace the ruined parts of their bodies. (is it an excuse to have cat boys and dog boys in my story? shut up) He refers to them as either his familiars or his homunculi, which becomes a problem because he has no regard for them as people anymore.

I'm not so sure about them passing as "homunculi" though. What do you think? Could there be a better term, maybe? The animal people are mostly regarded as familiars, but that is entirely because the warlock bound them to him so that they wouldn't tell anyone what he did.

What about for the dragons? They're not real dragons anymore, and the real ones refuse to even be on the same continent as these "monstrosities" as they refer to them. I guess it's sort of a semantics issue, but it could help with smaller details in the story and itch a scratch in my brain.Lysander was sitting in a diner, he had come here to escape Basil, always so determined to ”change the world!” “and stop the Reajans!”, but truly, Lysander didn’t care that much about it, he really only agreed to join Basil to kill his Father, who he so desperately hated. 

“How is it going Tyrannus?”
 The blood red haired man who suddenly sat down in front of him asked, which confused Lysander, as well as bringing back painful memories, though he quickly set aside his pain, as no one besides Basil should know him by that name. His confusion quickly vanished as he recognized the man, Alexander Reaja.
 “Oh, I must’ve forgotten, you go by Lysander now, don’t you?” 
“don’t act as if you could’ve forgotten that, Alexander.” 

“Wow, Lysander, how cruel. Can’t your cousin come and warn his cousin about his hunt, though you already know that, don’t you?”
“Of course I know of the price on my head, Alex, why would you come out here and hunt me down to give me information you know that I know?” 
“I just wanted to check up on you Tyrannus, I Haven't seen you in, what, seven years? What’s changed, still drinking SubHemo?” 

That single word brought back even worse memories, though again, he knew to set that aside, as the situation with Alexander was more pressing to him. After a few seconds, he finally responded simply, 
 “fuck you, Alex.”
“C’mon Ly, show me that cool blade the SubHemo gives you? We both agree everyone here is deplorable, why not off a few of them, give me a taste of the power your father gave you!” 
Alexander said this with an excitement foreign to Lysander, and as Lysander looked at Alexander, he saw not his cousin, but selfish royalty, whose death would send a message to the tyrants of Reaja. 

“You want to see my blade? Why, I could not deny you that pleasure, Alexander Reaja!” 
As the men started talking to one another, patrons of the diner started to notice these men, seemingly arguing, and started to watch, as an argument was considered a spectacle in this culture. 

“Then, partake in the act, summon that royal blade, which your father endowed upon you!” Alexander yelled with a lust, a lust which Lysander wanted so bad to experience, even just for a minute.

As Lysander saw Alexander with this lust, he started to channel the SubHemo which flowed through his veins, and manifested the long talked about blade, named the Tyrant’s blade, a most ironic name. The blade shone a blood red, and manifested itself in the right hand of Lysander. 
“Yes! Take the blade, and begone with the peasantry!” 
“Why should I? Why not begone with Tyranny? 
“Don’t pretend you would do that, Tyrannus. You are just as complicit as the rest of us!”
“Nay Alex! I have forgotten my royal roots! I have begotten the traditions of you tyrants! who would I kill? innocent peasants, to please some tyrant? Or the tyrant who wants those peasants dead? the answer is obvious to me, Alexander.”
As Alexander realized the situation, he swiftly threw a small blade at Lysander, but Lysander swung his blade, and deflected the blade. 
Lysander then took the final step and plunged the Tyrant’s blade into Alexander's stomach. 
“Sic semper tyrannis.” 
Lysander whispered, dissipating his blade, and fleeing into the night.Hi, everyone! I am an occasional poster and a long-time lurker. I would love for your advice on my first chapter. This is from a work in progress. I have trunked it a few times over the past three plus years and have finally nailed down where I want this novel to go.

**About the story:** *Creeping Forest* is inspired by my love books like *Hatchet, Julie of the Wolves,* and *Island of the Blue Dolphins.* Although my protagonist is 18, I do not see this as a YA fantasy, unless there are YA fantasies like the three YA books I mentioned above. This book uses survival and escape style plots. Another inspiration is weird fiction author H. P. Lovecraft. The magic contains some modern or scifi analogues, but this a vaguely 19th century setting. Think horses (mostly mechanical horses), not cars.

**About the feedback most desired:** I am mostly concerned with story. Do the opening lines spark your interest? Does the chapter bog down? Does it go too fast?  Can you tell vaguely what the story is going to be about? I also encourage advice on spatial scene setting. I suffer from face blindness in real life, and this crosses over into remembering layout and locations. So if I contradict something--layout of the cabin, directions, etc.--please let me know. I am also interested if the description is too much or too little. But I welcome any feedback, especially on the broader level.

**Chapter link:** [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XACUwsl9KRZslvvhtPqDHQz4p1M\_sQfo848KyBefMBM/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XACUwsl9KRZslvvhtPqDHQz4p1M_sQfo848KyBefMBM/edit?usp=sharing)

I look forward to your feedback, and I hope to return the favor.

Thanks!This is the first chapter in my debut manuscript. To give some background information, I wanted to start with the inciting incident (which later affects the main character, becoming a delayed inciting incident for him when he hears of the news, and how it affects him.) The characters are revisited throughout the A-plot and Werner serves as one of the antagonists.

I’d love some general feedback on the writing, maybe some thoughts about the piece, but most importantly, would you read on?  
Did you enjoy it? Criticisms from line edits and beyond are welcome and encouraged, I wish to create the strongest piece I can. 

[You can read this piece here.](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nH-dj_UX9tHi4A0YIH4OgSXw_OGPRYjs/view?usp=drivesdk)

Word count: 4000~

Genre: Low Fantasy 

Synopsis: Werner attends a gathering at the Grandfather Estate with the intention of killing all the nobility gathered within. Once inside, he meets a Princess, who has snuck away to watch her father’s address.Hi all, a little while ago I wrote this poem as I was inspired by both Dylan Thomas marvelous 'Do not go gentle into that good night' and the famous 'Charge of the light brigade' by Alfred Tennyson. Basically I wanted to see whether I could make a similar poem but then in a fantasy setting.

Although I did not have any real plans to make something larger around it, I have since created the beginnings of a sub-creation within my larger universe.

Before I disclose anything about this sub-creation/region, though, I would like to ask you what kind of questions and associations this poem raises and whether you are curious to learn more about the world in general or the specific story it allures too. Any comments are greatly appreciated!

\---

**The Brave Knight’s Charge**

Oh brave knight, rest and kneel and hear thou fated charge:

In faraway lands, past grey mountain peaks

Godly lyrics be song, ere the silence speaks.

&#x200B;

You, whose love and loss stands afoot the mirrored arch,

that endures, endure too the life no soul nor spirit seeks.

Oh brave knight, rest and kneel and hear thou fated charge.

&#x200B;

Master tree and master ghost, who sires the dead march

at front that fears and pains and creeps and shrieks,

Godly lyrics be song, ere the silence speaks.

&#x200B;

You, who has no will to fight, take up sword and targe

to strike, to shield; unwanted havoc the silence wreaks.

Oh brave knight, rest and kneel and hear thou fated charge.

&#x200B;

Oh friend to eldest foe, few look as far outside the marge

as you, stand tall, when life so dear to you meeks and creaks;

Godly lyrics be song, ere the silence speaks.

&#x200B;

You, who has lost their kindly bearing, now rightly discharge

your violent cry in anger and in grief, defying the dusk, grey and bleak.

Oh brave knight, rest and kneel and hear thou fated charge:

Godly lyrics be song, ere the Silent. Speak.

\---

To read after reading and interpreting the story for additional context:

>!I wrote this poem during a 'grey'/depressive phase and after recently loosing someone. Later on, I came to picture our Brave Knight as a Gnome who had lost his wife and children in an attack by the foul creatures of the Silence/Silent (the personification of Death). As a border guard who is charged with the defense of the light forest against the foul creatures of the dark forest. The light forest is predominantly inhabited by gnomes and fairies, who hate each other as much a they hate the foul creatures of the dark. My vision for the story is that our brave knight has been charged by the Lady of the Forest to break the Silence once and for all.!<

Whether you read the poem first or the 'spoiler' (as well), I am happy to hear any and all thought n the writing as well as the larger project. Thank you in advance!Hello, below is the the link to the first few pages of my first chapter. 

I'd like to know your general impression of my writing and whether you'd read more if you ran into this story online or at a bookstore. 

Any and all criticism is welcome. 

**Title:** Keepers of Fantasia: Hope Skies

**Genres:** Fantasy, Adventure, Action, Mystery, Drama, Tragedy, Comedy

**Word Count:** 2481 words. 

**Link:** [Chapter 1 - First Half](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SIETu5CjPXX011B1vzClIhYpIxjuNIw0/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=113367534900583146130&rtpof=true&sd=true)	

Happy reading and many thanks.

Edit: just noticed the typo in the title, it should be *reader* not *rider*. I promise there are no such mistakes in the chapter. LOL

Edit 2: If anyone would like to read the full chapter, please comment or DM me, I'll send it to you. I can't post it here because it is slightly over the subreddit's hard word count limit (6025 words).Hi all,

In the past, I've posted certain chapters of mine and I've gotten really good feedback. But my story was about a sage and a Pharoah battling it out for the fate of the world. And in that sense, I wanted to try and capture an epic fantasy story with a sense of adventure. My evil villain was going to wipe out the Gods of the Universe while my sage character would be stopping him. The villain had bascially won the conflict. He had destroyed the Gods, he had pretty much the world worshipping him. But then he found out in the weaves of destiny that there's a timeline that sees him defeated and threatens to unravel the entire progress. So in this timeline, our character, the sage wakes up to this and defeats him. Sounds epic doesn't it? Or maybe it isn't.

But I don't want to write that story. I don't want to write another fate of the world story. I enjoy epic fantasy, but I prefer my kind of fantasy to be Pirates of the Caribbean style, or the Mummy etc. What I like about those movies is how the characters have the freedom to do what they want. Like Jack Sparrow. He always kept you guessing because you never knew what his next move was going to be. He wanted to be free like a sparrow but always got intentionally or unintentionally caught up in the grand scheme of things. That's the character I want to write about. Initially five years ago when I came up with the story, what it was; My character would be just an adventurer going on his adventures while he stayed out of the epic fantasy/grimdark situation. I initially also wanted to write an epic fantasy of saving the world but after reading how cliche it was, I abandoned it. But I was mixing epic fantasy into it and it didn't make sense.

What my story is this: It's a high adventure novel about a soldier who caused the destruction of a grand empire that he was sworn to. In the end, wracked with guilt he left and vanished into the annals of history wanting a life of peace. Only to be found by agents of the former empire that want him hunted down. As a result, our solider/sage embarks on a ship in a small port before he is kidnapped by the agents of a new Empire, Tukhara. They bascially need him to find their holy altar of fire which has been kidnapped by the neighbouring city-state called Helios. The soldier tries to escape but he's given two choices: Either join with them and have a new role in the Empire or have his identity discovered and be hunted down. I think you'll guess which is the latter that starts the catalyst to the story. 

But that's the starting incident. That's what causes my character to explore the world much like in an open world RPG. I don't want an over-arching villain, it's where ever he goes, he will encounter villains that have their own goals, their own agendas. It's high adventure fantasy, just like Avatar the Last Airbender. 

Of course, this story likes to change itself every so often. It doesn't just gel into one area.  If I write this, it will change a bit in my mind. I can't seem to get a solid plot down. Plus, I lack experience in the art of writing character arcs or outlining. Outlining has been difficult because I don't understand how to outline. Other writers have done outlining but when I try it just doesn't work. I have no idea why this is. I'm a panster that is trying to do outlining but it doesn't work.

But my novel is meant to be a care-free, adventure-giddy style novel. It's not meant to be an epic fantasy novel. Epic in visuals yes, but slow and steady in terms of story. It's like Sinbad. Like how Sinbad has to face challenges, obstacles. And yes, my character will end up being swamped in the middle of things. So he has to figure something out. 

But I don't know, I need help in figuring out what I do with this story. But actually forming some kind of plan to shackle down this story. I'm tempted to do 3 characters POV, or write them in the first, or third person. Since I'm writing this story I also want to cover different regions. If I write another region it'll be feeling like I need to write that character's story from a first person or third person POV. I'm not sure.Hi all. After a lot of mulling over my work in progress (a sci fi/fantasy crossbreed) I've finally finished the prologue after a month of rewrites, feedback, and most of all, procrastination. Hopefully I can finish the full book within the next decade or so haha! The full doc \[2639 words\] can be accessed [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YFDP6tHypSuzPf8W2pMkwTsI7TpiOoUu7CYeECNhF_U/edit?usp=sharing).

As stated, I'd really like to know whether or not you'd keep reading (and if not, why not). However, criticism of any kind would be helpful. It's a prologue so while I'm not worried about confusion regarding geographical features (as maps would be included in the final work), but it's meant to be largely without context.Hello everyone. I'm struggling to find an agent when querying (as I'm sure many do), and would love some feedback on my query letter! Anything helps and don't worry I have thick skin. Thanks in advance!

Dear \[Agent Name\]:

Demetri is the last immortal on earth and heir to the most powerful throne in the world—but he doesn’t want any of it. All he has ever wanted from life is death.

Born half-immortal and half-monster, he has an unquenchable desire for human flesh but loathes himself for it, so he sets out on a quest to end his life. He must discover how humans craft magical swords that kill his kind and then assassinate the human prince: Levi.

Meanwhile, Levi has a mission of his own. His blood charges weapons that keep humans protected from monsters like Demetri. Levi has one year to obtain an alternative power source, or his father will use him to manufacture these swords by strapping him to a magical, blood-sucking chair until he takes his final breath. He learns his one chance at survival comes from the blood of the last immortal left on earth: Demetri.

Upon joining Levi’s troop disguised as a man named Merrick, Demetri finds himself interested in the human prince, who proves to be incredibly intelligent and surprisingly kind. While Demetri struggles with his assassination task, Levi relentlessly pursues him as both Demetri and Merrick, the former for his blood and the latter for his heart.

Their love for one another continues to grow, but if Levi wants to live and Demetri wants to die, they mustn't let these monstrous desires devour their hearts.

My novel, These Monstrous Desires, is an LGBTQ adult fantasy romance with an enemies-to-lovers trope and a dusting of horror. It is complete in 100,000 words. Recent comparable titles include Lore & Lust by Karla Nikole and House in the Cerulean Sea by TJ Klune.

I am a marketing writer for U.S. Bank and have a bachelor’s degree in journalism with a focus on LGBTQ stories. My background includes copywriting for William-Sonoma, creative writing classes in college, and completion of an intensive, year-long creative writing fellowship that ended in publication. 

Sincerely,

Kenzie FarringtonNote: Context is that a human teacher named Ralph got turned into a balloon-alien called Sky-Hi (part of a larger species called LuckyTomo) and now has to adjust to life on an alien planet because God knows you can't exactly stay on earth looking that way. This scene is going to sound even more bizarre without any context of what the characters look like, so here's an image. 

&#x200B;

https://preview.redd.it/xpffoyska7d81.png?width=544&format=png&auto=webp&s=31bd1269232d1dcde089c3368807a23b1e683821

Growing up, television warned me I’d end up growing into a mall rat. By all accounts, I was destined to spend my teenage years riding up and down escalators and yakking with my friends at the food court, an Orange Julius in one hand and a Walkman in the other. But by the time I hit my first year of high school, the one mall within a hundred miles of my house was nearly empty and hosted more drug deals than sales. Today was going to be the first time I truly got to “hang out at the mall,” and it was with a pink rectangle and a walking psychedelic mushroom on a throwback alien planet that by all accounts shouldn’t exist.

The inside of Horseshoe City’s signature mall was like an explosion. Those bright Planet Clover color schemes were on benches, trash cans, potted plants, and just about everything that wasn’t the brown-and-cream tiled floor. Tall, twisted abstract sculptures stood proudly in the middle of an otherwise wide walkway that still managed to be jammed with people. From between the ocean of multicolored bodies I spotted stores with names like “Watch Yo Head” and “Charmed I’m Sure.” An elaborate sign hanging between two looming palm trees welcomed us with the words “THIS IS BLUE MOON MALL” in bright cyan neon.

“Skrrtch, don’t they got fountains on your home planet?” asked Musicool.

“Not like *that,*” I said, my eyes glued to the mall rat monument before us. The streams of water jetting out of the towering yellow obelisk in the center danced downward through a series of cubes and spheres that floated in midair before landing in a large purple bowl basin at the bottom. Surrounding the main fountain was a large ring-shaped pool with cherubic stone LuckyTomo that blew dancing spiral streams out of their trumpets.

“There’s a bigger one in the Pot O’Gold Metro Mall,” said Musicool.

“Really?” I asked.

“Not for long,” said Mushmoosh.

“Whaddya mean?” asked Musicool.

“The add-on, remember? It’s coming this winter.”

“What add-on?”

“Mush, mush, shit!” Mushmoosh suddenly looked horrified. “I wasn’t supposed to say anything!”

“A-whoops. Guess my lips are zipped,” Musicool said.

“I won’t tell, I promise,” I said. Mushmoosh looked like he was going to throw up.

“Here.” Musicool dug her clawed foot into a pocket that had somehow appeared on the side of her body and pulled out two shining gold coins marked with an embossed shamrock with the number 1 in the center\*.\* “You could *both* use a wish right now.”

Mushmoosh held the coin to his chest, bowed his head, and whispered a sentence that had the word “money” in the middle of it. Then he threw the coin high into the air. It landed in the purple basin in the center with a tall splash.

“Big bowl. Fifty points,” said Musicool.

“Shut up,” said Mushmoosh, though the smile tugging at the corners of his mouth told a different story.

I looked down at the token in my tail. Musicool had said that good luck charms were only superstition, even on her own wacky homeworld, but thinking about wishes had made my mind pause. If I could have anything in the universe right now, what would it be? I held the coin to my chest—or whatever I had in place of it—knowing I should wish for a way back home. Instead, the words I whispered were:

“*I wish I was happy.”*

Following Mushmoosh’s lead, I tossed the coin upwards. It flipped several times before plummeting onto the top of one of the cherubs’ heads and bouncing into the outer ring.

“Holy Pool. Ten points,” said Musicool.

“What the mush? The coin landed right in the middle of the angel’s freakin’ head first,” said Mushmoosh. “That’s gotta count for something.”

“Skrrrrtch. Kay. Two hundred points,” said Musicool. “My turn.”

Musicool held the coin to her chin, made a few record-scratch noises, and then chucked her coin at the  fountain. It smacked the top of the obelisks’ point before sliding down into the purple basin.

“How many points is that?” I asked.

“A billion,” said Mushmoosh and Musicool, in unison and completely deadpan.Sooooo... I've kinda taken a loong break from writing, but now I've decided to start again. I've already decided what the main plot is and now I'm wondering if it's any good. Any feedback appreciated.

&#x200B;

Two element elf sisters (Aluna 16 years and Elli 11 years) have to flee from their homes in Worgolar when Grimm'Jo orders that all elves have to be killed. This is because his father, Grimm'Fa, was supposedly murdered by a group of elves. And since the Worgulian Empire is so big Grimm'Jo has all the other countries by his side.

   But here's the thing: It wasn't a group of elves that killed Grimm'Fa, it was Grimm'Jo.

   So now these two sisters have to survive while trying to prove that the elves are innocent. Oh and their parents died protecting the sisters.

&#x200B;

Thanks! 

Date: Tirdas, 27th day of Morning Star, ME 1397

Across from the Jorrvaskr Meloni Hall near Skyforge... Half a mile away stood Godvar's Castle, blackened by the fury of winter conditions, from the Snow Elves' last siege.

The weather was bad. Dark, musty clouds covered the horizon, and flocks of crows were flying over the castle, screaming bitterly.

I was standing calmly in the trench to the right of the castle gate. I moved slowly. I've been thinking, cold under the damp wind since noon. I was looking at the mountain floating in the distance in a vague mist. A large group of Snow Elves was hiding here.

Godvar blocked the way to Skyforge like a death wall. The damned crows were still making noise with their ominous voices. I rubbed my tear-stained eyes. So far, I've been in dozens of battles with the elves, even though I'm not a soldier.

He joined the army of Ysgramor, the commander of our little castle, and went to conquer Solstheim. Since the Snow Prince, the leader of the Snow elves there, was causing too much trouble, mobilization was declared in Skyrim and the majority of our armies had defected there.

After the Snow Prince was finally overthrown, our scouts observed a group of Snow elves who had to take shelter in the mountains near Godvar Castle, fearing the fury of the nords. As if this weren't enough, the commander of our castle was martyred in Solstheim and a new one could not be appointed as our leader.

We couldn't attack them because we didn't have enough men.

But after a while, they were trying to besiege our castle, whether they were out of desperation because they realized that they were outnumbered or because they wanted to avenge the death of their prince. We were pushing them back every time.

But now our resources were at the point of depletion. During these sieges, many of our good men were martyred, and the supplies and military aid we expected could not reach us. It must have been because of the weather conditions.

I was the only one in Godvar who had a say after the commander. I worked at the castle for many years. I did everything. Even when the foundation of this place was laid, I was there. I could do whatever I wanted since we wouldn't be able to get a new manager for a while.

In these difficult times, I had to take over and lead these people whose faith had weakened. Because no one else would. My prayers were answered. This was an opportunity that the gods offered me...

1. End of Journal Entry Young Ammar was the son of a legendary commander who had served in Sultan Ayzar's army years ago and died in a siege battle during the wars with the Rhodok Kingdom.

Ammar was in her twenties. He was tall and had a very strong appearance. The determined expression in his gaze gave him a striking handsomeness, and his virtues proved that he was the son of a great leader.

His honesty was never in doubt. When he was told about his ability to use a sword with his courage, it would be incredible for the audience. In fact, sometimes there were young people who came to visit him from far away just to see this, and Ammar would entertain these guests with a small tournament in the village square.

First of all, Ammar would start with a single opponent. Then there would be two, and three, four… In the end, they would accept defeat and drop their swords. After the consolation meal, they would go back to the villages they came from to tell what they saw. Ammar's skill with the sword came entirely from within. He had discovered this feature at the beginning of his adolescence. So no one had ever taught him that.

Ammar was the only child in the household. His mother had died so early that he had no memory of her at the moment. He lost his father when he was seven or eight years old. Little Ammar had no other relatives. She was raised in the village by a benevolent old man who had never had children and had lost his wife to illness.

He raised Ammar with great interest, putting him in the place of his own child. Affan was a master of his craft, a humble farmer and taught Ammar very well. Since he could not work in the fields due to the weakness of old age, all the work was left to his adopted son.

The village of Ayn Asuadi, where they lived, was located in a small area in the region of large sand dunes that formed the western border of Sarranid. This part of the country has been under threat and risk for many years due to its proximity to the Rhodok Kingdom.

The main source of income of Ayn Asuadi Village is date palm groves. Its people were known to be hardworking like bees.

&#x200B;

  March 23, 1257, Village of Ayn Asuadi 

It was a very hot Spring day today. I had been working for hours in a small wheat field just by the south entrance of my village. Now that I was overwhelmed by the scorching heat of the sun, I decided to lie down and rest in the shade of an old palm tree at the edge of our field.

While I was watching the deep blue sky, I started to feel the tiredness of working nonstop since morning in every inch of my body. I've also been sleep deprived for the past few days. I straightened slightly and glanced over the field.

I had very little work left; but meanwhile my eyelids were getting heavy. With the intention of sleeping and resting for a few hours, I lay down again and closed my eyes, but involuntarily I fell into the arms of a deep sleep...

While sleeping on my back, I suddenly woke up. When I opened my eyes, the first thing I saw was the darkening sky. I was watching the leaves swaying with the wind on the tree next to me with squinted eyes. I noticed the cooling air and the fact that I slept more than necessary. My mouth was dry. Then I stood up and reached for the broken-mouthed jug beside the tree.

There was no water left in it. With the empty jug in my hand, I got up and started walking towards the well outside the village. I was only a short distance away from reaching the water when I noticed a black horse drinking from the trough.

I paused where I was, so as not to frighten him and prevent him from fulfilling his need. But after a short while, looking more carefully, I realized that the horse was not wild, and I approached it with slow steps. There was a situation that I found strange; because although he had a saddle, his owner was not around, and besides, no one in the village had a horse. We usually rode camels.

As I got closer to it, I noticed that there were blood stains on it. I got out and looked around. When I couldn't see anyone, I started running in the direction it came from, following the horseshoe tracks left by the animal on the road; After a while I came across a man lying motionless in the middle of the desert.

This man, whom I did not know, was scarcely clear from his tattered clothing that he was a Sarranid frontier. One of them was a crossbow arrow and the other two were badly injured by being shot with arrows shot from a regular bow and was unconscious; but he was still breathing...[https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kPDA8lEIOeIM594Kb0rjwP-wb8sbJh1k7p3nSiDCHPU/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kPDA8lEIOeIM594Kb0rjwP-wb8sbJh1k7p3nSiDCHPU/edit)

I do understand that the contexts of this prologue are hardly fantastical and do not contain elements like magic or magical creatures, but this is supposed to be the dying moments of a character before he awakens in a fantasy world so I do hope that this is allowed here. 

Overall, please tell me your thoughts on the prologue and would you be interested in reading the story. Feel free to be harsh and critique it based on your experience as both a reader and a writer. 

Thank you for your help : ) 

I heard the arrow explode and instantly I broke the mental barrier I had created in my head to hold all the anger I felt towards the axe-wielder from coming out. I finally felt free, like when the half a dozen hour long meetings with my father back on earth would finally conclude and Kaylen would grab me to go for a drink right after. I could see Darius have somewhat of a similar reaction. With a devious grin visible on his face. He raised his right hand to reach for his metal axe. I reached for my own blade but being too focused on his upper body I didn't catch sight of the spell he casted on the ground. He didn’t even need to use any incantations and ice spread all around the arena…freezing it almost entirely. With my legs now frozen to the ground, he unsheathed his axe and started ice-skating around me. I wasn’t used to seeing such a big man ice-skate before so I found how good he was at it, quite unusual. 

“DIE DOG!” Darius screamed as he approached me at high speed, reminding me that we were in the middle of a fight. The only thing I could do, sit there and think since my legs were stuck to the floor. He grabbed his axe with his second hand as well to add power to his attack and swung right for my torso. An imaginary lightbulb lit up in my mind.

I ducked right under his swing, using my frozen legs as a way to balance out the weight. Thankfully with the speed he was going it would take him a few seconds to return. Swiftly, I heated up my legs to burn the freezing ice engulfing them.

“YOU GOT LUCKY THAT TIME!” I heard Darius scream at me once again. The more he yelled the angrier I grew. He was closer than I had anticipated however. I looked over and found out that the armored-warrior had withdrawn his frosty-skates and was now running on the ice towards me. With an evil grin in his face, he leaped in the air and violently swung his axe at me in an over-the-top motion. I unsheathed Fate’s Requiem and used the shining blade’s flat side to block his attack. After pushing his huge axe to the side, I infused mana into my legs and kicked him to send him back a few feet.

I had decided to stay silent during the fight. Screaming obscenities at my opponent was never my style anyways, but in the end…My vexation got the better of me.

“You just don’t know when to shut up do you?” I asked with a deadpan expression on my face while slowly walking towards my enemy. Not wanting to get caught in a situation like that again, I spread mana all over my body and casted fiery-senses to make sure he couldn’t freeze my legs without me realizing.

“Make me then…” The ice mage shot back with a cocky look on his face as he got ready for another attack.

“Oh, I will…It’s my turn now, Darius” I said with a cocky expression of my own. I ran to my opponent, my sword now engulfed in flames, a red, fiery aura surrounding my body and burning the blue ice around me. I jumped to Darius’ left and raised an earthen spike in front of me, placing my foot on it. I pushed against the spike and used the momentum I gained to kick Darius in the face with my burning leg. He flinched on impact. Still in the air as I was, he raised his hand to protect his head from any further damage, while falling, I swung Fate’s Requiem, using the momentum from the drop to cut through the ice-warrior’s armguard and chestplate alike. Thankfully the blade Zelstus had given me was sturdy enough to shed some blood.

The injury was not life-threatening but Darius was still surprised by it. “My armor! What the fuck did you do?!” the evil man let out a rageful scream. I engaged for a third attack while he was busy worrying about his stupid armor but he raised a thick, ice-wall between us before I managed to get close.

“It’s gonna look way worse when I’m finished Darius” I tried to sound as deadpan as I could but I knew my anger was distinguishable in my words. I put my hand on the 30-inch-thick ice wall to melt it down. As I burned down the wall, he made more around me, engulfing me in an ice prison. “You’re running away now?” I taunted the man while melting another hole to get to him. There was a slight pause.

“DIE!” I heard him scream. Immediately after, an ice spike sharper than any sheaf’s knife I had ever used came out of the frozen floor and stabbed me in the leg. I managed to dodge 2 more of the javelins that came out of the ground but the third and fourth hit me in my legs and back before I managed to burn a hole and escape.

“Stop playing dirty tricks! Just come out and FIGHT ME!” I angrily yelled at Darius while scanning the, now ice-wall filled, arena. I knew he was behind one of them but I didn’t know which one. An idea crossed my mind. I put my hand on the ground and used the abundance earth mana to cast my spell. After a couple of seconds…I raised an earth-spike behind each of the 7 walls around the arena. I knew he was going to block the javelin that would pierce through him, thus revealing which one he was hiding behind. As soon as I saw the ice wall that didn’t have an earthen spike protruding behind it, I put my hands together to conjure my next spell.

“QUIT HIDING!” I roared as I finished conjuring the huge fire-ball spell I had prepared and sent it to his direction. It took a large amount of my mana reserves but if the spell hit, it would definitely be worth it.

“Foolish idiot!” I heard the evil man say before he put the handle of his axe under my neck and raised it high enough to start choking me.

He wasn’t hiding behind that wall?! Then where?! I observed the arena. My mind got filled with disappointment as I realized what he had done. Darius had trapped me in the ice prison to hide the fact that he had conjured a 30-inch ice floor above the normal ground. He had made an ice-sarcophagus to hide in while I was trapped in the box. He was way smarter than I thought.

I raised a javelin made of soil to put my legs in so I can catch my breath. As soon as I did…a metal spike came out of the ground and pierced right through my thigh.

“You won’t be melting this one” Darius said with a nefarious sounding laugh as he stood behind me.

He has metal-demon powers as well?! Why didn’t he use them before?! I questioned in my surprised head but the answer came right after.

“Oh no…” I heard the voice of robin only due to my hearing being buffed thanks to fiery senses. “He is using his metal powers…” He said with a sad sigh.

“I thought he wasn’t able to control them?” I was barely able to hear Darius' elven friend speak next to robin. I was passing out. My consciousness was leaving me once again and there was nothing I could do about it. I raised my hand in a final attempt to escape but Darius grabbed it out of the air. That's what I was looking for however, he was now holding his axe with one hand. I conjured an explosion in the hand he was holding. Thankfully it made him flinch and weaken his grip for a couple of seconds. Long enough for me to escape his chock.

I was furious. More at myself that I let Darius get me with that cheap trick that I was with him. My mana reserves weren’t that high but I was doing good for the time being. I grabbed my sword and coated it in electricity in a last-ditch effort to defeat my enemy. Sadly, the big hole in my left hip made my movement slow and readable. He smashed the flat side of his axe on my face and I fell to the ground once again. Holding my bleeding nose from the pain.

“THIS FIGHT IS OVER! YOU'RE A WEAKLING JUST LIKE YOUR FRIEND!!” 

Darius looked over to where Amellia was sitting. “NEXT TIME FIGHT ME YOURSELF. DON’T MAKE A USELESS DOG LIKE THIS DELAY THE INEVITABLE” The furious man screamed at her as he walked over to his side of the arena. What he said pushed me over the edge. 

“WAIT” I roared at him. He turned around and looked at me, an evil smirk ranging from one of his ears to the other.

“I was actually hoping you’d still wanna fig-”

“I’LL WIPE THAT SHIT-EATING GRIN OF YOUR UGLY FACE” I screamed as I spread mana to all the nerves and muscles necessary to activate Lightning figure. Yellow tendrils of electricity started to crackle around my body and blade like a storm. I was still not used to the refreshing feeling of activating this spell but I needed to finish this fight now. I used Amellia’s dash ability to close the distance between us in seconds. After throwing my sword from my left hand to my right one, I put my open palm over Darius’ shocked, almost offended looking face and shoved his head straight to the ground.

“WHO’S THE DOG NOW DARIUS!” I roared at him after hearing the loud bang his head made when it made contact with the frozen floor. He was not replying. A wide grin crept up on my face as I realized that I had the upper hand in our fight once again. I raised my sword, still coated in violent electricity, and stabbed through Darius’ abdomen and into the ground. I needed him still for this. I could see his hand twitch in pain but I didn’t care for it. I started kicking the man that represented everything I hated about my old world in the ribs with all my power. I could see his eyes tier up; he was coughing blood aggressively, but I kept kicking. Darius’ face started to transform into all the other people I hated for earth. I put more power in every kick, not even feeling the pain from the hole in my leg anymore.

Suddenly, I heard the string of a bow being pulled and the hiss of an arrow a second later. Robin shot at me?! I grabbed the arrow with my free hand right before it hit my shoulder. I turned my head slowly to look at the emerald archer.

He was yelling something at me but I couldn’t hear it. The only thing I heard was Amellia’s voice… “Snow…” she said in a low and depressing tone. I turned to look at her. She had both her hands over her mouth in a disturbed and sad manner. I could see a tier roll down her beautiful blue eyes.

“Amy…” I said as my mind came back to reality.

“I said the fight is over! back off Darius now!” I heard Robin scream once again.

“Alright, alright” I raised my hands in a surrendering motion and walked a couple of feet away from Darius’ body before withdrawing all the spells I had active. I tried running towards Amellia but due to the adrenalin wearing off and the pain from the hole in my leg returning, I tripped to the ground.

“No…the fight is just beginning…” I heard the voice of a broken man say between coughs. I turned to look at Darius after I got up, he had pulled my sword out of his stomach and fixed his armor using his metal powers.

“You lost Darius…just accept it” I said before turning my back away from him and walking towards my side of the arena once again.

“No…” He replied but his voice sounded different. It was really high pitched but it was slow and calm. He sounded way more malicious than before. I turned my head once again, this time observing him with more attention. His eyes were glowing red and his skin was not any of the normal human colors, it was a lot greyer than usual.

“Shit…” I heard Robin say as he jumped in the arena. I felt Amellia activate her lightning figure spell as well. Before any of them could reach one of us however, Darius conjured a huge steel dome around us. I saw the thick metal connecting just before Amellia could reach the arena. The only 2 people inside were me and him. If he was even Darius anymore. Whatever he or it was it was pretty obvious it wanted to fight me to the death. No one could leave or enter this huge metal prison.

“YOU WILL REGRET WHAT YOU DID TO US!” The glowing-red eyed beast screamed with a voice so high pitched it made me want to cut my ears off with a chainsaw. With all my rage now gone and my mana reserves dwindling…I was left helpless to try and defeat this metal-powered monster alone. 

At a speed I could only achieve with lightning figure, the grey-skinned beast closed the distance between us and hit me in the chest with a metal spike ball it created in his hand. The force of the punch sent my flying into a steel wall the monster had created about 10 feet behind me. My body felt numb from the pain. Fear took over me as I realized I had no chance of beating this thing. I couldn’t even distinguish Darius’ face anymore. The only thing visible on the beast’s face was the glowing red eyes that glowed more violently with every second that passed as it slowly walked towards me. I tried my best to stand up. I could see the gray skin in the un-armored parts of the monster’s body starting to fall off as the grey aura that surrounded him grew more aggressive. 

If his skin is weak…I might have a chance. I thought before checking my mana reserves. They were low…I had enough for about 3 more spells but I was not sure. “Lightning…figure” I chanted between coughs. Yellow electricity covered my body once again and I finally felt like I could move again. I took a step and I felt my body and core shaking, warning me about the backlash, imminent if I didn’t stop using the last slithers of mana I had left inside me. With all the speed I could muster I dashed behind it, trying to pierce through the monster’s armor and core alike. But I was too slow. What was left of the ice warrior turned around and grabbed me by the neck. He pulled me off my feet and started choking me in the air. I gasped, desperately trying to breath for air but I couldn’t. His grip on my neck was too tight. I could hear my body scream as I felt my bones slowly starting to break. 

Was this how I was going to die? No. I could not just die here. I had people that needed me now. Not only Amellia, but Hunter and Frey as well. I needed to save them.

As I felt my soul tap into unconsciousness, I brought my leg up and kicked the monster in the face. That was enough to enrage it.

“FINE” it screamed “YOU’LL DIE MORE VIOLENTLY THEN” The red eyed monster threw me towards the metal wall it had conjured at the start of our fight.

…DON’T DO…I THINK… DO!... I heard Zelstus’ voice scream in my head as I flew towards the metal wall. I was wondering when he was gonna warn me. I guess the signal was not that good due to the metal cage because I didn’t fully hear him. I knew exactly what he was trying to tell me however. And I decided to not listen.

I was less than a second away from crashing into the steel wall at high speed when I casted my spell. If it even was a spell…I was not so sure about it.

I opened one portal right in front of the steel wall and another behind the metal beast. Grabbing Fate’s Requiem with both hands, I was sure with the speed I was going I would be able to pierce through the monster’s tough armor. As I entered the void portal for the first time. I immediately understood what Zelstus was talking about. I felt immense pressure squeeze my body from all sides, breaking whatever bones in my body were not already destroyed. I gritted my teeth at the mind-numbing pain as I held the firm grip on my sword and infused it with lightning one final time. The seconds of pain felt like hours of torture as the sensation of my insides being crushed would not stop. For a second, I thought the pressure was going to kill me but death was imminent if I didn’t do this so I tried my best to push through. After what felt like days of suffering, I finally found myself behind the metal beast. It had no idea I was behind it. I felt like everything was happening in slow motion as I pierced my sword right through the monster’s lower stomach and its core, thus taking its ability to control mana. I saw the beast shake in surprise as my motionless body hit the ground. My broken bones screaming at me from all the pain.

The monster raised its arms and let out an ear-splitting screech before kneeling and then falling face first into the ground.

I saw all the ice and metal around us slowly starting to dissipate. Assuring me that I had landed my attack. 

I had no idea if Darius would come back and if he would ever be able to use mana again. I knew one thing however.

I had won.It took the entirety of the Upper Heavens working together to slow down the invader, even as they released an attack to cast down the entity it was able to counter attack.

Dozens of the beings were captured and cast down with the entity, suffering the majority of the Upper Heaven's judgement. All of this worked in the invaders favour, even in failure it succeeded.

Stagnation was its nemesis, the entity’s only concern was the great cycle. As it was sent hurling metaphysically downwards plans were altered. All of its power that once soared throughout multiple universes was entirely concentrated on the here and now.

Crashing through all the Heavens leaving destruction and chaos behind the entity entered the profane world in a cocoon of protective power. Only when it was near the lowest reality did it make its final move. Mind, body and spirit were quickly torn away from its power.

The power itself was shaped to decimate the hells and deposit the entities foes safety in hell. Like the entity itself, what happened next would be up to them.

~~~

The Dreaming

I usually have trouble falling asleep, but the second I closed my eyes I felt myself go under. My field of vision was dominated by what seemed like a status window from a video game. *DO YOU WANT POWER?* It pulled at me demanding I accept or decline.

Sweat poured down my face and back as I resisted the compulsion, tearing my focus away. As I forced myself to focus on something else, really anything else, I felt myself tremble. The sound of breaking glass as I begin to sway, then fall.

Sudden pain, as I was falling. My senses quickly overwhelmed, then blue screened. It felt like being pulled apart as I fell for what felt like eternity. Finally, my senses seem to return as the pain recedes. The last thing I saw before waking up was a small sapling 

I woke up to find myself sleeping; everything seems unfamiliar. Jumping out of bed, shaking and disoriented, I looked around frightened. The last vestiges of disorientation hang around me like gossamer threads. 

As I slowly woke up I poked around trying to clear my head. ‘This is the invention that got me banished, the very thing that would start my adventuring days.’ 

Dashing around I quickly gather some of my more potent alchemical potions, put them in a haversack and climb to the top exit. ‘If I’m right I have less than ten minutes.’ 

That’s when I realized I was dreaming about my favourite D&D character, with the sound of breaking glass I found myself on a small island with a tiny sapling in the middle. “What the fork is even happening?”This is a micro-fiction writing prompt and challenge. Using a theme of “Sin” and fantasy elements, write a coherent vignette or snippet ***using fifty words or less*** and post it as a comment.

Have fun! The thread is in contest mode so that comments appear in random order with hidden upvotes.Hi everyone! For years, I've been building and writing an epic-fantasy saga that I hope to get published . On new years day, I completed the first manuscript for the first in a 4-5 book series. My grand total word count--brace yourselves--is approx. 490k. Yes, 490,000 words. It's a lot, even to me, and I have no idea how it became so colossal in size. I think the only positive is that it gives me a lot to work with.

Now, I'm in the process of editing (and trying to cut down anything unnecessary) but the whole process is so grueling that I'm feeling really overwhelmed, to the point of wanting to just give up. When I think about querying, I seriously dread it. I don't have the slightest clue where to start, perhaps because my story is so big.

I thought maybe posting on reddit might give me some thoughts/feedback I may very much need. By no means do I think I've written the next blockbuster series, but I do love my story dearly, and I want to share it with the world. So, here is a little synopsis:

https://preview.redd.it/6mhgcaymz5d81.png?width=936&format=png&auto=webp&s=047eb174c25791da8d191462346a14e9c30116cc

It's not a polished synopsis by any means, but I'd love to hear your thoughts regardless!!Intro is the wrong word, what I mean is between chaptes I have the intention to place minor infodumps about historical events whose outcomes affect the world, or add information that makes the reader understand the world, events, or charactes in a different way.

Anyway, here's the segment.

The Heralds  

Some four-hundred years ago in what is now the Northern Wastes, a great kingdom of warlocks waged war on the Gods in response to the divine chaos that had ensued for the past months.    

The war was fought in the divine halls of Geldbrandt where the Gods met their fate. Left in their divine halls were their heralds, the fourteen most powerful warlocks with whom they had entrusted their powers.  

These heralds had not accounted for the fact that one of the Gods was not present in Geldbrandt – the God of the Sun, Moon and Stars. After closing the gateway between their realms he laid waste to the entire kingdom before going into hiding.  

The Gods were decimated, all but one.  

The heralds, last of their kind, were trapped in Geldbrandt, forced to act on the Gods’ behalfs.  

The Great Kingdom of Artherin Nox was eradicated from the face of the world.  

Such was the outcome of their War on the Gods.Tl;dr: I have some plot points that would take quite a bit of effort to explain, would it be better to just leave the exposition out and have the reader come to their own conclusions; all to avoid impromptu lectures?

My story has what I would call a "magic system stew," meaning that it has defined rules for what is possible, but the rules are just broad enough that, if I think about it enough, I can definitely get away with some pretty extreme things. My problem comes when deciding on how to explain these extreme things. I can definitely do it, but I feel like it would be such a tangent that, if this was a text book, they would have to separate the explanation and put it under Fig.14b.

First, some parts of my magic system that is relevant to this post. 

1. Elemental magic. Putting the stigma against elemental magic aside for now, my version is very limited in what they can do. It can only be used in the form of magic tools. These tools can only be used for the single task that they were designed for. Trying to use it for anything else could end up destroying it entirely. The only exception to this is the literal handful of people that can use elemental magic without the use of tools.

2. Light and dark magic. Light magic can be compared to the soul; it is present in every living thing, it defines one's personality, talents, etc. Light magic is also the very embodiment of change and is thus the source of elemental magic. Dark magic, however, represents corruption and control and was specifically designed to be the antithesis of light magic. 

3. Shadow kin. The result of trying to get elemental magic out of dark magic. Plants and animals that have been taken over by dark magic and have mutated into monsters that actively seek to destroy any source of light magic. The form and abilities shadow kin possess are determined by a myriad of factors such as environment, ambient magic in the area, the species that was mutated, if it even was a mutation or created purely of dark magic, etc. 

Now I think I can finally talk about my 2 specific plot points that I have issues with. 

1. Origin of the Zephyrian Scholars. In the floating capital of Akivila, there is the Zephyr University, where they value progress and advancement above all else. If you're research catches the attention of the headmaster - the only person in the world that can naturally use wind magic unassisted, - you can potentially be granted the title of Scholar. When this happens, you are given funding to continue your research, along with a piece of the headmaster's very essence, allowing you to use a limited amount of wind magic on your own. 

The problem comes when you ask the questions "how does the headmaster do this?" "Why does he do this?" "When did he learn that he can do this?" "How many times has he done this and what are the costs for doing so?" I have answers for all of these, but I can't see a way that I can get into it without putting the story on pause for an extended period of time. Luckily, this group and the headmaster are kind of like the dwemer of TES in that nothing is off the table because of all the things they manage to pull off. 

2. The birth of the Akakyo. In the volcanic country of Leandria, the empress - the sole fire magic user - is backed into a corner and, as a last ditch effort, attempts to link her own soul to the abundant fire magic found in the volcano; effectively fusing with it. At the same time, a rogue shadow kin, lured in by the high concentration of magic, goes to corrupt the empress while she is in this precarious state. They combine and transform, all while growing to colossal size due to still being linked to the volcanoes power. 

Now, I hope that I summed up that scene decently enough, the problem is that there is so much going on at once, on top of the other characters in this scene that I didn't even mention. It makes me worried that readers may get confused about what's happening and miss some important steps when going from human woman to giant magma yokai. The only saving grace that I have for this is that I do have a precedent of people turning into elemental creatures under these oddly specific circumstances.

What do you think? Should I leave these out to streamline my story, or should I find a way to make it work that doesn't bog down the narrative? If I put it in, how would you personally go about implementing it? I you have any questions about my story or want more information about my style of writing, go ahead and ask and I will happily answer the best of my ability!I'm not really confident in my writing and I really want to improve, so any advice is greatly appreciated! I've completed the full book (100k words), so if anyone is interested in reading on I would be happy to oblige. 

Here's the google doc: [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oieVSwhBRqveiXldVUPmPrqxh3ywJgiiEMCdI4oQSlI/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oieVSwhBRqveiXldVUPmPrqxh3ywJgiiEMCdI4oQSlI/edit)So I'm writing a story based on my own Spanish culture and lore. A lot of religious iconography and cults. 

The story revolves around a woman named Agnes, who in the world eventually becomes a living Saint of Theries, the plot of the story has Agnes receive a letter from the lady of whispering lakes where she is lulled into undertaking a quest to steal the eyes of a demon from his cult in the crypts below Theries. Which she would use to see into a the realm of devils. My issue is I can't just have Agnes one day receive the letter, I'd like to emphasize her place in the world first.  I also feel the need to explain the influence of the living saints as they will be a big part of the plot. So here are two ideas I had. 

To clarify some lore that might explain these ideas better. Theries is a Spanish French inspired nation, who sanctify living people when they have been deemed worthy by the Ecclesiarcs. They are usually born sorcerers(like Agnes) who live very long lives and have magic that is tied to the universe in a way no one understands. Love craftian in a way. Agnes was originally a historical figure that started my original draft but i liked her character so much I felt I'd rather write her. She becomes the last Saint of Theries, dying a Martyr at 93(mid 20s for people of her kind) this would be the story of her becoming a Saint. 

The Devils trinity was a group of three devils who had climbed from hell to the regular world. Releasing evil magic and energy that twisted the world slowly. 

1. It starts in a desert. With bodies littering the desert, evident of a massive battle. Some being buried by the sand as the wind picks up. The scene settles on a hand on the surface that Jerks away. It's body buried below the surface. The body desperately digs its way to the surface and its Agnes, who doesn't know how she's alive or how she made it past the sand. She doesn't even remember how she got into the desert. And later learns it was an illusion. She was actually under torture in a therisian prison but she doesn't know why. And she is slipped a letter that will allow her escape if she comes to a specific forest to repay the debt. 

For that scene I honestly just think the buried alive idea is so cool and gritty. 

2. It starts during a battle on a tundra mountain. A battle taking place a century earlier where the seven Saints of theries led an army to attempt to kill the Devils trinity before they left the world sealing their Magick in place. But only arrive in time to see their eyes left behind. The present day would have seen the effect of this. Multiple cults having somehow obtained their eyes and establishing wicked homes in the crypts below the ground. Where Agnes would have joined a mercenary troop sent to capture and kill the cult of the eyeless ones. Coming in contact with the eyes of bel boras for the first time. 


I'd love to start it off intense. Showcasing the rather destructive scale of battle. My inspiration comes from games like warhammer fantasy and blasphemous so I go crazy for knights and lances, richly defined magic and old school fantasy ideas. I feel like a battle in the snowy mountains with the saints and the devils would be very fun to write. 

All in all what I have mostly are pieces to a story I find myself falling in love with. I'd love to explain more if you need more clarity on something before giving an answer.


Here is a link to the scene of Agnes's martyrdom if you'd like to read to understand the vibe of the story. Tho her appearance has changed a lot from this short piece.
 https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cw2xu-fhpG-L4bDZvd8hS366HYQJPSJ9eoi-h0Qh8b4/edit?usp=drivesdkHello! I've reviewed a number of magic systems here, but it's much more difficult to review your own, as you know what you're intending to do with it, so please help me out!

**Magically Light**: Cast structure set, intent negligible; Easiest for full wicchen (no/distant non-wicchen magical ancestry) to learn wandlessly; Focus on structure  
**Magically Grey**: Cast structure mostly set (some modification possible), intent important; Hardest to learn wordless or wandless  
**Magically Dark**: Cast structure loose/negligible, intent vital; Easiest for part-wicchen to learn wandlessly and for all to learn wordlessly

**Politically Light**: Ban all knowledge of Dark Magic; All magical species are equal  
**Politically Grey:** Ban exclusively harmful soul spells, and restrict spells that only do harm, light or dark; All species have strengths and weaknesses, and should be interacted with as such  
**Politically Dark**: No restrictions on magic; Wicchen are above all other species (changed \~400 years ago upon isolation -- was formerly treat everyone with caution, as all creatures are self-serving, but be equal in your caution)

In this world, those with magic were often persecuted by the church, so they either went into hiding or joined and became the members who would perform miracles and exorcisms back in the 1500s, when the persecution of pagans (and women, regardless of paganism) grew even more widespread, though there had been a level of divide for some time before this. There are also magical creatures who mainly went into hiding before the human wicchen (wicche singular, wicchen plural - the old English ungendered term for witches). Because of this, there are a number of similarities in government structure, but also a number of differences, due to the period of separation. There are places where the 'veil', so to speak, is thinner, like Ireland, where it is still common to do or not do things because of the fae.

One of these similar-but-different things is Parliament with the House of Lords and House of Commons. Depending on age of appointment to nobility, a member of the noble bloodline can take up the lordship at either age of the previous Lord's death (most ancient and noble - when it was more common for people to die young due to skirmishes between clans or invaders, though they need a proxy until at least 16), 16 (ancient and noble - age of magical majority), or 18 (noble - as a deterrent of students dropping out at 16 to serve themselves). The Houses are split into 3 main factions: Light, Grey, and Dark. You do not technically have to align with a faction, but it does help bills get passed if you do. In addition, not only are the political factions not a monolith in all of their views (much like any political group), there is also the aspect of magic to consider. A person could be magically light and politically dark, though that would be quite uncommon. Because of this, it is common for families to encourage political marriages between politically light-grey or grey-dark families depending on not only political but also magical beliefs, rather than sticking strictly to political affiliation as you would see in a typical feudal-style scene.

It's a pretty political story, but politics are more an incidental presence than an intentional focus for the mc due to his having several hereditary titles, and due to the fact that the intentional focus is the magic, so politics are inevitable as a politicized topic. As such, it's really got to be coherent. Please feel free to ask for clarification (I had to keep the chart pretty slimmed down to fit in the boxes)

&#x200B;

Edit: the image was the wrong file type so I had to add the descriptions whoopsA orange-red hue fills the sky, golden fingers of sunlight stretches across the marsh, bringing with it all manner of life; dragonflies, butterflies with purple and blue wings fill the air, while a light fog and the smell of rotten eggs hang over the marsh. A dark brown beaver balances on its large flat tail as it's gnawing at the bark of a willow, only after the soft tissue underneath. An barbed arrow flies through the air and finds its mark, its pierced through the back of the beavers neck, pinning the animal flat against the willow. Blood seeps out of the punctured skin, slowly running down the beavers back. A man wearing a half purple and blue surcot, over a grey wool tunic and brown hose, pulls the beaver from the tree, breaking away the bark to reveal the cambium of which the beaver was after. The man presses down on the beaver with his mud covered leather boots, and with his right hand gripping the arrow, pulls is out, with it came pieces of the beavers flesh and skin. He ties a rope around the beavers tail, attaches it to his rucksack, head facing the ground, the upper half of the body hangs over the end of the bag. The man picks up his bag and heads back to Tarluk, ready for the day ahead. On his way back, he passes other villagers. A group of five passes by, he remembers seeing them once on the south-eastern saltwater wetlands, they provide the town with fish and shellfish. Further down the road he passes a group harvesting wild berries and roots for flavoring. As he approaches the town he sees other hunters coming back as well, some already sitting around birch tables, showing off their game. Lastly, he sees the final group of ten men and women leaving the town, heading to the south-western bog to collect peat, which is dried out and used for heating and cooking 

I  want you to try and guess what this scene is about. I would like to   develop my prose and overall conveyance of the plot in every page.   Please let me know what you think!

\---

*"There's  no such thing as a painless lesson, they just don't exist. Sacrifices  are necessary. You can't gain anything without losing something first.  Although, if you can endure that pain and walk from it, you'll find that  you now have a heart strong enough to overcome any obstacle.”*

\- Hiromu Arakawa

A shimmering ocean.

An  expanse of sky and clouds as far as the eye can see. I am hovering  above this endless blue sea. I try to reach out in front of me, only to  find that my body is formless and translucent. I was made of glass. Or  perhaps the same water beneath me. I do not know where I am, but for  some reason I am calm. I feel familiar with this place. This feeling of  peace.

Movement on the horizon.  Ripples start to take over the face of the ocean. The sky grows restless  with winds and whispers. This lake, this impossibly large expanse of  water, begins shaking with an unquenchable quake. As if the very planet  itself is screaming, the darkness beneath me is illuminated by the red  glow of volcanic activity. Clouds forming – whipping and melting from  delicate streams of white to puffs of brilliant alabaster fluff and then  into massive dark grey bodies, thundering and booming with the force of  nature.

Just at that moment, from  the inconceivably numerous thunderclouds, it seemed as if all energy in  the world converged into one point. A thunderbolt, louder than anything  my senses could handle and mightier than the world itself, struck the  water’s edge in front of me. Beneath the water from where the lightning  had struck, deep darkness began to grow. It grew and grew and grew until  that shadow emerged above the water.

There  was land. As the ground continued to grow and as I watched, I was able  to see it all, yet still feeling incomprehensibly tiny compared to this  new world. Around this world, this *globe*,  I saw tiny dancing lights scattered all across—first one, then two,  then six, then nine. Looking down, I almost didn’t notice the figure  approaching me from afar.

That figure seemed to be completely translucent as well. Coming towards me ever so slowly, but with the assuredness that they *will*  reach me. I had felt nothing but awe, calmness, wonder, and perhaps  trepidation throughout this entire sensation. But this figure, this  person, filled me with nothing but dread.

I wanted to run.

The  figure stopped and reached a hand out to me. It did not speak, but my  head was suddenly unable to focus on anything else but a voice. A  booming voice. A voice that sounded in an incomprehensible cacophony of  tones. A veritable choir of a million voices invading my mind, speaking  the same words at once:

UNDO THE CURSE.

With every word, with every enunciation, I felt an increasing pressure. I felt fear. Was my mind going to break?

FIND HIM. HE WHO WILL UNDO THE CURSE.

If  I had a mouth, I would scream until blood came pouring. If I had hands,  I would cover my ears. But I didn’t. I could not react to this agony.

And  just at that moment, the figure lowered its arm. The pressure relented.  Before I knew it, I was falling towards that land that had just formed  beneath me. Falling and falling. I could feel the weightlessness in my  stomach. My organs – or at least what I perceived them to be – were  floating, barely contained. I fell and fell until I could see nothing  else but the ground rushing towards me. One last time, I heard a voice,  but not the same as before. It was light yet somewhat commanding –

“*ZEPHYR!”*

…

I  awoke to the sounds of birds high in the sky and bugs chirping away in a  nearby tree. Slowly opening my eyes, I noticed that I was inside a  large metal box. The box was vibrating ever so slightly as if it were  alive! My head started to race with questions. *Where am I? what is this place?* As I began to rise from the wooden bench perched against the side of the container, I noticed that my hands were tied!

Panicking,  I began struggling to undo those strange rope-like ties around my  wrists. Just then, probably due to the noise, a man looked inside from  an opened end of the metal box and spoke. “Ah, you’re finally awake, are  ya?”

I jumped in shock, the man  spoke again in his strange yet jolly tone, “now-now. There’s no need to  be afraid. What’s yer name, missy?”

My mind continued to race. *My name? What’s my name? Why can’t I remember anything?* Other than that strange dream, I only recalled something. A name perhaps.

“Lucy… who are you?” I said cautiously.

“My name is Donovan. You must have come a long way to end up here, Lucy. Do you remember anything?”

I  shook my head. Funny thing that head, it was so fuzzy. Throbbing, as if  there was something willfully preventing me from remembering. Donovan  continued, moving in full view, and revealing himself. A man with heavy  lines across his easygoing brown eyes and pixie-like brown hair  acknowledges me. I never would have expected such a kindly voice to come  from this impossibly bulky person in his deep blue buttoned uniform.

“Well,  Lucy. We’re here to take you someplace safe. My partner stopped for a  smoke but we’ll be back on the road in just a tit.” I shook my head.  While scanning for a possible way out through the open doorway, I  noticed – he was *armed*.

He continued again, “Hmm, well, that’s too bad. I’m afraid you have to come with us.” He said in a half-shrug. *Wrong answer,*  I thought to myself as I immediately used my unrestrained legs to jump  up and grapple onto his shoulders. Then with an almost instinctual  flexing of my muscles, I flipped him onto his back and loosed myself out  onto the grass. Before Donovan could react, I was already in a full  sprint. *Find ‘Him’. I have to find out who ‘Him’ is.*

Just  then, Donovan got back up, lightly groaning and rubbing his lower back.  He then knocked his free hand on the midsection of the metal box I  escaped from. “Oi Magi! We’ve got a runner. Time for you to do yer job!”

I  don’t know what direction I was going, but I know that my legs carried  me like the wind. That rude, pudgy man had no hope of catching me. As  soon as I assured myself, a panel on the side of the metal box opened to  reveal a tall thin man. He seemed to be wiping ashes off his lap. He  spoke in a relaxed tone. “Oh, alright, man, chill.”

The  man wore a similar uniform, but it lacked a helmet. He bent his arms  back and stretched and yawned, a large badge glinted on his chest  revealing the words: MAGI OFFICER

“You  country folks sure are wound up. I’ll get her no problem, just keep  your helmet on.” At that moment, the slender man knelt slightly,  muttered something under his breath, and the wind began to pick up  behind him.

He took off with the  force of a gale, crossing the near-20-meter gap between Donovan and me  in an instant and rushing me into the ground.

With an “oof” and a *thud,*  I was pinned against the grassy knolls, unable to break free. The man  grappled me and retightened my restraints. Before I knew it, I was back  in that metal contraption.

“You’re a feisty one, aren’t you? Lucy was your name, right?” I just struggled. Not giving into his questioning.

He continued, “Well, my name is Lucas, and I want to be the first to welcome you to Zephyr.” I froze.

Did  I hear him correctly? Before I could react, he tossed me roughly into  the back of the carriage, did a cheeky wave, and slammed the doors shut. Hello, my name is Jiuan. I am trying my hand at writing a novel. I wanted to write a prologue that creates suspension for the story. I hoped to get some advice from more experienced writers. This is a first draft. I am prepared to get demolished in the comments. This is my first work after all.

&#x200B;

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

# Prologue

It had been a very boring and uneventful day until then.

No bandits robbing the roads, no fighting or squabbling amongst the local peasantry. Nor were there any suspicious travellers. All had been in order. Peace and prosperity reigned. And it bored him to death.

For Tülagu, this has become his usual day. He had served for over twenty falls, a veteran. And he was quite exceptional at his job. Joined the guard at twelve, at age sixteen he was appointed lieutenant, at nineteen captain of his own unit, at age twenty-five he already led his own garrison together with his companion and commander Zev. He himself was vice commander.

Now he was thirty-three, with a wife and two children at home. He has a warm bed to sleep in. Every time he came home, his beautiful wife Liu would have already prepared his supper. On his own plots of land, he would play ball with his two sons. After dinner Tülagu taught them literacy and writing. And afterwards he would light an incense-lamp made by his favourite shop and tried reading novellas. Most of the time though, he simply fell asleep.

But Tülagu missed the old days. Back when the Khaganate was still more or less in a state of disarray and disorder. Twenty years ago, it could still be considered a young empire, barely older than half a century. Hegemony had yet to be fully established.

In the chaos, bandits used to roam the roads. Raiders and skirmishers, remnants left by the warring states before imperial rule, still roamed around. Regional gangs and brotherhoods had to be taught a lesson. 

The exterior guard corps, which operated outside the cities and the *jinyiwei*, the empire's secret service, cracked down upon drug lords, insurgent rebels and pillagers alike. And they were damn good at it.

But the land grew ever more peaceful. It flourished. Crime was at an all time low. There was no pride, valour or fun in that. A girl could wander between towns by herself and nothing would happen to her. The days consisted of patrolling around and simply doing nothing.  So when Tülagu heard from a townsman that there was an abandoned building where "quite suspicious activity" had been reported, he was quite thrilled. If he was honest with himself, he kind of hoped for another crime syndicate or something to stir things up.

On his chest, there was a wooden plate where his name was written: Vice-Commander Tülagu Korokhai of the exterior guard. Next to him rode captain Sun Wen and second officer Laryon Ebrahim.

Together with about eighteen men, he tracked down the location of the building from the description of a witness, a hunter.

“Barrels sir, tons of barrels.  They rolled them all into these cabins. Four, five of them, if I remember right. The bunch looked quite suspicious, they did.”

“What did they wear? Describe them. Weapons?  Height? Anything.”

“Well they looked like those desert travellers you would see on the road. They wore black robes and black headscarves that covered their entire face. Carried sabres. I didn’t get too close.”

I turned to Captain Sun. “Write down, four to five men, black orokeen attire, ethnicity unknown, but with high probability of being orokh. Black shemagh scarves. Armed, probably shamshir-swords. Barrels, you say?”

“Yes. Lots of em. Rolled them up from their carriages,” the hunter said. “It was odd because they were about five to six *li* off the main road. Deer territory. I didn’t even know that there was a building there.”

It was afternoon. The group began riding.

“What do you think? Illegal drug stashes? We dealing with a new gang?”

“Would be interesting. First orokeen gang I’d be dealing with. But then again, those people are all very talented at trade.”

“Honourable trading though”

“Indeed. I guess we shouldn’t generalise. This is something new”

From the sound of it, the captain shared Tülagus' interest as well. It had been uneventful for far too long. Though he never commented on it. One must remain professional, especially as Vice-Commander.

His men all donned full suits of lamellar-armour with mirror plates to the front and domed helmets with nape guards. Standard for the exterior guard.

There were four men with hand cannons, four with crossbows, the rest were infantry.  But everyone had steppe bows hanging from their hips. Tülagu had a cutting polearm, and a curved sword and buckler hanging from his hips.

They arrived at the site. Two cabins in the middle of the forest. Seemingly abandoned.

"Breach," Tülagu ordered.

Captain Sun and Ebrahim each led their own half of the troop for both cabins. The infantry at the front, and the crossbowmen and hand-cannons at the back. 

The captain sun and the vice commanders half entered the cabins in formation with perfect execution. Tülagu then ordered the gunners and crossbowmen to stand outside and guard the doors.

“Fuck. This stinks”

“This guy has been here for a while. The body looks at least a week old”

On the other side of the room lay a corpse. It was an old man. His throat had been slit. Putrefaction already began setting in. The troop searched the room. There was no sign of any fighting. And there were no barrels.

“I think I found something,” said the captain. He stood over a trapdoor. It was beneath a rugged carpet. 

“Help me open this”

Tülagu slid the tip of his glaive polearm into the split. Then, he and the captain pushed and the hatch opened. There were stairs leading down to the cellar from which an odd smell came out. And it mixed with the odour of the deceased body culminating in an awful stench.

“I think we sho-”

Then the windows of the cabin were ripped open with a thundering crashing noise. The men in the cabin covered their ears.

Tülagu ran outside. The grass had been scorched. At other patches it was still burning. The other cabin, the one where Officer Ebrahims group went into, was gone. In flames. The roof and the walls, everything but the stone tiles were laying on the ground. Everywhere. In the flames, he could barely make out the charred head of ebrahim. Half his face was gone. The other eyeball had popped out. 

The vice-commander stood there for a few seconds. Then he regained his composure. Quickly, he turned towards the men still inside the other cabin.

“Get out. Out of the building. Now! That’s an order!”

But suddenly an arrow hit him. His armour had barely saved him, but it was stuck right in his chest, a few centimetres below his neck. He ran into the cabin. Arrow began whirring again. This time, they shot into the cabin through the windows and doors. 

He ordered his men down into the trapdoor and closed the hatch on top. About three men were lost. Riddled with arrows.

The cellar was quite cool. Especially for the beginning of summer. Incense lamps had already lit up the dim place. They knew they would be coming. Tülagu looked around. The cellar was much bigger than he had thought. It spanned several… he thought… it must have been several buildings in length. Bigger than an entire housing block. It must have been once used as a secret government storage area.

And the barrels were there. Hundreds of them. All lined up in rows. These were not opiates. No one could possibly produce this much.

And then he noticed something: the barrels had matches coming out of them. Like incense. No, he thought… like the matches one would be using to light up thunder-crash bombs. Tülagu had used these grenades to clear rooms during close quarter combat. Magnificent piece of technology.

But these could not have been entirely filled with gunpowder. These amounts could never explode in the right way. There was a red, half liquid juice running out of the barrels. 

For a moment, the men just stood there in awe of the entire storage. Or in shock.

And then, the hatch was opened. A single person jumped down.

He wore robes. Didn't have any armour on him. A black scarf wrapped around his head and his face. Only his eyes could be seen. But his eyes, his eyes were a bright yellow. They seemed to glow in the dim light. Like a cat.

The man had a curved shamshir sword in one hand, and an axe in the other.

One of the men pointed a crossbow at him. 

"One step closer, I'll shoot"

The man was silent. He didn't seem to care. He walked forward, and as the guard shot, the bolt clattered to the ground. The man had deflected it with a sudden, erratic move.

Tülagus Men charged the scarved man. And the vice-commander watched in disbelief. In disbelief as his men, all of his men, were cut down in a way he had never seen anyone been cut before in all his years of service. 

The bright, golden eyes were focused yet the movement was something that could only be described as spontaneous. Spasmodic.  Inhuman. Almost like how an animal would act, like the sudden bite of a rattlesnake or how a frog would catch a fly. At first, it seemed to lack any kind of control or coherence. Or maybe it was just too quick. Five veteran exterior guards against one.

But the strikes were precise, right through the gaps of the armour. Face, neck, armpits, knees. 

The Vice-Commander had served twenty long falls. His opponent now walked towards him. He raised his sword. Didn't plead. Tülagu Korokhai was going to die with pride.

And as he readjusted his stance, upper body forward, buckler to the front, he felt just a little bit of fear. He knew he was going to die anyway.

Korokhai...his name. He shared it with his wife Liu. He remembered the first time he had met her. How her parents didn’t approve of her marrying out of her own ethnicity. They had their arguments. But somehow they made it work. And they had built a garden together, next to their farm. The husband would adopt the more settled, less nomadic customs. 

He thought of the first day he joined the exterior guard. How he rose up. His first raid at a hideout. He helped in building this world, this peace. Made the empire safe. Where a little girl could walk between several towns and nothing would happen to her. He thought of home again and realised this world he helped to build was the best thing he had.

The glowing eyes came closer.

He didn't think about how this man could have possibly cut down five of his armoured companions. Captain Sun's body lay against a barrel. It leaked the red goo. His face was mutilated.

Vice Commander Korokhai awaited his murderer.

He was prepared to defend the peace one last time.Hello everyone!

So as the title says, I'm looking for some ways one would train and hone their ability to manipulate shadows. I have some in mind, but I don't think I'm going as far or as deep as I can with this. One of my characters is able to control shadows, as does the god she has to work with and train under, so I'm looking for some different and fun ways one could train to better their skills.

Any thoughts are appreciated!

&#x200B;

**Edit:** I realized I should share some that I have already, so here they are: 

* manipulation of/drawing on shadows
* creating physical silhouettes out of shadows
* using the lack of light to drain warmth out of the shadows she casts (for example, in a scene I have my main character practicing, but she loses control of the shadows and they begin to spin above her in a funnel, cocooning her and creating their own  vortex of polar winds that freeze her)
* eventually, she will be able to transport through shadows, but I'm not sure how to go about explaining that one
* i want her to be able to create physical objects out of the darkness, like tangible things, but I'm also not sure how to go about explaining how    I wanted the book to have a sort of biblical feel while reading it; a story told as actual events. But I feel like I either leaned too hard on that or strayed too far off of it. Thoughts?


 The tides are high, the sky is clear, the winds howl like raging dogs. Just like the night before the last. The night I saw heaven not looking down on me, but as my equal. With a resource so long forgotten that the word barely comes to mind. Land. Up I stood at the tip of my boat, and shifted the sail eastward. “I will make it,” I muttered to myself. “Falling is not an option. I will see it again,” those words, I meant. I searched behind me, waiting for the waters which would rise me past the clouds. Anticipation built in the pit of my stomach once I saw the wave begin to sweep in. Fifty centimeters, one hundred centimeters,  two hundred, then four hundred, growing, growing ever higher, almost past the clouds in it’s own right. My fear silenced, my curiosity embraced, and my heart lifted by the raging waters of the Moygou Ocean. Up I was carried. My boat tilted forwards slightly, threatening to leave the water’s guidance. I pulled it back in, and prepared to launch from the wave, now fifty men away from the surface of the sea, and soon to be even higher. 3, 2, 1.

    The light, It gleamed in my eyes again. The soft yellow shined on the mountainous silhouettes of the sky. Trees, real trees, and ground, and grass. I tried to reach for them. I tried. But Bouyn called me back again. “You have gone too far. You have seen something you are not meant to see,” and so back I fell into the waters below. The water quickly rushed around me, leaving sharp pain across my feet where I had landed. Still I swam up to the surface, with eyes scanning the water’s surface. My boat, where could it be? It likely sank just below the waters, and now It’s gone for good. The Anchor won’t be very happy about that. Now I have to swim back the way I came.

    


    Mouygou Antoya, the city built atop a large ship. Since the great flood, there has been little to no land left. Our height makes us constantly cold, as well as making the water consistently freeze over. The breath giving plants have lifted to match the sea, for many which were further in the depths, now had no sunlight which could reach them. Some plants have become sturdy enough to stand on, but can hold no more than two or three men. Leaving us with this lone vessel, and it’s small shiplings, to guide us through these terrible waters. Sixty-thousand men, women, and children, crammed into this two-thousand square meter boat. With many more continuing to be born, or found surviving out at the tall mountain tops, which were the only thing left to stand on in this wicked new world. Bouyn is vicious, but not half as terrifying as the Anchor, leader and head of Mouygou.

    Just as I began to freeze over, I’d found the gargantuan Mouygou. The Mouys took great pride in ensuring the looks of the hull were the best of any ship. Shaped like a wedge, it was. With many windows, fitted with iron doors, ensuring no water breached the hull in crises. The gunwales had been outfitted with lines of flowers and other precious plants which gave us breath. Directly underneath were huge statues, alternating between two faces. One of the mighty Anchor, stern and stonelike. The other of a man long passed. His name is known to no one but the anchor, so then we are left to refer to this figure only as “The Glistening Chain”, for the Anchor has said that his mind shone brighter than the moon itself. The Chain has made this vessel, and with his passing many years ago, he garnered more respect than even the Anchor.

    I swam to the ship’s front, and called to the men, “Lower the platform! Quickly, I cannot stay out here much longer!”, and so, the crewmen looked down to me, and dropped down the platform. I lifted myself onto it, and was taken by it, a motion like that of the gargantuan wave. Lifting higher and higher into the sky, until I came to a stop at the boat’s third layer, and was gifted into the hands of the Anchor. He stood tall and wide, mirroring his expression carved into the side of this boat. Wearing his notable garb the Mouy people had dubbed, “the Balancing Hand”. Made of a long strip of leather, wrapping around his waist, then around to his right shoulder, and then to his left. Garnished finally with straw tabs, colored in theme with the Mouygou flag; blue, brown, and white. Underneath, a plain black form fitting garb, dashed with hints of gold.

    The Anchor spoke in a deep, slow voice, “I assume you no longer have my Mouyli,” I began to freeze, but pushed my words through the pit of my throat, “No, Great Anchor. However I did see it. The Liowin was made clear to me, and in it, I saw land! Land that was green, and colonised by luscious trees, bearing fruits lost to us by the flood.” The Anchor looked in curiosity, leaning in, he questioned, “How much of this did you see?”

“I was lifted up by the high tide, and the Liowin was revealed to me, but just as the waters lifted me up, they also called me back down, and so I fell. Seeing not much more than what I have told you, great Anchor.”

“Hmm,” the Anchor looked out to sea, then up at the clouds above. At Liowin. “This is a grand revelation. Tell me, this is the second time you’ve managed to call the waters, and be lifted to Liowin. How have you done this?” The question asked was a grand one, for it was unknown, even to me, why the waters willed me into the sky, but yet, I told him all I know. “I find the spot where the wind blows wildest, and the waters sway with unrest, and where the clouds come closest to the seas. It is then, that the waters lift me, and then when Liowin is unveiled.”

The Anchor let out a heavy breath, turning into a slow chuckle. Whether that was good or bad, I could not tell. The Anchor wrapped his hefty arm around my shoulders and he said, “Come now, Yos! We have many plans to make, and a discussion about my now missing Mouyli.”

    The first layer of the Mouygou housed nothing but workers. With their main purpose being to find any leaks or cracks in the Mouygou’s body, it also housed many different meats. The cold environment makes the food last. The second layer housed the inner workings of the Mouygou. The crewmen - Mouyhons, as we called them - could easily go up to it, and work the ship’s heat, motors, and plumbing. The next layer housed our limited supplies. There we kept our fuel, and medicine, among other things. Over the last twenty years, since the flood first haunted the land, we have steadily lost these accommodations, with little room left to produce more. Yet still, we survive. The next two layers were  “Commoner layers”. They housed nearly everyone, men, women, and children. A drab and depressed clump of people, as the top deck men see them. But my uncle tells me things are different down there. Although they had little food, they still could dance, still could sing, still could make life wonderful. And if you listen deep into the Mouygou, you could hear it, every night. Though it’s still not something I’ve ever seen.

    And lastly, our destination. The very top of the Mouygou, the people called it “Rich man’s bounty”, but we called it,  “Mela ni Liowin”, the View of Heaven. The Anchor and I rose up from the ship’s hull, and onto the deck, where the Winli feasted, laughed, and hollered. Often commoners would gather and sing for those viewing the sea, and the ones good enough would receive food and drinking water, or whatever else the Winli thought was fit for a reward. Despite all the open air to scream into, they preferred to eat instead of speak. Their mouths were too full to yell and cheer as they do in the commoner layers. Instead, they spoke only about what concerned them at the time, and not much more. Even though I was one of the Winli, I still felt different in that regard, that I had the nature of a commoner more than a Winli.

    “Mis lesoni winshi,” A bronze man spoke a common phrase, meaning, “You still live”. He approached us, extending a hand. “Knolindhilo”, the Anchor responded, gripping the man’s hand in a firm lock, “I’d never die!”. The bronze man let out a chuckle and looked down at me. “Does the girl bring news?”

“She does, I plan to unveil it in the night to the Mouyhons. You two, walk with me.”Done with my second edit and about to start the painful third. Wondering if I should bother.

I do expect to be demolished but please tell me why it sucks. 

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1avOq5PPtvN3pDffocL6RTylhVbpYr-YEuCjbljleiLM/edit?usp=sharingI have been building a whole continent and it's history and cultures for me to write various stories with. Makes it easier in the long run I feel. One I have in particular is about the time of when an empire conquered the whole continent and slowly liquidated the other cultures to form a common one. It was a strong matriarch that dominated the rest and push their values heavily that later shaped the continents history long after it's fall.

The empire has 2 types of soldiers. The reserve/elite army and the volunteer/conscripted army. It's obvious what the conscript army is. Men who either volunteer or conscripted and given low grade basic equipment. With an economy that has 2 important farm animals to make armor. The great ram for it's wool and the hoglin (kinda like pigs with strong leather skin and fur) that grow fast and provide alot of leather for use and meat for the people. The conscripts would be given thick woolen gambesons and leather lamellar chest pieces. The weapons will be the same for both armies. A large heater shield, spear, and their iconic axe which can chop but also has a spike for thrusting in close fighting and a back hook spike for grappling enemy weapons.

The reserve or elite army are those taken from the state when they were toddlers and raised to become fearsome soldiers. They often come from the empires entertainment houses where women would do dances and participate in festivals for the populace. While that is their primary purpose, their secondary job is when the women are give permission to "expand the family garden" by their ruling mother (they call her the "All mother"). They pick a man from the crowd, the one they find interest with, and ask him to "help with the family garden". It's literally a saying of them offering sex and trying to get kids. These entertainment houses would love it to be a live girl as it secures their lineage and bloodline; raising them to become entertainers too. Though if it was a boy they'll become disappointed and would throw them out and leave them the infants to die on their own or sell them to the state if the state has room for the reserve army. Other times it's from other families who have too many sons and just sells them off as slaves or elite soldiers for the state.

The main character of this story is one of the boys who was born from an entertainer (prostitute) and was sold as a soldier to fight in the conquest for the empire. Since this is a matriarch, the armies are primarily lead by women as generals, commanders, and knights who are given soldiers to lead. But in the armies there are other women who play different roles that are outside the battlefield which are leading supply chains (with soldiers as bodyguards) and medics.

So that's the whole context. The story goes through the main characters life training since he was a boy and given armor the elite armor that is the same woolen gambesons but with brigandine vest, pauldrons, and round kettle helmet and mail with woolen padding that protects the rest of the head and neck (it has big enough eyes slits to allow a good amount of vision). They only wear wool padding and leather armor on their legs and arms because those places are needed to be light and allow the soldier to fight long and tire out less. I know that the further away weight is to the center of mass, the more tiering it is for people. So in the story of this guy who has to live through all of this war. Had to suffer demeaning insults by the woman generals and commanders them saying "men are but a means to an end. Your just a body to be used for war or labor. That's all." But in the campaigns there was a medic woman who heals his wounds after battles who didn't see him as just another body. Actually made him feel respected and given humanity. The whole story revolves around their relationship. I do have an idea about an ending of the medic saying if he lives through a big important siege of a city, she'll use the pay gain by her service to the army and buy him from the state to marry him. That he'll be her family's "guard dog". Give that last bit of contradiction because let's face it, all societies are filled with it.Hi All, long-time lurker here. I've begun writing fantasy as a hobby and was looking for some feedback. This is the first draft and it's mostly unedited. No one in my life writes or has any affection for fantasy so I was hoping I could get either feedback or advice from some people that know some ins and outs of creative writing. This is my second Reddit post ever so if I've done something wrong please just lmk or mods can delete the post. Thank you!

&#x200B;

The Murkmother Comes

Part 1

 

The last rays of sunset could be seen between the Icereach peaks in the distance and the stench of decay grew thick on the wind. That was Captain Bron’s first hint of the attack. Unhooking his looking glass, spying out over the castle ramparts Bron saw his second hint. Beyond the sprawling town cresting the castle walls, past the main gates and the glacis the forest shifted. An unnaturally thick, and sickly yellow mist started to roll between the trees slowly coating the field like oil on water. She was here.

“TO ARMS!! TO ARMS!! THE DEAD COME!!” Captain Bron shouted, running towards the ramparts door, TO ARMS SOLDIERS OF SALFREE, SOUND THE ALARM!”. 

Throwing the door open he could hear the gong of alarm bells starting throughout the town. Running through the torchlit Castle halls, Bron’s boots slammed on marble. Reaching the door at the end of the hallway Bron threw open the oaken slab and sped past two metal-clad royal guards. “THE DEAD ARE HERE! PROTECT THE ROYAL FAMILY!” Bron shouted, continuing to run without looking back to see if they moved. Bursting into the brightly lit hearing chamber a man in his mid 50’s sat in a pitch-black highbacked obsidian chair, surrounded by three advisors. Straight-backed and proud King Regis looked every bit a king should. Thick black hair flanked by two white streaks sat beneath a ring of silver as he turned his head to the Captain. 

Smile leaving his face he made eye contact with Bron, “Captain Bron, why are you sprinting, what happened?” 

As soon as he finished his question the chamber’s front doors burst open filling the room with the royal guard and ringing of alarm bells.

“My King, the Murkmother’s Army is here.” Panted Captain Bron

It was Captain Bron’s job to catalog all possible threats to the kingdom of Salfree, and to his dismay, he had frighteningly little information on the Murkmother. No one knew where she came from, or her motivations, he only knew she was out there. It began as just reports of people going missing near the Murkfen, which wasn’t unusual. The unusual part was when those people came back. Reports stated that the recently returned had been twisted into a grotesque mix of fungus and flesh. They were covered in veins of mycelium interlacing with their skin, and mushrooms sprouting from random parts of their body. These husks of the returned missing lacked any human component, compelled by sheer bloodlust and rage they wantonly killed until put down.

The King turned his head to one of the advisors, a grizzled old general from the time of the Orc Wars, “Crandall, Prepare to call in the townspeople. If this checks out I want every man, woman, and child brought behind the castle walls. Now Bron, tell us what you saw”.

Bron straightened his back a bit, “My King, there’s a large amount of movement in the trees beyond the field. A mist has begun pouring forth from the treeline. She’s moving on us.”

“A little bit of mist is nothing to get excited about Bron….” A portly advisor in his mid 40’s huffed, “Do you really expect us to lock down everything because of some….”

“First off, *Devin*” Bron cut him off. “It’s Captain to you, and second, it’s fucking yellow mist. Have you ever seen yellow mist?”

Devin opened his mouth to interject, but Bron steamrolled right over him, “No, you haven’t, you haven’t seen what I have. You haven’t seen the walking dead slaughter entire villages, you haven’t seen the soulless husks dragging every man, woman, and child into the damn Murkfen, and you haven’t seen what these unholy abominations are capable of. As a matter of fact, you haven’t seen jack shit on account of you doing nothing except sitting your fat ass in the comfy palace chairs devising ways to fill your coffers with the coin of others. You don’t believe me? Then go out to the ramparts and see for yourself, if you can even manage to waddle that far.”

Pure rage twisted Devin’s face as he prepared a retort.

“Enough.” King Regis commanded, “Captain, you don’t need to insult my advisors with every report you give, and Devin, show some damn respect. Quit trying to undermine the Captain with every breath. Now, Captain please finish your report.”

Bron steadied himself and took a calming breath, turning to the King he continued, “Your Highness, this is how it always starts. A yellow mist appears right before an attack, but it’s not a mist. On the last outing, I took Eliquin with us to see if he could learn something we could not. Through whatever magical means he used, our court wizard discovered the mist is actually a spore cloud. It covers everything it touches with a dusting of spores. Shortly after the mist appears so too does the husks. We’ve thought for some time the Murkmother has been building an army. Fewer and fewer husks wander out of the Murkfen, and they’ve been dragging bodies back with them. This could only mean she’s massing her forces.”

The King patiently took the information in, “And you think she’s here to what? Take the kingdom? Kill our people?” He asked.

“We don’t know what she wants,” Bron said, “only that she is a direct threat to the people of Salfree.”

The King rubbed his temples and sighed, “ Ok, if all is as you say then let us go to the ramparts and see this threat.”

With that, the King stood up and started towards the side door. His retinue of guards and advisors trailing him out onto the castle walls. Upon cresting the edge of the ramparts the King and his advisors looked out over the town and field.

“By the Gods.” King Regis muttered. Turning towards one of the royal guards, “Quickly, get Eliquin down here immediately.”

A thousand yards away, past the town and field, a roiling wall of yellow mist completely blocked the view of the forest. Various dark shapes of all sizes could be seen shifting within the boiling cloud of mist. Slowly, the impenetrable wall of spores inched forward, greedily consuming the land it touched, obscuring it from view.

“What the Fu…” Devin was cut off by pounding boots. 

“Your Highness….I…. Came as Fast…. As I could” Eliquin the Court Mage panted.

Tearing his eyes from the unnatural wall of vapor, King Regis looked at the mage, “ Eliquin, can you summon a wind strong enough to disperse that fog? We need to see what’s behind it.”

Eliquin straightened to his full height and peered out through the ramparts, “Seven Hells….” He Whispered. “It will take me a moment but I don’t think It should be an issue”.

Reaching into the pocket of his robe he pulled out a piece of purple-colored chalk, and crouching down, began to draw. To Bron’s eye, it seemed like a mix of geometric shapes and runes laid out in random patterns, but past experience told Bron it was a circle of power, Symbols placed on the ground to enhance the power of the mage standing in it.

Upon finishing the circle Eliquin stood up and stepped into the circle. Raising his hands to the sky he began to chant. The shapes and runes in the circle began to glow softly, first lavender, and as his chanting picked up speed, a more radiant violet-blue. His eyes glowed the same violet hue as the scent of ozone grew thick on the wind. Flags cresting the castle ramparts began to whip violently trying to pull free from their standards and a thousand yards away the yellow mist began to move.I'm looking for 2 things about this race:

1. Whether it bares any similarity to an existing race in any media.
2. Name suggestions

Here are the details of the race: They live on a planet that is occasionally exposed to intense heat from their sun (for no longer than ~2 minutes at a time) and have adapted to withstand this heat. Their skin is very dark and glossy, becoming mildly reflective when exposed to direct sunlight. They grow bright white hair (which gets burned off in the event of a sun exposure). They are physically strong but not taller or shorter than regular humans. Their eyes have a variety of colors but the irises are slitted like a cat's and can close completely to allow them some visibility in very bright conditions (and the sclera is a dark brown, rather than white).

When exposed to heat they do not sweat, instead venting excess heat by simply radiating it off their skin in a slow, inefficient manner. When they reach a critical mass of heat (such as when exposed to direct sunlight or when engaging in intense physical activity) they pass out until their body can get their temperature down and go into a sort of stasis. As a result, they have adapted to be strong and fast so that when facing a threat they can attack and kill it quickly (before they pass out).

Their usual core body temperature is quite high. Below the boiling temperature of water, but not significantly. Their blood is a liquid metal which shunts heat to the surface of their skin through a system of capillaries. This makes them vulnerable to cold temperatures, as sufficient cold can make their skin become solid and brittle. Low temperatures that humans can withstand would kill someone of this race quite easily.

That's the basics. Bullet point overview as follows:

* Dark, glossy skin
* White hair
* Slitted irises which can completely close
* Very high internal body temperature
* Strong/fast compared to humans, but low endurance
* Pass out if they overheat, die if they get too cold

My preference for invented names are ones which are simple, without sounds that are difficult to pronounce.Recently I started to work on the second draft for a novel which I'm working since start the pandemic. At last year I finished the first draft and all of the alpha reader said a nice map would be appreciated.  (which was my own opinion as well). Previously I did a basic looking map in Photoshop which has a lot of information. It contains things like climate zone, currents, topography etc. Those are very useful for me but would look ugly. I couldn't use it in a book.

So my questions would be: anyone here needed map(s) previously? And what method would suggest? Hand-drawing is out the question. My skills are terrible for that. But there are some other options.

\- I can try to make one a better looking in Photoshop. Technically I work as a photographer so I know the software although not for this use. This one probably would be cheapest but most time consuming method.

\- I can always pays for someone. Probably would be the most expensive option but also it would make my life a bit easier. Although I'm not sure how this works and what kind of map would I get for my money.

\- I can also buy some a program and do it in (like Wonderdraft). This would be probably a nice middle ground but my main fear that it would be really recognizable and maybe it would look a bit amateurish when the reader recognize the software what I used.

Or maybe there is another option what I can't see yet. But I would appreciate some suggestion.Hi peeps,

&#x200B;

Just want your opinion on my battle scenes (more of a surprise invasion and massacre). its from the perspective of the MC who ias fleeing from the town with her mother and sister. please give suggestions.

Setting: 1700s India/Steampunk India

&#x200B;

WARNING: Graphic details.

&#x200B;

Amara closed her eyes trying to sleep but there were many thoughts racing through her mind. The thought of marrying made her whole body cold. Despite the reassuring words of her father, she knew that her mother always had her way and that she would be married before she turned sixteen. Would she be able to play with Vrishka if she got married? Would she have to go to someone else’s house? And what would she do there? Although she was seven years older, she enjoyed spending time with Vrishka and she was sure that she would miss her more than she would miss her parents when she went away to someone else’s house.

It was sometime before she was dozing when she was woken rudely by her father who shook her shoulders vigorously. She was dazed and rubbed her eyes and said, ‘Pa!! five more minutes! Tell Vrishi to get the water from the well today!!’

She felt her father pulling her up and shouted at her anxiously, ‘Amara! Get up! There has been an attack on the town. They are killing everyone!! Get up Amara!!’

Although the words were still hazy, she knew something was wrong by the tension in her father’s voice. Her eyes were wide open now and a sense of fear gripped her as her father forced her to her feet and assuming the soldier’s voice, instructed her, ’Hold your sister’s hand follow your mother.’

‘Pa!! what is going on? Who is attacking us?’

‘JUST GO!! Follow your mother! I will be with you in a while  .’

Sritka rushed into her room and grabbed her left hand and pulled her and turned to her father and pleaded, ‘Mannu, please come with us! Don’t risk your life. Please come.’

‘No dear. I want to fight these bas– bastards.’, his voice choked.

Sritka, seeing his resolute face, relented. She gave a quick kiss and a hug and said, ‘ I love you. Better come back alive.’

‘I will’ , Manar replied thoughtlessly clutching his sword tightly. He got down to one knee and hugged Amara tightly and kissed her forehead. Vrishka, who was rubbing the sleep off her eyes, just stood lazily as her father gave a bear hug.

‘Go now. Be safe. All of you.’ He tried to sound strong

Her mother muttered a prayer under her breath and grabbed Amara’s hand and instructed tersely, ‘Hold your sister tightly.’

Amara felt a stab of pain in her chest as the view of her father disappeared. He still had the eyes of a soldier. His face, from that of a loving father had, in an instant, had turned stoic and hard. He clutched the hilt of the sword in one hand and was muttering something to himself.

Amara saw a black smoke rising at a distance, with a faint glow at its base. She heard faint shots of rifles being fired and people screaming behind her. Although she was fully aware by now, her mind was in a cloud. She could not understand who was attacking and why they were attacking such an insignificant town. At that moment, she heard a thunderous bang and looked behind her where she saw the bright glow in the sky. Judging by the distance and the direction, she guessed that it was the Townhall burning.

By now the streets had been filled with people running towards the end of the street. In no time, the street had become so filled with people that all sense of civility had vanished. There were many children perched on their mother’s shoulders to avoid suffocation.

The friendly neighborhood, in an instant turned in a mob thronging towards the cart, pushing each other behind. It was only when the three reached the cart did Amara noticed that Vrishka’s forehead was bleeding and she was crying. Before she could bend and tend to her little sister, the town sentry in-charge of boarded the commonfolk push them into the cart and shouted, ‘Fast. Get in fast.’

Sritka’s frowned at the rough handling by the guard lifted Vrishka by the shoulder off the ground and put her in a corner of the cart. Seeing the bleeding forehead, she tore the end of her drape dress and tied it around Vrishka and turned to Amara and chided, ‘Can’t you take care of your sister?’

‘Maa… I-I didn’t—’ she started protesting, when there was another bang in the distance and the cacophony of buildings exploding, men screaming and grunting and gunshots became multifold. Amara stared into the distance at the dancing blue flames licking the night sky. She felt a knot building up in her stomach. She just hoped her father would be safe. She knew many would not return.

By now, most of the commonfolk were in the cart and it was so packed that half of Amara’s body was edging outside the cart. Most of the people in the cart were women and children with the exception of a few old men. The air was dense with the heavy odor of charcoal from the dresses of women in the cart and their sweat. The fear was palpable.

Finally when the sentry latched the cart, he climbed over the driver’s seat along with another sentry who was armed with a rifle and sword hanging around the hip. She heard the two sentries briefly on which route to take.

‘You idiot!! Take the market square road. It’s the shorter way out.’, the one with a rifle said.

‘No. don’t you hear the gunshots. They might already be in the market square. It’s too risky.’

‘Just follow my order.Go.’

The one in the reins stared at the other for an instant and whipped the horses, heading them towards the market. The tense silence in the cart was contrasted by the ever-increasing cacophony ahead. Vrishka curled up in the corner slamming her ears shut. She was crying.

Amara herself felt her face being wet, although she could not decide whether it was her sweat or tears. She thought her mother was faring much better with a steadfast look ahead of the cart. Sritka lifted Vrishka’s face from her knees, gently wiped her tears with her thumb and said, ‘Vrishi. We have the blood of Kandhael herself. Don’t cry. Everything will be fine.’

Vrishka wiped off her tears with her forearm, but began sobbing anew as she saw her mother smiling gently at her and leapt into her arms. Her mother held her as one would hold an infant and began rocking her slowly, whispering endearing words. She now turned to Amara and said, ‘Simy, whatever happens today, remember we you are. Remember who we are. Never leave your identity!’

Just when the cart took a sharp turn entering the market square, an ear-shattering gunshot tore through the night air. Amara peeked from the corner of the cart to see where the shot was fired.  she felt something sprayed across her face. She froze and slowly felt her cheeks. It was blood. She shifted her gaze to its source and saw the sentry’s head limping backwards and his blood flowing from a hole in his head like a scarlet waterfall. Her horror exacerbated when she saw her sister, who was right under the sentry. She was drenched in his blood. Vrishka screamed so loud that it rose through the chaos.

She knew she needed to pull her sister away from the blood but her body could not move. After what seemed like an eternity, she brought herself to pull her sister to her and with a swift move, she brought the skirt to Vrishka’s face and wiped off the blood. Within the next minute, there was another gunshot towards them. This time, the cart itself lurched forward as one of the horses fell dead. The passengers crashed with each other and some of them toppled forward.

Amara felt her hand being pulled harshly. It was painful. Amara was not hurt but her whole body ached. Pained as if she had been running for hours. The only thing she was aware of was being pulled and pulling her sister along. Vrishka had lost all semblance of fear. She strung along like one of Amara’s ragdolls she used to have when she was young. Amara wished that this was all a nightmare. Everything she knew and loved was changing and burning. Finally, she became conscious when the pulling sensation had stopped.

Sweat drenched her mother's face as she turned to her and said, ‘We cannot run across the market without getting shot. You both hide under the vendor’s stand here. I will hide in the one opposite there. No matter what happens, stay here.’

‘But mama—’ she started but her mother was already running towards the vendor’s shed twenty feet away.

It was then when she viewed the full scale of the carnage. The invaders were clad in black and gold tunic with a steel breastplate, embossed with a flaming phoenix. There were oases of blood all over the market square. The exchange of gunshots whizzed in a chaotic manner, creating a hazy curtain in the places between. There were bodies lying everywhere. Some bore a hole to the head, some lost an eye and many were lying with blood-stained gear. The sweet smell of roasted peanuts was replaced by the overwhelming blend of gunpowder and blood. At a distance, she saw the Temple of Goddess Liriel aflame, blue flames were devouring the immense structure. It was the biggest building in the whole town. The flames were turning amber and then bright yellow as it burned. There were columns of dark smoke rising from multiple buildings. The statue of Jeon in the market center was now riddled with bullet marks.

Amara continued to peek through the gaps in the crevasses of the stand she hid. She held Vrishka close to her, hugging her tightly. Vrishka was still a doll. She pressed her bloody face into Amara's body and shut her ears tightly. The defenders took cover behind overturned shop stands and fallen carriages. Couple of the defenders were shooting from behind dead horses, grunting and shouting curses. The attackers took positions behind shops and walls and returned fire. One of the defenders who was behind the horse got shot in the eye and flew a couple of feet away and slumped lifelessly.

Vrishka lifted her head and shakily whispered, ‘Simy, are we going to die? Where is Mother? I want her.’

Amara looked down at her, searching for the right words. But, after what seemed like a whole minute, she just pulled her close and hugged her. Seeing the helplessness in Amara’s eyes, her sister started crying anew in her blood-soaked dress. Although by each passing minute, Amara felt less like a child, she could not console her. She just held her hand over her sister’s head and softly caressed her hair and started weeping silently.

She heard her mother calling out to her. she had moved behind the overturned cart they had come in, which was just fifteen feet away. Amara peeked over the wooden plank and saw her mother waving at her to come beside her. She motioned her hand to come along the cover of the wooden planks which were plastered to the makeshift shops along the edges of the square. Amara tightened her grip and lifted Vrishka to her feet and got up in a crouched manner. She attempted to console her sister by saying, ’Vrishi, see there. There’s Ma. We just have to go there. Then we will be safe. I promise.’

She knew she lied.

The two moved along the planks almost like an attachment of the wood. When they reached the end of the makeshift planks, she saw that they had to run about ten feet in the open without any cover. Bullets whizzed past constantly. The invaders seemed to have an endless supply of those damned bullets. The ten feet between them and their mother was a horror. Most of the people who had been with her in the cart were lifeless bodies in pools of blood and slush. Mothers, and children lying face down on the soft wet slush. Some women were still groaning in pain and cursing the attackers as their children lay still beside them. There was no clean space where the two sisters could cross to their mother.

Amara, seeing the horror, collapsed to her knees and started wailing. Suddenly, acutely aware of her sister, she pulled her sister to her chest covering her from the gory spectacle of death.

Vrishka, not aware what was ahead of her, looked up to sister, who was still on her knees wailing, and asked, ‘Simy, what happened?’

Ignoring her, she cried to her mother, ‘I can’t do this, mother. I JUST CAN’T!! I CAN’T!’

She continued to scream the same thing hysterically. She saw a couple of her friends among the blood-soaked bodies. Her mother, seeing the plight of her, ran to her, narrowly missing a bullet. Amara felt the warm embrace of her mother. The familiar smell of earth and charcoal exuded from her. She threw herself at her mother, wrapping her arms tightly and crying inconsolably. Vrishka, though still not aware why Amara was crying, joined in with her.

‘Ma, I can’t... I can’t --- ’, Amara began in a whisper.

Sritka held her shoulders and looking directly into her eyes said, ‘I know this is not something anyone should see. I know you are a child. But, you must gather yourself. If you don’t, we will end up with them. *Be strong. Be brave*.’

Amara felt her throat parched and almost bleed with dryness. Her mother continued, ‘We must go into the street to the left. We can then reach the North Gate.’

Vrishka and Amara asked in unison, ‘What about Pa!?’

Amara followed it by asking, ‘Is he not joining us? He is safe, right?

Sritka’s eyes showed a tinge of sadness for a second but she forced herself a smile and said, ‘He is safe, Simy. I saw him for only a couple of minutes. He said he will rescue the priests from the temple and join us.’

Part of her wanted to believe her mother, so she forced a wide smile and said, ‘Despite the years, he still wants to be a hero.’

Her mother gave out a faint chuckle and said, ‘No, my dear, he *is* a hero.’

Vrishka also smiled and wiped the tears off her eyes. Sritka’s face became stern now. She said, ‘Now, listen carefully. There is a ten seconds gap between the firings, we will run to the cart in this gap. And in the next interval, we should be able to get into that street and head for the gate.’

As the attackers were reloading their weapons, Sritka, carrying Vrishka in one hand and grabbing Amara in the other, sprinted to the cart. Amara, however hard she tried, could not help running over the lifeless bodies. She hated herself her that. Just as the three hid behind the cart, the firing began again.

Amara saw many more soldiers taking up positions at the far end of the square. Now, they were twice the number of defenders. Realizing the superior number, a few soldiers made a direct assault towards the defenders with the remaining covering them with fire. Amara seeing the assault team heading towards them was certain that she had just a few seconds to live. Strangely, she was relieved that this horror was coming to an end.

But, out of nowhere, she heard a voice growing in volume amidst the grunting, screaming and the constant barrage of gunfire from both sides. The voice was sonorous and musical. It strangely echoed through the market square. He spoke in the Sacred Tongue and in that instant, all the light in the world around her disappeared except for the gunshots. And then the gunshot stopped. The light from the scones went out, and the temple ceased to burn. There was a gusting wind making its way from every direction to the far end of the market square where a man glowed. Enormous heat started emanating from the man. It was as if he was absorbing all the light of the world. There were rays of light and fire darting towards the man. Amara knew of only one man capable of this. It was the Chief Priest of Goddess Liriel.

He was absorbing all the light and was glowing like a small sun. His body shone so brightly that it was like the whole market square was in daylight. At that moment, the winds started swirling around the man reaching sixty feet in the air. Now, the whole market square was gusting in fiery hot air. The bits of paper and light makeshift shops were lifted into the air and started circling the epicenter. Amara felt the scalding winds burning her face. As she ducked, avoiding the gusts, she felt her mother pulling her away into the adjoining street. Though she knew she had to leave, she felt a tinge of disappointment not being able to see the full spectacle. Amara had only read of these fiery storms in annals of history and in the stories her father had told.

Holding Vrishka between her hips, Sritka pushed through the onslaught of the burning squall as Amara followed behind. The blasts of winds made her eyes water, but almost immediately turned to vapor. Finally, they entered the street and were on their way to the North Gate.

As Amara ran behind her mother, she noticed that the gales had died down and she could run with less effort. She felt a burning sensation in her right elbow and saw that it was bleeding. Not knowing where she got hurt, she continued on. There were other people from the town racing to the North Gate, most of them, women and children. Some of the men with rifles on their shoulders, were heading the other way to provide backup. It had always been this way, be it when bandits attacked the granaries or when the barbarians from the Grey Islands raid, the men had always provided defense. She did not know whether it was the case with other towns but, in Aygudi, every able-bodied man fought. She saw Grinash heading the opposite direction, towards the market square. She felt a sick pit in her stomach seeing him heading into hell. For a second, she fancied the thought of just pulling him to safety, but the thought died down when she wondered if he even knew who she was.

The firing was distant now, but still loud enough that her ears hurt. The images of dead soldiers, women and children alike, all littered in the market square flashed in front of her as she caught up with her mother. Vrishka was dropping her head over her mother’s shoulder and seemed almost asleep, mostly due to the rhythmic motion of Ma’s running. The rustic smell of blood had faded by now and was dominated by the seaweed oil of the scones which lined the street. It was a sweet odor. The dim streets accentuated the grimness of this particular night. Amara felt the fear in an air that hung as thick as winter’s morning fog. Despite the number of people racing towards the gate, there was not much chattering except the occasional insult for not giving way for them.

She had been running northwards for five minutes now and she realized that she had taken a few turns along the way. Only her eyes were following her mother, her mind was racing through a thousand questions. Where will they go if they manage to get out of this hell? Will they be on the road? Will my father join us? Thinking back on the sadness her mother showed, a dreadful question came alive. Is he even alive? He was her father, he must be! She found herself reaffirming that he is alive. But the images of dead bodies flashed before her and destroyed the fortress of belief she built, in an instant. All these reveries faded when she heard a pandemonium ahead of her. Her eyes became alive once again and saw townsfolk thronging towards the entrance of the North Gate.

The wooden doors were shut. The doors were twenty feet high, made of Ironwood. They stopped short of the mob and her mother came near her and said, ‘Seems like those bastards have barred the gates too.’

‘What do we do now?

‘We have to get out of the town! even if they don’t kill everyone, we will not be safe.’

‘If the North Gate is barred from the outside, then, all other gates will be closed. Right?’

‘Yes. But there is one place where no one will be able to find us’

‘Where?’

‘Basement of our shop.’Lycans are one of the main species in my current world, but they have a couple major differences from what is considered normal for the species. Are these differences too much to still be considered lycans or werewolves? Should they be considered their own species with a different name?

&#x200B;

Biology:

Lycans are humanoids with wolfish physical traits. They do not transform by will or moon phase; they are permanently in a hybrid half-wolf/half-human state. They were created as war machines, so they do have wolfish snouts/teeth, claws, and strength, but they are also normal "people" making lives for themselves, so said claws aren't obtrusive enough that they can't be gentle with their young or handle delicate objects. While they were originally created by a deity, Lycans are now created by live births like any other species; while there are myths surrounding a Lycan disease (lycanthropy), these are racist rumors with no basis in fact. They are intelligent beings, not animals. Magic, healing or destructive, has little effect on them and they cannot use magic themselves. They are a hardy people and resistant to disease and injury.

&#x200B;

Lifestyle/Culture:

While a rare few live in cities, most live in hunter-gatherer tribes. Some also create merchant caravans. It is tradition to have hunts or parties during the full moon which leads to (untrue) rumors that Lycans turn into mindless beasts during this time. There is no "alpha wolf" dynamic, but they do have a form of leadership. What form that takes (elders, the strongest fighter leads, etc.) depends on the tribe. They have a loose definition of family, which means they tend to consider friends as part of their families and will often take in orphaned, neglected, or abused children of any race. A small portion of most tribes usually consist of species other than Lycans because of this tendency. However, this also leads to the racist rumors of Lycans stealing children from their beds. While *most* tribes do not look for fights, they don't shy away from them when threatened.

&#x200B;

TLDR;

The Lycans do not transform between wolf or humanoid form, do not have "alphas", and aren't generally warlike or temperamental. Does this deviate too far from typical lycan/werewolf portrayals?In the beginning was “The Mysterious Circumstance” (which some sects call a maternal deity as others call it a non-sentient primordial force) created three gods at different times. This thing is the constant in all theology of this particular religion and it’s comparable to a metaphysical Big Bang (or being).

The first god was all alone for the longest time after being born, and the thought of eternity drove him mad and he wandered around non-existence in a state of existential dread. The Mysterious Circumstance, then created another being (a more orderly god) who fused with the mad and chaotic god. They fused after a lengthy battle that created demons after they delivered blows onto each other, but then made a compromise to fuse.

The combination allowed the new being to think in a balanced way, and he realized he could will things into existence. So, he created gardens, sand, rock, metal, and other matter to beautify his new dwelling.

Then, another being came about who fantasized and dreamed about not being alone, and created souls of people to dwell in his mind but did not give them bodies since they were never intended to feel pain. He then gave them meaning and comfort and did all he could to make their presence in his mind a pleasure.

The fused god became angry and stabbed at the third god. The blood fell into the fused God’s dwelling, and coagulated into life (other than plants) over a long period of time. Eventually, the fused god plucked the souls in the third God’s fantasies and gave it to beings (against the intentions of the third god). 

The third god was not killed, but continues to bleed out until the end times when he is prophesized to be victorious over the fused god and his forces. 

The newly created beings were upset over being made mortal and protested. In anger, the fused god cursed the new creation to not know its own nature, purpose, or origins.

The third god is now said to want to help humanity. He made an afterlife that can fulfill all our fantasies, and dreams if we vow, in this life, to offer our bodily vessel to him if he ever requires it to fight evil (now or later). At the end times all of the people who agreed to give their bodies  to the third god by signing their name in their own blood on limestone, will have their bodies fused together and will form a huge mass of flesh who will team up with the third god to slay the fused god and his demons.