Hi there,

I turned 30, and realized that I was a carpet for people in my life — overworking for less money at work, giving family money and not being reciprocated, being there for friends who didn’t reciprocate, leaning into toxic social media presence, drinking/smoking etc.

I quit ALL of it. I removed my social media and started a game night instead, I cut off the family, I cut off the shitty friends, quit my shitty job, quit drinking and smoking cigarettes, but I feel pretty alone and kind of bored. Nothing crazy happens that makes me have to freak out anymore. It’s just kind of quiet. It’s good, just…quiet. 

My toxic bonds were toxic, but they were deep. It’s hard to start healthy from scratch. I would love words of wisdom from women who have been through something similar, or know of some sort of support group for this? Like AA for…doormats?i'm turning 25 in about a week and a half. my partner keeps asking me what i want to do but i just don't know. :(

no big parties obviously because of covid and we're in the middle of moving so i'm not really capable of hosting anything (even small) anyway.

my partner gave me my bday gift early so i won't have any tangible gifts to open. i like sweets but would it be weird to order my own cake?

i originally had plans to do dinner with my best friend and our partners but she has pushed me away recently so i don't really expect that to still happen. my brother, however, is coming into town that day (for something else) so i might have dinner with him and his bf?

i've been going through some heavy depression lately and having a disappointing/mundane birthday might just send me over the edge haha (figuratively!!!) so any tips for ways i can make the day feel more special would be greatly appreciated!!

Edit: thank you to everyone who replied 🥺 i want to try and reply to everyone throughout the day!! also just wanted to mention that my partner is a girl since a lot of people are referring to her as my boyfriend haha (no worries, i realize i didn't mention gender in the post!!)was asked to put one together by my therapist but so far i just have a colouring book & pens and a face mask) :Im so sorry if this is a dumb question... I'm young and scared and I jus regret having sex. I lost my virginity 7 days after ovulation (Feb 10). On my flo app, it says I have a low chance of pregnancy. 👍, however, I still fear that I am pregnant. We used a condom and everything, but something keeps telling me that something went inside. Sperm only lives 5 days after sex inside the body, so should I wait for my period (Feb 18) and hope for the best? I'm almost positive that I'm not pregnant and over thinking, but I was curious, is it likely for me to be pregnant? I know with pregnancy there is ALWAYS a chance, but I wanted to know specifically 7 days after ovulation when I am least fertile. We did have protected sex, so I'm jus really hoping im not pregannt.Hey all! 
I’m starting my first ever ‘real’ job on Monday since graduating college and want to make a good first impression. 

However, I took a hard fall today. I was bleeding a lot and had to get stitches on my jaw. I currently have to wear a bandage on my jaw/chin when I go to work on Monday. I feel so embarrassed and I think the bandage makes me look quite silly & clumsy. I also can’t talk or smile much which I’m afraid might make me seem cold and give people the wrong first impression! 

We still wear masks in the office so they might not see the bandage until I take the mask off, but I won’t be able to emote well and my speech is kinda slurred. 

Any advice?Okay so all my life I have longed for a group of girl friends, I have a few friends right now dotted all over the place but they all have their own friend groups and live in different towns and stuff so it’s really hard to spend time with them. Also we only speak when I reach out first. My point is where can I go to meet new people and how do I go about becoming their friend. It’s so hard to make friends outside of school and even when I was in school I never really clicked with people. Starting to think there’s something wrong with me as I feel like I have no friends. Any advice on how I can make some?Does anyone do this? Have an outfit on and cover up a bit with sweatpants or pack it to put on later after getting off the bus or subway? I’m thinking ahead for the summer, I’m going to need to walk through my somewhat sketchy neighborhood and get on a bus to take my son to summer camp each morning & to take myself to my summer classes. 

I don’t really want to pay insane amounts on Uber rides if I don’t have to but then that means feeling unsafe and exposed for about 20 minutes. (the bus stop is close & the ride isn’t long) I’m not sure where I am going with this but can anyone relate or have any advice?I’m 24, already going through a quarter life crisis, and everybody around me is getting pregnant. 

Right out of high school, I had a long-term boyfriend who planned on marrying and having kids by the time we were 21. Eventually that relationship unraveled and since, it’s been a string of cheating and/or abusive boyfriends. 

Now I’m currently in a 3 year relationship, we’ve recently just started to overcome tons of his infidelity and difficulty committing. Marriage and kids seems like a long way away. We don’t discuss it, and if I do, he gets awkward. 

We live together and the housing market is terrible so I can’t move out and move on. I feel like my life has stalled and I’m stuck with somebody that I don’t even want kids and a future with (and he doesn’t want it with me, or in general, it seems), and yet I want those things so bad. I get jealous of everyone around me starting the life I’ve dreamed of and almost had. 

I know I’m not the only mid-twenties girl that has been through these feelings, so, for those who have been through this : what would you suggest to fix my funk? Any words of advice that can make me see the silver lining? Any happy stories that can give me hope? 

Have a lovely day xxI wear makeup maybe once a month and i find myself constantly throwing out eyeliner and mascara after getting just a couple uses of of them. Do there exist like tiny things of these, or otherwise what is the cheapest you can get them? Quality isn't all that important to me but I'd like to pay only \~$2-5 each since I only get a small number of uses.Throwaway because I'm embarrassed.

Basically I always have those intrusive thoughts constantly telling me that everyone thinks I'm disgusting.

That I smell bad, that I'm disgusting because one of my acrylic nails is broken, that my natural nail shape is disgusting, that I smell bad, that every little thing about me is disgusting.

I was bullied a lot in school. I grew up with alcoholic parents who were also smokers, so I sometimes didn't have clean clothes and always smelled like cigs. And well kids were cruel.

Now I think I have the same normal hygiene habits everyone else has. But I still always feel like everyone thinks that I'm disgusting.

If anyone asks what's the smell in the room I always assume and get paranoid that it's me smelling etc.

How do I get over this? It's ruining my self esteem horribly.My boyfriend is about two inches shorter than me. He's 5"5 and I'm 5"7. I don't want to make him uncomfortable while we're walking around because people would give us judgemental looks. I make sure never to wear my hair in a hugh bun or a high ponytail. I avoid heels too. Any other tips would be super helpful. Thank you.I'd love advice from anyone who struggles with depression/anxiety/broad trauma symptoms or has low self worth and if you date.

My (f24) low self worth has prevented me from doing so much in my life. For a picture of how I experience life, I truly believe I am an incompetent, unworthy, and unwanted person. I know none of these are logical, especially after going to therapy, but I believe them nonetheless and have corresponding thoughts. I have lost things to my low self worth. Time, relationships, opportunities. It may sound bizarre to someone who hasn't experienced it but I go into every moment in my life expecting to be rejected. By other people, by society at large. I meet people expecting to be disliked and needing to hide the person I really am. I turn down opportunities for jobs or friendships bc I expect to fail. I also physically can't stand myself. I think I might have body dysmorphia bc I think the disgust I have towards my body is abnormal. As much as how I think has gotten better, the core beliefs remain.

I don't like this about myself. And if I truly believed I was worthless, I wouldn't be typing this. I know this. But the problem is that these are going to be long-term problems for me. I'm going to be dealing with these beliefs for the rest of my life. At least the next decade, right? So the crux of the issue... I want to connect with people authentically. I do want to date. But can I do that when I feel this way about myself? Is it safe or even useful or will it confuse things more? The way I think about it, I'm in a period of my life where I need to learn about how to form different kinds of relationships and meet new people. My world is very small right now. I don't want it to stay that way even if my gut does. I need to practice dating and meeting people or I won't ever get out there. I know myself and I'll always find another reason why it isn't time yet. And every moment I don't date, I am able to reinforce the idea that I'm undateable. But... if I even found someone that likes me, would I be able to understand and accept that? Would I sabotage it? Or is that a belief that keeps me in my comfort zone?

It kind of feels like I'm cursed. I really hate hearing people say that so it's even worse to hear it from myself. I feel cursed bc I am not well. And I don't think I'll be well for a very long time. But once I am well, won't it be too late? Won't I have lost years to waiting to act when I get better instead of actually trying to live?

There's other issues I haven't mentioned. I have some degree of fear and dislike of men. I know this is wrong, it hurts me to say that. It's rooted in the fact that I grew up with my mom talking about how much she hated men and seeing that behavior reflected in my father, who abused me. I for some reason never cultivated relationships with boys/men in my life. I also get infatuated with men easily. Clearly there's shit going on here. I feel like dating might make that worst. Bc I'm afraid of men, I see them all as terrible somewhere in my core, which is unfair, and then I also get infatuated with them. I think that's definitely a trauma thing. But it just makes me sick. Like it sounds like female inceldom. How did I allow myself to get that way?

Obviously, this is not just a dating problem. This is a my life problem. But I feel oddly preoccupied with dating. I think it's because I've always felt like there was something wrong with me for not dating. Like all of the women on my mom's side of the family are in their 50s and have no intimate relationships and few or no friendships and don't date and it's a constant reminder of how I might end up, which is emotionally stuck, frozen in trauma, and so missing out on life. Alternatively, all of my friends (women) have horrible mental health problems too but they date and are able to maintain intimate relationships.

The worst part is that I use the fact that I'm struggling with all these things bc of the way my mind works as a reason to put myself down. So as I try to get better, I'm giving myself this constant barrage of abuse.

I'm just tired. I feel really alone. I feel like I'm always on a different page than other people. I can't connect with people. I'm sometimes told that I'm kind, that people enjoy being around me, I'm attractive, my friends tell me they like seeing me, and I can't believe them. I always feel like they're lying even when I know they couldn't be. I'm crying as I write this bc I'm just exhausted. It's been years of this, since adolescence. I know I'm not but I feel helpless. I'm tired of always feeling confused and always assuming people dislike me... and having to tell myself it's a lie when I'm 100% sure it's true and have evidence to match. It's just sucking the life out of me. I feel empty. How can I even form meaningful relationships when I feel like a shell? When I spend half of my day quiet bc I'm mentally fighting a war with my own abusive thoughts at work or with friends?

Thanks for reading if you did. It's become more of a vent than anything. At least I got it out??I've been with my current company for 4 years in the same role but been told recently that I am performing above the grade of my role. I applied for the next grade up, a new role that will build on my current experience but involve much greater responsibility; accountability for my decisions, shaping a lot of the role as it is new. I will also have to design and carry out site audits independently, something I have no experience in.
I had an internal interview with the managers I have been working with since I joined. They called me back later on to discuss their concerns over my lack of confidence (I am very introverted, like to think things over and communicate over email if possible, and I find it hard to think on the spot, dislike confrontation) and therefore lack of presence to be able to communicate audit failings confidently and be taken seriously while on site audits. They really made me argue for why I thought I'd be okay with it and they said it was from a care perspective. But my male manager said that he thinks I don't have any confidence.
I do come across as quiet, but I feel absolutely furious at being told this. I feel it's overstepping personal boundaries to make that remark. This man talks over others and in his own words, spends a lot of time just winging it.
I feel that some men in my field cannot recognise those with other ways of working or personality styles to themselves, that are not some form of confident bullshitting, as competent.
I was astounded but in the moment I insisted I would be fine with it and that I know it will be hard but I'd be able to grow into it, using past examples as far as I could make them fit. And they offered me the job, and apparently the male manager loved that I argued back at him.
But the whole thing has left me completely empty inside. The thing is, I don't believe anything I told them myself! The new role will be a lot of stress, it sounds overwhelming and I'm now completely in my head wondering about why people don't think I seem competent and how, at the age of 30 plus, I'm still so shy and struggle to be firm. They have said they will support me and organise personal coaching sessions to improve how I present myself, which I hope will be an immense benefit. But I'm just wondering whether I should let them know I've changed my mind and decline the promotion. 
I was also competing against a male colleague who joined later than me and who I have trained and still help now, and they told me it was a hard decision to choose between us. I felt that I have more experience and technical knowledge than my colleague, so if it was that close, I must have tricked them into believing I believe in myself enough to do it because clearly I am not that good (if my male colleague can already be seriously considered). Aspects of the role are absolutely terrifying to me (I've spent the day since then worrying about it) and I'm not sure it's worth the cost to my mental health. But if I stay where I'm at in my comfort zone, I feel like I will be failing myself.

I'm sorry this is so long. I'm suffering from a hellish round of PMS at the moment and I'm probably not in the right frame of mind to make any decisions. I'd just like to hear from anyone who has been through something similar and how it turned out.I'm a mega pale Portuguese which means I am a veritable forest of dark hair. I'm also kind of embarrassed about my man-like leg hair and have found that it's no longer soft after waxing, shaving, and Nair-ing. 

I recently heard about bleaching body hair and was wondering if that would make the hair less noticeable and softer so I can finally ditch hair removal and pants 24/7.I've dropped most of my friends and realized that the friendships I do have left are me mostly putting effort into them and not vice versa. I don't know what to do without having anyone to talk to.It's a universal fact that we get a lot of bullshit from men at work. Also as a health worker I get a lot of bullshit from violent patient and I expect my coworkers in the appropriate department to take the appropriate actions, period. I was violently threatened by a patient because some asshole of a man didn't do his job correctly and let a violent screaming patient go with several employees' names written on a piece of paper. Today I reported him to my supervisor and now other women in the workplace are congratulating me.

I come across this a lot. In university I reported two assistants who were bullying me and other students especially female students. Both times people again congratulated me and some even thanked me for doing that.

Stand your ground ladies. Report inappropriate behavior. People will do anything to take advantage of their jobs and if everybody lets them, they will just continue to suck.

I cried from how high my anxiety was last night but today I'm glad I reported.Apologies if the title is convoluted. My current living situation is getting... tense and I had all plans of moving with them once the lease is over but I think it would be best for our relationship, my mental health and my growth as a young adult if we didn't live together. I looked online briefly and I've seen that people rent out rooms for ~$800 which I can handle. I have a friend from high school paying something similar but her room is apparently small. I guess I could talk to her but I would LOVE any advice on here on apartment hunting. 

What should I look out for in a roommate/landlord? 
Is there anything I should consider? 
When should I start looking?  meaning how long before my lease is up should I be searching
Red flags in potential roommates, landlords, the living space?
Green flags?
What questions should I ask?

I would appreciate anything relevant to apartment searching as I've never had to do it before and I don't wanna be trapped in a shitty situation.When getting measured by other people (like standing barefoot and straight up against a marked scale on a wall or something), I’ve gotten all the way up to 5’8, and I’ve also gotten all the way down to 5’6. When I measure myself, sometimes I’m 5’7, and other times I’m just under it (like…5’6.8?). So…how do I know how tall I am?Hi all! Huge wall ahead but would appreciate any advice <3 

Just got off a call with a couple of my managers and I'm still feeling like a bunch of nerves. 

For context, I joined my current job (financial services) as part of their graduate program two years ago. While I graduated with a Marketing/Business Analytics degree, I didn't really know what I wanted out my career. Our grad program allowed us to move around different departments to try out their craft, and I got to move from Marketing to HR to my current 'weird' role that's kind of still developing. 

I've been in this 'role' (still as a grad on paper) for just under a year now. My current area is more of a project team where we're trying to establish a learning hub for all of our engineers and tech peeps. Previously, I was just helping two of the managers out in this area - they did most of the planning/macro overview stuff, while I helped with the day-to-day admin, coordination, and comms. However, both of these managers have since left the company and the project almost completely falls on me now, which is where we are today. 

I've been offered a new role which essentially is a combination of my previous two manager's role, on top of what I've originally being doing - it's been referred to as a 'mini project manager & development opportunity specialist" role. I've also been offered a decent salary bump (from my original salary of $55k to $81k to the new $93k) alongside the increase in role responsibilities. 

My main concerns (out of heaps more) are: 

1. This new role is completely out of my league and comfort zone. I'm not sure if it's imposter syndrome or reality, but I feel like I don't have the skills, training, and support necessary to do this job to the standard that should be expected of me. The last 6 months of my job have been awful with all my direct managers resigning and me basically logging on and doing nothing due to depression/anxiety/potential ADHD (more on this later). My managers have told me they don't expect me to do EVERYTHING listed on my job description on Day 1, but I'm worried I'll never get to a level where I can comfortably perform in my role. 
2. My manager hinted that I don't have to accept the salary they offered, but suggested I should counter. I'm still currently in the belief that they offered *way more* *than I deserved*, but at the same time I don't want to tell them that. Rather, I was wondering if it'd be a good idea to accept the current offer, but ask for more training (e.g. certifications/courses) so I can feel more comfortable and do my job better. 
3. I'm currently in the process of getting an ADHD diagnosis (scheduled for next month). The manager who offered me the role is aware & super understanding of this. I can still do my day-to-day job fine, but I am experiencing a tad more emotional instability (particularly anxiety every day) between now and my diagnosis as I'm hyperaware of any systems. Should I bring this up again with my manager again so we can discuss potential next steps before I accept the new role? 

Apologies for the wall of text but I'd really appreciate any help with this! Life has been an absolute chaotic whirlwind and I'm still trying to get my head around everything 😅 Thank you all so much in advance!!I’ve had an inferiority complex my entire life. On the outside I am considered “high functioning” and I dont usually talk about this openly but this issue of feeling inferior to everyone eats me away daily. It was always a psychological thing but it is now starting to get in the way of my relationship. Im not jealous of the women my partner is around (there are none as he works in a male dominant workplace) but he has concerns that my jealousy in general will get me into big trouble some day. 

How do you just accept you for you? Is this something you grow out with age or does it get worse? (For me it got worse so far)Basically is it more beneficial the more you cut off or is 1inch going to the same health to your hair as cutting off 4inches? I’m trying to grow out my hair from dying it & one inch every 3 months doesn’t seem to make that much of a difference. I’m using better products & keeping moisture in my hair & washing my hair every 3 days. I’m assuming this will be a journey to get back healthy hair but i was just wondering if cutting off more hair would help at allJust started a new job and my manager wants me to meet everyone on the team. This wouldn't be a problem if we're in office, but we're all remote. 

I'm awful at texting and I don't know what to write to them, any advice??  I think I've to meet them all individually??So, I got the summer internship out of state, about 4 hours away. I'm going to be going alone (except to bring one cat). I haven't exactly found a place yet since most places aren't doing their summer subleases yet, but I am trying to think about what sort of app or device I should have to allow my boyfriend to track me while I'm there. (For safety reasons.)
I just got that Invisawear charm, but haven't activated premium. 
I've been debating between premium for Invisawear, Life360, or bSafe. I do also have the Noonlight app. I just want to be prepared in case of an emergency. (I do also have a pepperspray charm and a Leatherman Signal multi-tool).I was recently accused of something I didn’t do and fired from a job I loved. 

I’m now starting a new job, it’s similar, but less prestigious and much harder. I also moved this week and none of the furniture I bought has arrived due to shipping delays. 

I feel unsettled both at work and at home and just feel down all time and my instincts and intuition just feel off, like my gut keeps screaming that something isn’t right. Every mistake at work feels like the end of the world and I feel like I’m always anxious or sad even things are mostly okay.

Any advice on how to pull myself out of this funk?Will people think I’m copying her, should I just return it. I really like it and bought it before I knew she had itHi all,

I’m looking for a good push up bra. My current bra size is 30C. I’m looking for something that looks good in low cut tops. I know how expensive bras are and I’m looking to start somewhere. 

Thank you!I’ve never been a huge fan of dresses and skirts. I’ll wear them when the occasion calls for it- otherwise, I’d opt for jeans and a solid top. 

However, I’m concerned that dressing the way I prefer is going to negatively impact me. Say in the dating world, for instance. I know a lot of guys are apparently into “sundresses” and “feminine women.” Do you feel like you struggle in the dating landscape because you don’t like that style? Any general thoughts on the topic?I feel like there is a negative perception around women with glasses no matter how hard I try to "just be confident" or "wear it with style". Like every makeover you see getting rid of glasses, every stereotype about glasses is still something negative like being too geeky or undesirable or not taking care of yourself. In movies and media you rarely see female characters with glasses and even then it's usually some stereotype. All the "perfect looks" don't include glasses, and everyone always wonders how someone looks without glasses.

As someone who is incredibly insecure about my appearance having this complex doesn't help me at all. Of everything I'm self-conscious about glasses is the worst. I need to wear glasses full time and I mostly don't do it. I wear them at home and try to wear contacts when I'm outside, but they often make my eyes dry and painful and most of the times I simply can't. So at times I rather choose to go out "blind" and not see well to avoid being with glasses in public. I only wear them when I *absolutely have to*, which still ends up being a lot of the time anyway.

And to make matters worse, it's like everyone can tell I'm insecure, they see my visibly irritated eyes from contacts or me straining to look at things which just makes me extra frustrated and reluctant to actually put the glasses on. I envy those that can wear contacts all the time or those that can wear glasses proudly. Sadly I'm far from it. Am I alone in this?I recently interviewed (phone interview) and was accepted to work at a biotech company for a research and development position. Tomorrow is my orientation and I’m unsure of what to wear. They haven’t seen me before because it was a phone interview but they were very impressed with my application and ended up hiring me right after the interview, so I don’t think I need to stay in the “trying to impress them” stage. The orientation is just to meet everyone and discuss the paperwork.

Should I go for a casual look? I was thinking of wearing a light grey wool sweater, navy dress pants, black Chelsea boots, and a purse. Or should I go for something more formal like a blazer? I am 23F for reference.

Thanks.I'm asking for my little sister.

She hasn't been officially diagnosed yet but is on her way to be and I'm 99% sure she's bipolar. She already has an adhd diagnosis and takes medication against her depression but she still occasionally gets deep depressive episodes. My poor mom spends her entire day trying to make her eat and it's stressing her out. She's awfully skinny right now because she doesn't have any appetite, everything makes her nauseous.

She's gotten special drinks with lots of calories but she says they taste horrible and it's close to impossible for my mom to make her finish those. She barely eats any food no matter how much my mom encourages her and she don't have any appetite for any dish or snack.

Is there ANYTHING that could increase her appetite? If weed was legal here I would've seriously gotten her a joint to smoke or an edible. I want to help my sister but especially my mom. She's already stressed as it is!I'm a plus sized gal with my toddler's 3 year pics coming up soon. I saw an ad for a beautiful dress that looked gorgeous and would look great for the pics, but I don't know if it's worth the price ($104). They do have plus sizes but seems to run small - I would normally be a L or XL but it looks like on their sizing I would be a 2x (which I don't care what the size says and they carry a 2x so it's fine). Any ladies have any experience with Baltic Born, good or bad?Hi everyone,


I noticed the other day, that one of the girls in my class at college says the ending of my sentences with me. It drives me insane. She's not finishing my sentence, I'll be saying the last 4/5 words and after a slight delay she tries to say them along with me. 


For some background info, we aren't close at all, just happen to be part of the same larger study group (7 people total). She also keeps trying to say that we are super close, but I've never once opened up to her before. It's literally just talking about schoolwork or assignments.


My question is, do I tell her the speaking with me thing is a bit rude?Since middle school, I’ve always had issues fitting in & I think this is because why. I’ve always been insecure about it (I actually still am). I am deeply disgusted and ashamed of the person I used to be in middle school through college. It’s to the point that I decided to create new social media accounts and not add many people from the old schools I used to go to (because I had the reputation as the weird girl who people love to bully).

Other women didn’t like me because they thought I was weird and gave me shit for it. Because of my bad social skills I had in the past, I currently have no female friends. This is despite me having similar interests with other women such as shopping, traveling, partying, etc.

I feel as though I’m driving people away because of how I used to be in the past. That’s why I tried improving my social skills, but that didn’t change anything about my insecurities.Hey, I’ve seen a few posts here asking about Pap smears, but I haven’t quite found something similar to my situation. With how friendly y’all are, I’m really hoping for some help! 

I got my first Pap last year, which was pretty painful, but I attributed some of that to it being my first Pap. Unfortunately, my Pap came back abnormal— I had/have abnormal cells. I had to get another 6 months later, and that time I was more relaxed but I quite literally almost passed out from the pain. The pain was like nerve pain, like similar to when you hit your funny bone/ulnar nerve, rather than pain from getting hit or falling, for example. It was really sensitive, intense pain. 

I’m on birth control because my cycles were ridiculously long and heavy. I don’t have PCOS and I don’t have endometriosis according to my blood work. 

I have go to back for another Pap in less than a month now to make sure everything is still normal. The last results came back normal (yay!) but I really don’t want to nearly pass out again. I’ve heard of a tilted uterus and cervical erosion, but I feel like my doctor would’ve mentioned that to me if I had either. 

I’m just wondering if any of you have a weird mystery case like me and can relate? Paps aren’t supposed to hurt, and my doc is so kind and gentle I don’t think it’s anything he’s doing with equipment and technique. I genuinely don’t know how to lessen the pain. I don’t fear the speculum and again my doc helps me feel very relaxed. The part that gives me the pain is when I believe I’m actually being swabbed. The speculum feels weird, cuz they do, but not painful. Any help is so appreciated!!I had my first Pap smear done today, I’m proud of myself for getting it done with, but slightly concerned.
I am a virgin and have literally never had anything up there.

The speculum hurt quite a bit even with the pediatrics size, but now even 20 minutes later my vagina is still burning/hurting?For starters, I'm 16, and my whole life I have never felt in touch with my femininity. I have an older sister, but she doesn't care about her looks and beauty at all, and my parents are always encouraging me to pursue knowledge over beauty. They never let me feel pretty, and when I did feel pretty, they made me feel uncomfortable and awkward by calling me "cute", cooing at me, and wanting to take pictures. I've never worn dresses or skirts, I haven't bought clothes in years because I don't have the money and my parents dont want to buy me anything, so 100% of the time I'm wearing oversized hand-me-downs, and my mom doesn't like when i try to buy skincare. My only 2 close friends are dudes, and I love them, but sometimes I wish i could be close with girls and have girl best friends, but everytime I try to, it feels wrong and I feel like an outcast. It got so bad that at one point, I thought I was trans, and people at school told me they could never see me in a relationship with a dude. I don't have the money to get my hair done either, and my mom doesn't like doing my hair, and I don't know how to braid either. I don't know how to feel pretty and feminine or where to start, especially with no money. I look everywhere at school and see pretty girls with nice hair, nails, clothes, etc., meanwhile I wear the same huge hoodie everyday with my hair wild and undone. I dont know what to do. Help?Hey, I’ve searched for a recent post about this but the most recent seems to be a year ago; however, I’m sorry if this has been discussed recently.

Can anyone recommend leggings that doesn’t camel toe on them?

I’ve lost over 75 pounds the last two years; 10 of which have been the last four months and now my leggings are all up in my lady bits. They sink in on the side and between the lips; literally look like they are painted on my mound and labia. Idk why it decided to recently start happening but I can’t workout in public like this; it’s embarrassing and makes me self conscious. So, please offer suggestions or recommendations.I'm so tired of shaving. I know electric razors won't get me baby soft like a razor and I'm okay with that. I don't have time to keep up with waxing and had a bad experience last time. 

Can anyone recommend an electric razor? Are men's better than women's? I'd prefer one that can be used wet/dry but if it's only dry that's fine too.

Thanks in advance!over the past two years, i’ve gained a significant amount of weight. while i’m trying to be accepting of it, i often find myself fixating on my neck/face.

i see people all over my instagram with these sharp jawlines and beautiful necks, and i feel like i have no definition. i then saw plastic surgery instagram with necks that look like mine.

idk what i’m hoping for from posting this, but maybe advice on how not to fixate? how to accept yourself just as you are?I've been having periods for around 10 years and have always absolutely dreaded that time of the month. I am a heavy bleeder and frequently had to get up in the middle of the night and change my underwear, pyjamas, and bedsheets. I've been trying to be more sustainable, and period products seemed like a good place to start. I can't use items such as menstrual cups or discs, so decided to give period underwear a go.

I have always found pads to be uncomfortable and kind of gross (they smell baaaaad if you don't change them fast enough). They can give you a rash, and I think that they increased the number of ingrown hairs I was getting. None of that is true with period underwear - it is so insanely comfortable, you can wear a pair for around 12 hours at a time, and I have yet to have a heavy-flow leak. Specifically, I use Knix briefs for lighter days, and either Knix and Innersey (Amazon) for heavy days.

They can be a little pricy up-front, but if you take care of them properly they can last for years. For transparency, the Knix set (4 briefs + 1 boxer) was $140 CAD and the Innersey set (3 pairs) was $30 CAD. Thats enough for a new pair ever 12 hours for meJust curious to those ladies who live alone.. do you ask a friend over when you have scheduled maintenance or installation type of work done?I'm doing engineering and I feel miserable. I have some friends from my class, but we're not really close.

When I was in middle school I feel like I was more like myself, but when I got to high school I became obsessed with people seeing me as intelligent, and I decided to do science courses even knowing that I didn't really enjoy them (I was a "good" student, and had good marks in most subjects, so people weren't surprised that I'd pick science) and I was a more "artistic" person, who liked languages, drawing and stuff. I felt out of place, and started to become more and more isolated.

I hid the things I liked from everyone (watching anime or TV shows, or drawing or jounraling) and was afraid of people judging me or hating me and only now I realize that I made a mistake.

I've thought about changing majors and even moving or finding a part time job or something, but I still feel like I'm too immature for my age and like I'm behind everyone. The problem is that since I don't do those things anymore I'm not good at them, and I don't even enjoy them, and I feel miserable every day.

I feel very jealous of my sister, who is two years away from finishing high school, since she has friends, she is very passionate about what she is doing and I feel she is more creative and passionate than I am about everything. She is very happy and I just feel like shit, and talking to her makes me feel guilty for wasting my high school years feelign alone and numb.

I don't know what to do anymore and I don't know what I should do in the future.(using my alt for this one lol) ok to start i may be on here asking about this but i use he/they pronouns so respect that but i still get that problem. its kinda funny in the moment but also embarrassing and i wanna know if theres a way to prevent them from happening once i sit back up and start moving around.Hi ladies! 

Has anyone tried using Bumble BFF and what was your experience? 

I’m (20f) currently taking a gap semester from college after my horrible junior fall semester. 

I was technically supposed to be abroad but I ended up failing one of my classes due to mental health struggles and so I was no longer able to go abroad. 

I decided to go on medical leave to take care of myself and focus on my mental and physical health. I’m currently living at home with both my parents and don’t really have friends in my hometown.

I do have two “friends” from elementary/middle/ high school but we’re not super close and they’re in school so we only see each other once every few months. 

Basically what I’m saying is, I want to meet girls my age who I can potentially be friends with but that’s hard to do in my situation while no longer being a student.

I don’t really have friends at my university either due to the pandemic and my depression and therefore I isolated myself a lot during the time I was on campus. 

I feel like I’m in a much better mental space now and would really like to try meeting new friends.

Should I try using Bumble BFF?In my late 20s now and all the people I knew from school are getting married, getting pregnant, out there being social  meanwhile ever since starting my career with a move and the pandemic I’ve been more and more withdrawn from society. Playing a lot of video games and stopped accepting invitations from friends to go out due to being “too tired” “too busy” or “too stressed out”. Help this is a call for help I need validation or thoughts from others. Are you all just coping as well or is it better out there right now for some of you??My ADHD blabbermouthedness kicked in and I've said this in a conversation. Now I'm like what the hell are you doing me, you don't know these people, are you trying to invite trouble? I hate feeling this paranoid. Does anyone have tips for me so I can feel safer?

To clarify, i live in a first world country, am not rich.Do any of you live in/near Paris or ever been to Paris? I’m going in November this year and wanted to know any tips or advice. I’ll sort of be alone, I’m sharing a hotel with my aunt but during the day I’ll be going out by myself while she goes to a convention. I’m kind of nervous lol I’ve always heard the stereotype that Parisians can be rude to tourists, but idk how true that is. I’m trying my best to learn as much French as I can everyday before I goSo I’m moving out at the end of this month into a London houseshare. I’m in a fortunate position where I know the house, a little of the area and know the 3 people I’ll be moving in with. 

Been looking forward to taking this kind of step for a while now, but all of a sudden a little nervous. Any tips, advice or things you wish you knew at the time?Preferably a brand that doesn't break the bank as well... My pants never reach my ankles. I prefer joggers but I can never find any that reach. I'm used to hand me downs so I really have no idea where to start. Most places in the mall don't have pants that fit and the ones that do are like $80+ (I'm looking at you Express). Any help is appreciated.Just saw someone post asking about solo travel tips to Paris and it got me thinking—what are your go to tips for solo traveling as a woman?

Edit: you guys are amazing. Thanks for all these great tips!Okay bear with me....I've never taken a bath before so I'm already a little queasy about sitting my ass in a tub.

I scrubbed with mold/mildew removed and Scrubbing Bubbles cleaner, but how do I know if it's clean enough for a bath? I'm renting a house so I don't know how upkeep has been in the past.I've recently migrated to a different country so I'm basically the new girl everywhere. I'll be starting college next week and I'm dreading the lunch breaks because not only am I starting school in a new country, but I'm entering in the middle of an ongoing school year so they'll most likely have their own cliques and friend groups by now, making it even harder for me to socialise. I'll also be the new girl when I eventually get a part-time job (which will also be my first job ever, yikes). Any tips on how to make being the new girl less lonely and awkward?Hey! So a year ago i asked if any of you guys have any suggestions about very cute, girly, feminine tv series about mostly girls, friendships, make up, clothes, school and fun stuff. And i got a LOT of reccomendations and i am so thank full for them. The problem is i watched literally almost all of them. Emily in Paris, Pretty Little Liars, New Girl, The Bold Type, Girls, Doll face, Gilmore Girls, Weeds, Say Yes to the dress, Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, Sex and the City(even the prequel with Carrie), Younger and etc. I started and finished, and enjoyed so many of them and honestly i think i've gotten to the point where i genuinly think i've watched every single tv show on this planet it's literally driving me insane HAHAHA.
SO i am really searching for something very light and care free, without a lot of unnecessary drama or fights, just something about fashion, cute decor, pink EVERYTYING, friendships, shopping, chatting about boys you know the typical clishe stuff you see on the tv. Any suggestions? I will be so glad if i got to check out some new shows!Today I had an embarrassing moment. I work at a retail store and an older colleague straight up shouted at me that I have stinky breathe, and that she can smell it the whole room I should go brush my teeth. She made fun of me and everyone burst out laughing. I've had people constantly assuming that I don't brush my teeth well or eat alot of sugary foods, but I am really obsessed with oral hygiene and here's my routine
• I brush 3 times per day
• Mouthwash severally and floss twice a day
• Drink a lot water
• Gargle warm salty water after brushing
• Tongue scraping

I am aware and very conscious of my breathe and try to wear my mask all the time. I sneak in between shifts to brush or mouthwash. I've tried baking soda, cayenne pepper, vinegar, cloves and cinnamon stick but the odor still remains. I've been checked for tonsil stones turns out the bad smell might be coming from cavities, not stomach. When I breath out I get this whiff of terrible smell just a few minutes after brushing and this is getting really depressing. 

I’ve seen multiple dentists the past 2 years with a little bit of money I had. All the consultation fees, check-up and x-rays even at a low-cost clinic cost quite an amount. Mostly I've been told I should get root canal, dental fillings, scaling and a deep cleaning procedure, all cost around $2700 including a dental implant for my front tooth. Maybe it'll help solve the problem.

I've had two tooth extractions and I still have 2 more cavities and my front tooth was messed up badly when I decided to get some work done at a dental school. This cost me my smile but luckily we're still wearing masks. I still have excruciating toothache from 
the cavities, aside from bad taste and tooth sensitivity. Even with a job I am struggling with bills and not able to raise enough money for dental work.

I have no social life anymore, each time I'm around people it's hard to talk or even breathe close to someone. Sometimes I find myself crying, its really hard for me. And now my front tooth is also messed up I can't even smile in public. I know people can't stand the odor, but most of us struggling with bad breathe have pretty good oral hygiene. Be kind to others.hi everyone, i just bought my first pair of loafers from call it spring https://www.callitspring.com/ca/en/women/footwear/flats/loafers/limitless-black/p/13380846 and i was wondering if anyone has any tips on how loafers should fit? i am normally a size 6.5 or 7 but i opted to get a size 6 in these. i tried both a size 6.5 and 6 in the store, with socks and without socks, and the size 6.5 were too loose and my heels would slip out when i walked in them. size 6 fit more snug and my heels didn’t slip out of them so i opted to get those, but i just came home and tried them on again and i’m finding them slightly uncomfortable because my toes touch the ends. how snug/tight should loafers fit? is it a bad thing that my toes touch the end? do you think it would be better to get a size 6.5 and just wear them with insoles?Hello lovelies!

A week ago, at the ripe age of 31, I finally got my wisdom teeth out. They had been causing issues for years but due to a lack of self-esteem and a twisted view of myself deserving to always be in pain, I slept on the issue. Well, no more!  I take care of myself now. 

All four of the teeth were removed and for the most part my recovery has been pretty normal. Intense pain, chipmunk cheek swelling, so much jello, etc.

My problem is, a week after surgery, it is still very uncomfortable to wear a mask. I am currently in school full-time and there is a mask policy for campus buildings, which is great but it means I have not been able to attend my classes unless I zoom in. Which is incredibly awkward when all my classes are discussion based and I'm the only one on a laptop. So, is there anyway to make the mask more comfortable? School requires KN95, N95 or KF94 masks so unfortunately comfy cloth ones are a no go. 

Another issue I have is with food. While I have been able to eat more solid food now, I have two gaping holes where my bottom wisdom teeth were and food gets stuck there very easily. I do use the pick thing the dentist gave me to flush them out, and the process both fascinates me and grosses me out. What food can I eat that won't get stuck in the holes? is this an impossible ask? Should I stick with mushy foods for longer, like applesauce and mashed potatoes? I was recently diagnosed as prediabetic so I am worried about all the sugar I've been consuming during recovery. I have also been eating baby food to try to get some veggies in; can an adult get enough nutrition from baby food? 

Any tips on masks and food will be much appreciated!

p.s. I hope I'm not too old to be posting here. While I am in my 30s now I still feel like a little girl trying to figure everything out. Hooray for trauma!! /sI’m getting surgery 2/18 and as part of my medical clearance, I need a blood test. Now for most people, this is no problem. But for me, I’m a wreck even just thinking about doing this and have gone pale in the face from thinking about it too long or listening to people talk about it for awhile. I have a big phobia and I’m just quite scared to be honest. I’m doing this on Tuesday.

My mom is going to be coming with me and hopefully they’ll let her in with me. I have to fast too so I’m just afraid that the combo of anxiety and no food will make me faint :( I keep trying to practice being in the situation and pinching my arm and some days I’m okay, other days I need to literally sit up and breathe deeply because I freak myself out. Does anyone else have this issue and have any tips or ways I can contain myself during this process?

Is it super quick? I’m just afraid of feeling my blood come out. I don’t even know if that’s possible. I’m just scared!!I booked a Brazilian for next Monday. But I just shaved thinking it was over two weeks away. Should I cancel the appointment? It's my first time and was hoping to get it done before a big trip so I wanted to not have to worry about shaving during it. Did I completely mess up and now its pointless?Something less than lingerie, and something more then an oversized shirt. Maybe something you would wear staying over in a newer relationship. 
( first time posting here, I'm sorry if this has been answeredAlright so I got a problem where anything I do such as walking or even opening a door looks so robot-like and awkward. Can anybody weigh in on this, and tell me what you personally do to look more graceful? Is there a specific function in the body that I have to move to look more graceful? Thanks.I’m in an endless loop of regretting it and being glad that I did. We were together for 2 years and he’s my first everything. I haven’t even gotten my things at his house. 

I don’t have any friends and the only people I talk to is some guys I met through a game.

I could really use some adviceSo Im 23 year old and hispanic, and am deciding to move outta state. From experience is it worth it moving down south, what are the benefits compared to up north? Will I be accepted pls help😭 anyone whos moved or been living in kentucky or around the areaGetting my hair cut, colored, &amp; styled takes about 6 hours. Do you girls bring food in your bag to the salon? Do you order delivery to the salon? Is that rude or standard? I usually try to eat right before the appointment but by hour 4, 5, and 6 I’m starving and would rather eat a regular decent meal than little snacks. 

Should I just suck it up and stick to protein bars or is it normal to whip out a salad or sandwich while I’m waiting for the bleach or color to take? Obviously I wouldn’t eat while they’re actively working on my hair but there are times during the color process I’m waiting 30+ minutes just thinking about how hungry I am.

What’s the etiquette here?

Edit: Wow thank you for all of the input! I’m going to bring my own (non smelly) food and ask them if they’re fine with me eating at a point we’re waiting and they aren’t around since I’d be taking my mask off. Bringing a treat to offer to share as well!Sorry if this isnt the right subreddit. Please dont just remove please redirect me to the right place because other mental health subreddits are from people suffering too and I would like advice from people with experience in working. I'm in my first job, and I'm really struggling with it. I have symptoms of depression, social anxiety and body dysmorphia. The doctors wont diagnose me because they said depression and anxiety isnt serious enough conditions to be diagnosed, but they put me on antidepressants and I'm on a long waiting list for therapy. In the meantime I've been working a part time job as a cashier. I'm finding it really hard. There's a lot of problems such as barcodes not working, incorrect prices, not being able to see the balance on our gift cards, sales not coming off, a lot of things that causes a standstill and makes customers wait.

They get frustrated and annoyed, understandably and they take it out on me. Customers have been very rude and disrespectful to me and it shoots my anxiety really high. Also because of my anxiety I'm constantly making silly mistakes that indicates to my colleagues I lack common sense. These aren't mistakes I should be making anymore. But I'm so anxious, so forgetful , absent minded, exhausted from not sleeping properly. It's literally my social anxiety's worst nightmare. I already dont have self esteem and people being so disrespectful chips away at any last piece I had left. People say dont let it get to you but how can you not when you're already so fragile? I'm trying my best to get on with life but I've been told off for the amount/severity of my mistakes and my supervisor makes fun of me and I just cope by making jokes and being like haha I'm so dumb. But it is getting to me because I hate how stupid I look in front of everyone. I'm at rock bottom with my mental health. I thought I just had to get on with life. But really I'm just causing trouble and burden to everyone. I dont know what I can do. Can someone offer insight and advice pleaseI am 25 years old and I am not planning on having kids anytime soon. I can’t say exactly that I will not have them when I am 30, but not until then. Friends are telling me that I will have a hard time giving up and that abnormalities for the fetus is more common. That scares me because I am a health freak, I don’t smoke and I work out all my life. I consider myself fitter than most my age women. Should I really just ignore my friends or take their opinion as normal?Ok so, I'm a 17 year old trans girl pre-hrt and I just got my first bras today (a 3 pack of normal padded wireless ones) and I noticed that once I tried to take one off, I just got hit with a sudden wave of dysphoria. One of my friends who is a transfem on HRT mentioned that it's not a good idea to wear them to sleep too often due to the increased risk of breast cancer and infections, but also mentioned that due to the type of bra I got, It's safer to sleep in, so I'm wondering how often I'll be able to get away with sleeping in one so that it doesn't pose a health risk, since I don't want to have to deal with dysphoria every nightI’ve just been having a really hard time with depression and health issues the last few months and think it’d be beneficial for me to see a therapist/councilor. The problem is I have no idea where to start and every local option I could find is totally full and not accepting new patients. 

I know there are online options but have heard bad things about betterhelp and am worried about ending up with a bad therapist or an overpriced service.

Does anyone have an online recommendation? Preferably one that works with medicaid insurance? Thank you!I'm currently in school but going to start studying at university in October of this year. I have yet to decide which field I'm ultimately going to pursue.

Out of the 3 fields I currently have the most interest in, and could see myself in the future, 2 of them have a very low female to male ratio.

As someone whose close social circle mostly consists of girls, I am worried about how this drastic change is going to affect me psychologically. Don't get me wrong, I have (very few) male friends and I don't think I'll lose contact to my current friends, but as someone who had to change school in the past due to moving I know how important it is to make new friends.

I hope there's someone here who has or had a similar situation like this and can share their experiences.

Note: English is not my native language so I apologize for possible mistakes

Edit after 10 hours: Thanks for all your replies ♥️Hi, girls. So my hair can get frizzy easily, because I have curly hair (3A, i think). I could reduce it with gel, but that makes my hair look wet and a bit hard. I want my hair to look soft and shiny. I also get knots in my hair easily. So it seems like the only option is straightening my hair, but I also don't want to damage my hair, so I don't know what to do.I felt the hit while driving, stoped expecting him to stop too but he just kept driving, followed him and he turned out to be someone from my university, I saw the car going into the campus but then I lost it, there are cameras in the entrance so I’m sure that there is a way to see the license plates, if there wasn’t any physical harm should I still ask for the number?I’ve been to the GYN twice for birth control (to treat PMDD, virgin) both times were just talking 
So I know she’s really nice and gentle but I’m beyond anxious. 

I made the appointment back in December (she suggested it’s a good idea since I’m 23) and have been panicking ever since here and there
Now my appointment is in just a few days

My main fear is the speculum but it’s all of it. How did you do it?!  How long is the whole thing start to finish? I’m literally afraid I’ll have a mental breakdown in the exam room.
I’ve talked to her about the darkest thoughts but somehow this is scarier then thatHello doll faces! My name is Nona and I am 20 years old and I am a university student. I have been having a problem with my hygiene..for pretty much all my life!
As a teenager, I never had my mom tell me how to take care of myself or how to always be hairless like all the other girls. Not saying that hair on female's body is bad, but for me,I wanna be hairless, shiny and smelling good everyday.
I feel like I been very deattached from my feminine side and I just blame it all on my university...I am gonna admit it, I take a bath maybe once every two weeks.. Because my hair is long and curly its a hastle for me to wash, I just ignore it and leave it which makes it worse. I am always scared to get out of my room because I am afraid someone will point out my smell or my body hair or.. Anything really ..please girls help me.. Idk how but please do
1)I know how to make sugar wax.. I just need to know how to make sure that there is no hair on my body( atleast most of the days of the month)
2) I wanna know how to encourage myself to give myself more baths and to dedicate more  time to take care of my hair and my scent
I just want to be beautiful.. I know I been lacking but am done of being scaredHi there! Here to ask about the *best* chore on Earth: laundry! /s

I'm not sure if it's my machine or the way I do my laundry but sometimes, my clothes don't smell fresh, I know it's clean but it just doesn't smell nice or else, it comes out smelling nice and then I leave it for a few days and the smell is gone and it's kind of musty :/

I use Tide detergent, sometimes along with Downy softener. My husband works in a kitchen at a busy restaurant so he always has dirty laundry that smells really bad and I'm wondering if I need something stronger to clean his clothes better and make it smell nice?

I've never used scent boosters before and I'm wondering if there's any one else who uses it and if it actually works? Is it safe to use? How do you add it to a front loading washing machine?

Any other helpful laundry tips would be nice because this really is the bane of my existence right now D:As a Gen Z, most of my life was spent on my phone. Imagining I was growing up in the 80s or 90s- what would I spend my time doing instead? *excluding extracurricular activities and sports and hanging out with friends because I already do those.Well, I’ve seen some people that have a tough look to them, which makes other become wary. Well this may not seem like the best idea, but at this point I’m tired of getting treated badly. Why do people look tough without even trying?Hi you all. I have an embarrassing question to ask. See, I’ve been working through my insecurities and I know one of my biggest is smelling bad. I think I generally smell nice, except for one area... down there. I shower everyday, even twice sometimes, and use Dove Sensitive soap to clean that area. I’ve been wearing panty liners daily to make sure that the awful smell doesn’t taint my clothes. I’ve been rubbing deodorant between my thighs as well. All that does is keep the smell off my clothes. I know my vagina is capable of smelling normal as this awful smell only occurs after I’ve been through a very anxiety inducing situation. The smell is similar to that of onions. I don’t bother wearing anything but jeans out anymore otherwise the smell will just penetrate through the cloth. What can I do about this ladies? It seems directly tied to anxiety, but I’m not sure what to do about that. If any of you can relate to this and have found a fix, kindly let me know.I guess this might be a pretty specific tip, but I recently suggested it to my close friend and she said it really helped, so maybe it'll help other people too.

On the third date with my current boyfriend, we started to get intimate and things were escalating, and I knew that there were things I needed him to know before we got any further. So I suggested we lay on top of his bed. I knew what I wanted to say because I rehearsed it in my head and with my therapist beforehand, but it was still really nerve-racking because I didn't know how he would respond. Anyway, laying down really helped because it's a comforting position, and you're sort of facing the ceiling in room with dimmed lighting so you're not forced to make any awkward eye contact. The dark also helped with the intimacy or importance of the situation. 

My close friend did a similar thing with her current boyfriend about something important she needed to tell him, and it definitely helped her ease into the conversation, especially since she's not a confrontational person.

Anyway, some of this might not work because of certain triggers, but hopefully it'll help a few people have That Conversation.

TLDR: Lay down with your partner, in the dark, practice what you want to sayf21. i used to sex and even sexual fantasies. i’m going through a depressive period so i decided to hold of on hookups. but now even fantasies just trigger sad memories from a month ago. it’s like Endorphins that used to make me feel good I just remind me of this person. 

i have so many better things to think about, so why i can’t i stop thinking about this? anyone relate or have advice?One of my husband's coworkers experienced a family tragedy. I don't know them. In fact, I've never even met them. This is why I don't know what the best thing to do is, because if I knew them well, I'd know how to handle it!

I signed up to do the meal train, but I don't know the proper etiquette. Do I leave a sympathy card? That seems trite. Do I leave my name and number on a post it note? That seems impersonal. Do I just ring the doorbell, drop off the food, and split? I'm dropping off disposable containers, so there's no name and number on a casserole dish or anything. 

If anyone knows how to handle this sort of thing, I'd really appreciate some advice!Hi everyone. So im a 21f in college and for the past few years, I have always felt like my clothes just don't look good on me. Does anyone have any tips for me? I just don't feel beautiful in any of my clothes. I noticed that all the girls around me have found what suits them. I'm 5ft5 and weigh about 107 pounds. I'm thin and insecure about my skinny arms and thigh gap. I don't know what fits my body. For example, I only have skinny jeans and I feel like it doesn't flatter me. I tried mom jeans, but those don't look good either. I just end up putting on black sweatpants and a basic t-shirt to school. I'm not just looking for advice for jeans. My whole closet needs an update. My body shape is similar to @ shaylajanel\_ from Instagram for reference. (crop tops is not an option for me).Okay this gonna sound really weird but stay with me. The only type of pants that look good on me are pajama pants the rest of the pants look ugly and awful and just bad. 

I’ve tried all the jeans they don’t fit right. Im 5’4 and close to 130lbs for reference. I also have pretty prominent hip dips and a curved waist. My stomach tends to stick out a lot (if you have any tips on how to fix that you are more then welcome to share im also lost on that topic and im starting to feel like this is karma from all the times I made jokes about my bloated cat) 

Please for the love of everything what type of jeans fit like pajama pants and where can I find them. I have been on a hunt for over a year and this is not an exaggeration. Before that i wore the same pants everyday because they looked descent. Now I lost my trusty jeans so I’m lost. 

Please help a desperate girl i’m out of solutionLadies, we all hate going to the dentist but please set up that appointment you’ve been putting off! Detecting issues early on can save you literally thousands of dollars, so do visit the dentist every 6 months at least. 

I just had a root canal treatment, actually a super relaxing procedure lol  but the cost is ridiculous. I could’ve easily avoided the whole thing had I gone for a check up regularly. Do not make the same mistake!

Also, if you have dentist trauma from childhood (like I did), know that most procedures are completely painless now. I dozed off during what’s supposed to be a painful procedure according to many people. 

Also, brush your teeth twice a day and don’t forget to floss.I hope this has ever happened to me personally, but I've been paranoid after working shifts in OB/GYN clinics where I've seen multiple women with little pieces of toilet paper stuck on their hoohaas. 

I use water to wash myself down there (a South Asian thing). And follow up with toilet paper to dry but I'm concerned that because it's wet, the paper might stick there. I mean you really wouldn't know! 

So what are some good, non-irritating, fragrance-free wet wipes you use either for wiping or for post-wiping hygiene?Women here who are content with their life; what are the things you have or do everyday that lead to this feeling of fulfilment? 

What gets you excited about life, excited for the future, and happy with your day-to-day life?

(Looking for inspiration haahaha)I’m looking for some inspiration, tips, and advice as to how some of you overcame this mindset! 

So I’m having a hard time spending money on myself or going out to eat or buying things of larger value because I’m mainly frugal and I try to save. I was brought up to not waste money and I think this has led to some strange scarcity mindset. Whenever I make a purchase, I would go for the cheaper option (if it still looks good and isn’t broken/rotten ofc) and if I go for the more expensive one I would feel guilty or as if I wasted money. I would use things until they break because I have this mindset of “if it isn’t broken yet there’s no need to fix/replace it.”

I’m not sure what I’m saving for to be honest but I want to just feel financially secure just in case of anything. At the same time, I want to have a cozy cute decorations and “self care” stuff for myself but I can’t justify the price :/ it’s quite silly if I think about it but I get sad/envious when I see Pinterest or my peers’ rooms that are so cute and cozy. I could have that too but I feel like it’s wasting money on something that isn’t practical. Plus owning too many things makes me overwhelmed? I feel like I’m living in a contradiction and I can’t find an in between ground and it’s making me feel like I can’t appreciate/romanticize my life to its fullest in a comfy environment. Don’t get me wrong, I am more or less content but I feel like there could be improvements. 

How do I change this kind of relationship with money?I’m turning 24 soon and will be graduating with a bachelors this year, but once I’m out I have *no* idea what I’ll be doing. I have no ideas what I want to do career-wise, or what I want to get out of my life. I was discussing this with a counsellor, and she suggested that I treat my time off like its an exploratory phase.

Right now plan is to get some dead-end job and live at home in the mean time, but take time off to do some baking or pottery classes. Maybe go on a trip, if I have the money to. But that’s all I’ve got for now, I’d appreciate some ideas!!23 F 

I’ve always struggled to make and keep friends. The only long term friend group I had bullied me severely growing up. Coupled with an adult autism diagnosis and childhood PTSD from the severe bullying, I’m a relatively functioning adult with enough social skills to be relatively fun at parties and have plenty of acquaintances but very few friends. Maybe 2 people I can always count on but only if it’s a crisis. I still struggle to sit with people at lunch or get myself invited to outings, I only really go out if it’s an event I helped plan for a school organization or went out of my way to figure out where my classmates are going out and I’m just awkwardly there. 

I am finally in a long term relationship with a lovely boyfriend who supports me through all my mental illnesses and is always there for me. We’re long distance and I love him so much it hurts. But I’m seeing my social life shrink down to just him, and it scares me. I never really liked the idea of being the girl who only spends time with her bf and doesn’t have many friends but I think that’s what has happened to me. 

I’m trying to come to terms with this and be okay with my life as is. I used to be able to go out twice a week but now it’s about once a month. I love going out clubbing and drinking but I can’t exactly do that with a long distance boyfriend. 

Just tell me it’s okay to be like this. I’m really struggling 😕I (F 22) have been at my first big girl for less than a year. I am MISERABLE. I don’t understand anything so I’m always lost in meetings and not able to contribute. I’m getting projects wrong because there is no robust training in place. I just feel very unhappy. 

I started applying to jobs to get an out and might have something in the horizon. How do I tell my manager I’m leaving without burning a bridge, considering I haven’t been here for a full year yet?Hi all, 

24F here, started my current job in Oct and I'm really enjoying it. It pays well and I get along with my boss and coworkers well too.

I still live with my parents because rent in my area is pretty expensive for a single person and I don't particularly have any issues living with my family. But I will say, living with my parents while in my mid 20s, or largely approaching my 25th birthday is beginning to get to me. I love my family but I really am feeling the need for some of my own space. I never lived on my own even for college, I commuted to school and after graduation I commuted to my first job which was 1+ hour away sometimes with traffic. 

However, I've also been feeling the need to travel so badly since I've gotten this job- especially since it's WFH and so many of my coworkers travel during weekends and its all I hear about and it makes me so jealous! I first want to travel around the US, I have friends in every corner of the country that are willing to let me stay with them- so really I'd only be paying for transportation, food, activities etc. which still of course adds up. Additionally- when COVID is much more..."tolerable" or this wave of omicron passes, I'd like to travel to the EU but that's a whole nother beast on its own, definitely something I'd like to do within 5 years though.

My predicament is- I really want to travel for the spring/summer and living with my family offers me not worrying about all the things that come with leaving an empty apartment, but my goodness am I feeling the need for my own space. My mother absolutely has good intentions, but she's still my mom and can be overbearing sometimes. I really want to experience independence and living on my own. I guess I'm just asking for some perspective or advice from anyone that has been in a similar situation or is even feeling the same way.

Do I travel or save up to move out?Hi ladies!

Hoping to amass tips related to feminine hygiene/health/sexual wellness to improve my life. For example, I only learned to pee after sex from friends in college! And only recently was told that sleeping without underwear is good for your intimate health.I am 24F and lost my virginity at 14. I have a BF of 4+ years whom I find insanely attractive. In the beginning, we had sex constantly like rabbits. But now it seems like every time he wants it, it feels chore like to me, and it’s usually painful upon entry at first due to his and my size. I do masturbate privately when I have the urge, and I want to be as into it as I was in the beginning. I am wondering if other women deal with this as well? I have also been on the same birth control pills for 7ish years. Do I have some kind of mental trauma that’s causing my sex block? Am I asexual? Looking for guidance or even just to know I’m not alone

Side note-I have been 100% honest with my BF and he is supported and suggested I post here for advice.Hello friends. 

So a little background...My boyfriend and I are breaking up and we have been together for five years. I am planning on moving out and finding an apartment within the month. This will be the very first time I have lived on my own since college. I will be going through the process of organizing our things and picking out what is mine. Off the top of my head I do not have many house hold items that are just mine. Many things my boyfriend had before we were together or we got as a couple.

My question is, what do you think is a good list of must-haves for apartment living (Especially as a woman living alone). I feel like I am pretty much starting my adult life from scratch and could really use a proper, practical list to get me started. Thank you in advance!I remember that, when I was going through puberty, I had always heard the jokes that vaginas smelled like fish or had an otherwise unpleasant odour, and so I thought the fact that mine smelled weird and bad was just part of being a woman. Turns out, no, absolutely not, it’s just because I didn’t ever clean my vulva because nobody told me that I had to! I figured out how to clean it shortly after, and I learned that its natural scent is very mild, inoffensive, and hardly detectable. If you clean your vulva thoroughly and regularly and there’s still a strong, unpleasant smell, that isn’t normal, and it’s probably an infection. 

Let’s stop normalizing the idea that vaginas stink, because I think it leads a lot of young girls to believe that the weird smell they’re noticing is just part of being a girl.I started Uni this month bc of omicron delays and I haven't slept a single night since. I have daily panic attacks - mostly at night and this sense of eternal doom? 
I should mention that I'm getting a degree in something I don't like bc of financial reasons. Lockdown in my country doesn't help. I feel fine the next morning but the night is the worst. I can't think or breathe. I haven't had a nightmare but I'm scared of getting one. 
I should probably go to a therapist but I just can't afford one. 
Tips to calm myself down and decrease the frequency of these attacks?Hi! First off, I'd like to apologise in case this is the wrong place to ask but I've been looking for a more appropriate place, and can't seem to find any sleep-related subreddits or forums.

So I have a new weird sleep thing that's been happening to me for the past.. 1-2 weeks? And it's really bothering me. The best way I can explain it is that I'm being woken up by "fake" noises. It ranges from the doorbell ringing to someone knocking on the door, but I know these aren't real when I wake up because I check the front door camera every time and there's nothing/no-one there. The new one I experienced? The noise my fridge makes when it's making ice. It's so bizarre and every time one of these noises wakes me up, I wake up with anxiety. My heart is racing and I struggle to get back to sleep because I feel panicked.

It could be my dreams but I don't remember the dream when I wake up. It could also be anxiety in general as I have a lot of that regarding the house at night, but I've tried things like L-Theanine and it doesn't seem to help. Nothing in my life or sleeping environment is new that could be causing this. I get to sleep fine initially but I'm always woken up by these random noises that gives me anxiety. What could I do to fix this, or what could be causing it?as we’re all aware, pockets in clothing aimed at women are … disappointing to say the least.

last wednesday, i was a little bit frazzled because i’d woken up late and had to rush to get to work. for reference, i would usually begin my commute at 7:20am but on wednesday i began at 8:00am. the train was a little bit packed, but i didn’t mind because i usually stand anyway as i only have to travel two stops. i was wearing a sweater, a pair of jeans, and my favourite wool coat which has beautifully deep pockets which i LOVE using. i was listening to one of my favourite podcasts and felt as though my morning was going okay, considering.

anyway, when i got off the train and it subsequently departed, my airpods disconnected. annoying, but hey ho, it happens. i went into my gorgeous, deep pockets to fish out my phone and figure out what happened and whaddaya know - my phone is gone. 

while on the train (for two stops which was literally like 5 mins) someone had been able to take my phone from my coat pocket. the thing i had so revered about this coat had betrayed me. i almost always keep my phone in my trousers pocket but i was frazzled and thought that there’s no way that someone could go into my coat pocket without me feeling it - it’s so big after all - and i was only going to be on the train for a few minutes so i’d assessed the risk to be minimal. oh how i was wrong.

so now, i am phone-less. i didn’t have insurance because i hadn’t needed it for my previous phones (have never lost them or anything) so i need to keep paying it off until august 2023 :( 

i am feeling very frustrated and sad and i genuinely don’t think i’ll ever use big coat pockets again in my life. too much space for the hands of thieves. 

LPT: insure your phones and do not under any circumstances put it in your big coat pockets if you have other smaller pockets in your trousers that are availableI hate hearing this, people keep telling me my eyes look dead.. is there a way I can change this?Its gonna be the first time I have sex and I’m super super nervous ;_; 

I’m terrified of getting pregnant and we’re both virgins so I’m sure its gonna be awkward for us both. He promised we’re gonna go slow and said we can stop anytime I’m not comfortable.

I’m not on birth control but hes gonna use a condom and we’re gonna use lube as well (is this enough?). I also learned that I should pee right away after sex to ensure I dont get a UTI or anything. 

Ive watched a few vids and read some posts on having safe sex, but is there any other important info I should know that anyone wish they knew for their first time?f21. i have a lot going on these days. i graduated college early, i’m planning to study abroad next month, and i keep telling myself there’s things i want to do/learn. however after a long, emotional, trauma bonding, love bombing filled hookup, i was reminded of how desperately i want a companion. 

though i’m still sad about it, i was able to let go of the guy from the insane hookup i feel like my life spiraling into an obsession with dating apps and hookup subreddits. This weekend i had a hookup planned but it felt so wrong in my gut that i cancelled, and i’m proud of myself for that. but why can’t i stop engaging on these shallow platforms when i know it’s not gonna make me happy. 

i feel like a part of me hopes something can be different or maybe i just like attention. i’m still trying to figure it out 

i have so many better things to be worried about but i’m awful at distracting myself. does anyone else struggle with this?I’ve heard “eyes are the windows to the soul,” does this really mean that someone’s evil actions will show through their eyes? What are characteristics of good or bad eyes?Hey girls. I'm im desperate need of cash and wondering has anyone ever considered selling their plasma just to get some cash? If you have, how long does it take to get paid and is it painful? I would like to get a dental filling asap I've been having a bad toothache.

Update; Thank you all guys for the info. I was able to get to the hospital, apparently I won't be paid for plasma, coz they take it as a donation just like blood. But I did it anyway, I know it will help a patient who really needs it.I always feel like the third wheel everywhere I go. Even in my group of friends I feel like I am the one extra that everyone wishes wasn't there. 

I have a job that I love and I work with some really great women, but recently they haven't been treating me the same. I felt very welcomed and accepted when I first started there and worked very hard and got promoted after only a few months. Now, I feel like the same group of girls that were always happy to see me don't want to interact with me at all, and purposely exclude me. There have been some incidents recently that make me think that I'm doing something wrong, but no one will talk to me about what it is. I have really bad imposter syndrome right now and feel like I'm in over my head anyway and I'm starting to have nightmares about all of this.

I admit that I'm not that great at socializing with other women. I find it really hard to tell whether someone actually likes me or not. I like to try to make friends with everyone but it is so hard for me to tell when someone is being genuine or just putting up a front and then talking about me behind my back.

Honestly at this point I'm just confused. How do I know if women really like me or not? How do I build back these relationships? What do I need to do to feel like I "fit in"?

Edit: thank you all for the really good advice! I agree with the idea that I need to work on my own self love and acceptance, I know that I am a people pleaser so it really hurts me when people I try so hard to please don’t return the sentiment. But that’s only because I’m not super satisfied with the person I am and I need to work on that! 

I hope that this post and all the helpful comments helps someone else who is in the same boat 💕💕Basically I had my first Pap smear today and I been with this doctor before too and I love her as she is sweet, gentle, and caring. I’ve done a pelvic exam with her before because I had a yeast infection but I went back because I turned 21 and my symptoms came back. 

I was a little nervous because although I’m fine with showing my vagina to a doctor, it is not the same with my breasts as I feel more exposed than I was previously. Now I never been shy to go to the gynecologist because I always felt welcomed and it has been professional but this time it was not the same. I went inside and was waiting for the doctor when she finally arrived and I see another person with her (a female). 

Being confused at the time, I didn’t understand why she was there when in my past appointment she was alone which I liked. The girl didn’t really introduce herself but she was in scrubs and later I found out that she was possibly a medical student. Long story short afterwards, we were finally done but I felt an urge to cry and I can’t really find the reason for it. Was it because I was fully exposed, was it because no one asked me if it was alright to have another person in the room during my first Pap smear. 

Nonetheless the student was very polite and didn’t do anything to overstep her boundaries but I feel.. vulnerable, more vulnerable than my previous gynecologist visits. I’m wondering if I am overreacting or did you guys have something similar and how did you overcome it? Thank you!

Ps. No I didn’t say anything after or during the procedure because I am a very shy girl and I HATE making people feel uncomfortable or unwelcome.

Edit: based on some of the comments already, I would like to add that I did have a previous pelvic exam with my doctor and had no one else with her. I understand it’s for liability reasons but can I get requested to have just me and the doctor?For the last few weeks, it seems to take forever for me to fall asleep. I used to fall asleep so easily. I just have crazy ruminating thoughts and my head just will not shut up! Even if I’m not particularly feeling stressed about something that day, I just really can’t fall asleep right away anymore :(

Does anyone know how I can help this issue? I do have some stressors that have been affecting me in life currently but I just want my mind to be quiet :(

Edit: thanks so much everyone for the helpful responses! I’ve read each one and I’ll try as many techniques as I can. Appreciate you all :)So I did cognitive behavioral therapy for a year which is a very logical type of therapy where you take any negative thoughts you have, identify any distortions(like say if you’re exaggerating or over generalizing) and then you change it to something more realistic. It did help me make some small improvements nothing major, I basically just learnt that I have to be more present and that I don’t have to impress anyone in a social setting. I read a lot of books on the subject as well but a lot of it doesn’t address root causes of anxiety like bad self esteem etc. you can reframe a thought but what about the belief where it comes from. 

So after about a year I could already guess about 90% of what my therapist would say before o would even walk into a session and I felt like she would invalidate my feelings and concerns. So I gave up on therapy after a while as I had about 4 therapists to date and none of them made a big difference. I was just reading books to try and did physical exercise to help myself but I found that I was waking up in the middle of the night worried about the future. 

So I just booked one session just to get things off my chest. And she said she wants to know my history and she wants me to commit to doing a session every week. And she said that CBT realistically doesn’t work to treat the cause of the problem which makes a lot of sense after a year of reading cbt books. But I don’t know if I want to commit to paying that much money after trying so many therapists before and wasting that much money. 

TLDR how do you know if a therapist is going to be effective?I've only seen women from my community clean, and they use damp towels to wipe dust off surfaces and floors (as that's all that was available for cleaning in my country, so that's what they learned and taught others). Using a towel means crawling along on your hands and knees while pushing it in from of you, or shoving it along with your foot, and is quite annoying. Surely someone has come up with less tedious ways to clean. I'd highly appreciate if you shared some of them with me. Thank you!Hi! I recently bought some Rago shapewear based off of some old threads from this subreddit, but I'm a little disappointed with the results. My interpretation of shapewear was that it would essentially emulate "sucking in," but the shapewear I bought does not pull me in at all.

Am I misunderstanding how shapewear works? I wear tights often, and I felt that the shapewear was looser than the tights. Did I just order a size too large, or is this something that is universal with most shapewear?

I'm afraid that if I return the shapewear and ask for a size down that it'll still be too big - does anyone have experience with the size differences of Rago products? If I do end up sizing down, should I go down one or two sizes?

For reference, I had bought Rago 9070 in 3XL. I've never worn clothing above L before, but I wanted to follow Rago's provided sizing guide as closely as possible.  


Thank you!Long time lurker and first time posting.
I've always been conscientious about my teeth. I was told my teeth are discolored due to overused antibiotic when I was little. Now, as a grown woman, I envy the women and men that I interact with who have gleaming white teeth, so white that their teeth seem to sparkle. What would you suggest I can try to brighten my teeth? What is the process? Where do I start?I got a Livia - a wearable tens machine that's supposed to be "an off-switch for period pain". I see people raving about these machines all over the place, especially for endo (I was just diagnosed). 

But it doesn't seem to work on me? 

The machines definitely functional, I feel the "buzzing" on my abdomen when I turn it on. 

I'm putting it on according to instructions and it works great for aching back but when I stick it to the front it just doesn't cut through the pain and I end up taking midol anyway.

I've tried it up to the highest setting. 

Things that might be going wrong: 

Placement? I've tried it next to my belly button all the way down to just above my legs. 

I'm overweight (like 70 lbs), carrying a fair bit around my stomach. Not sure if this makes a difference. 

Is it user error or does it just not work on me? :/ 

Should I try a different brand? Ovira for example has a differently shaped gel pad, I wonder if that could make a difference.

Any tips greatly appreciated ❤🙏I am a natural blonde that needs a dry shampoo (preferably fragrance free due to allergies) that doesn't cause my hair to break. Or become so dry/brittle. 

Suggestions welcome!!So I’ve been going to therapy for a bit. Actually, I have been in and out of therapy for a number of years now, but it’s only in the last few months that I feel like I finally found a therapist that is actually a good fit for me. 

Despite this however, I walked out of my most recent appointment not feeling…that great (unlike previous months-worth of appointments where I’d walk out feeling refreshed and a little more hopeful about the future). In fact, my therapist made a little comment that sort of “triggered” the anxieties that drove me to seek out therapy in the first place, but because the time she made that comment was a couple of minutes past my session, I didn’t get a chance to address that.

I was thinking about bringing it up during our next session, but if I’m being honest, the triggering comment she made wasn’t anything objectively bad or wrong per se. And I’m sure a lot of you would actually agree with her! But she said that comment as if it’s a fact whereas I was sitting there thinking, “*That’s not necessarily true in my experience, but maybe this means I’m the loser here.*” Like it felt like she was putting “experiences in my brain” (my own twist on the phrase “words in my mouth”). Soooo…I also feel some embarrassment at the thought of bringing it up. I’m afraid she’ll think of me as some immature loser.

Anyways, what should I do? Is this something that any of you have experienced before? Is this a sign that she may also not be a good fit despite feeling otherwise this whole time (the thought of starting over with a new person exhausts me)?There's this site I came across called Sexart and they make aesthetically pleasing porn videos that are more realistic and honestly much more stimulating than regular porn. The problem is the site is membership based and I cant afford it and other sites that have clips from this site have clips of very short duration. 
So do you know any sites like this that are free?Hey all, had some thoughts at the gym so I thought I'd post, maybe someone else has answers! 
- Is there a girls that go to the gym subreddit? I put in what I thought would be the keywords and that....was NOT what I wanted to see.

 -Also I need to get my pull day workout into shape, it's the only one I take so many "contemplating life" breaks (aka right now).

- Running outta protein powder (finally, premier protein vanilla is a nightmare flavor now) but what to get next? MyProtein looks good but so many different options. Anyone have a favorite to share? 

- Pretty sure my workout routine is synced with this 1 guy and he let me use his machine one time, I want to ask him to spot me on bench but don't wanna look like I'm trying to flirt? (We make eye contact quite often, I'm not sure who is looking first haha). Thoughts on spotters? Should I just die proud and alone, crushed by my bar....Because of the almost 2-year quarantine & online college classes since the pandemic started, I feel like my physical features have changed. I looked "more fresh" 2 years ago when I was in my last year of high school. Tips on how to bring that glow back?Enlightened and stricken by trafficking and other atrocities, I've been thinking- what can we do to ensure our safety? I've seen articles, and TikTok might have a bad rep but a lot of first-hand accounts are very informing. ~~Turns out we can't even trust each other women.~~ Prevention against these issues shouldn't exist but they unfortunately do and as a younger individual, I don't know exactly what to do to ensure my safety and the safety of those around me or spot out bad signs.

I'm also thinking of possibly starting a website or blog that is kind of a site, mainly for tips on safety and maybe basic female issues in case of expansion. Suggestions?I recently told my good friend that I really like him and want to be more than friends, but unfortunately he doesn’t feel the same way. Since last week, I’ve had bouts of being down about myself, wondering why he isn’t interested, and what’s wrong with me, even though I do know the reason he rejected me is probably because he’s too busy and doesn’t want a relationship.

Any tips for being more confident in myself after a rejection?This is a bit embarrassing to ask but sometimes I feel like I lack a lot of common sense. Its even worse considering I'm 20 now. Now I know I might be considered young and a lot of people are carefree at this age but I still feel like I'm behind the curb here. Lacking common sense and emotional intelligence has caused a lot of problems for me. I feel like I get excluded at times, I get used a lot, I am not able to get recognition for my work which can cause my shortcomings to be more apparent (happened sometimes at my old job). Any help here, I feel so stupid sometimes :(I was driving down the street in my neighborhood and stopped when I came to a four-way stop. When it was my turn to go, suddenly all the lights came on on my dashboard (battery, oil, tire, service engine, brake, PS, etc) and my car wouldn’t accelerate. I pulled over in a parking lot, cut my engine, and started my car back and all the lights went off. 

Does anyone know what caused this? I’m still driving (not while writing this post) because I have things I need to get from the store, but should I just turn back and head home or would it be safe enough for a 10 min trip? 

I already have an appointment for a mechanic for a separate issue with my POS car, so I’m not sure if this was a related issue.I had a therapist who was basically a TERF. She made me feel less than compared to a cis women. She also made me feel horrible saying I had "male entitlement" when it comes to not being assaulted (I have been in dangerous situations and am willing to protect myself). As a teen I wasn't shitty towards women. If anything I for the most part only had friends that were girls. Although my mom isn't a feminist and doesn't believe women should hold power etc. So I almost feel inadequate and inheritently flawed as a trans women. I didnt experince the traumas and struggles that women do growing up. Its only now that I am truly facing them. I would just like an outside perspective on things. Im afraid I could be misogynistic or any of the other things that come from living the beginning of my life raised as a boy. I feel inheritently flawed because of that.Typically I wouldn't complain about this online but I'm so frustrated with my appearance. Things that I enjoy, like a modern, oversized minimalist style or cottage core stuff, would be easy/probably look great if I didn't have huge boobs, wasn't 5 feet tall, and chubby. This isn't a post to down myself or anything,  but it's like certain styles seem to only fit a specific body type and it's frustrating. It's not even revealing, I typically dress more modest as a personal choice, but I feel like I always look awkward or frumpy instead of looking sleek and put together. 

I guess I've been getting more frustrated too with it because since I turned 23, it's like I suddenly aged 20 years overnight. I've been mistaken for being 40 so many times that it's really affecting my confidence. Nothing has changed physically, but suddenly I'm being perceived as much older. I don't understand what I'm doing wrong and feel like this just is how it's going to be. Even in the typical "college" gear, like athlesuire or leggings + sweatshirt or running shorts/big tee I've still been mistaken for being my dad's wife.


So anyway, I'm just feeling down. I wasn't like beautiful before, but I was average I thought. Feeling less that average today.Anyone else have big quantity of discharge? I am absolutely dependent of small tampons (not the ones u use for menstruation) because without them my lingerie would just be wet all the time. I went to the doctor, verify is everything is okay and it is, there is no bacteria. 

My question is, if u had the same problem, how did u solve this? Or what's your hygiene? I'm showering every day, sometimes couple times a day, but that doesn't seem to be enough. I wear a pair of panties during the night without a tampon to let it breath, and I change them for the day. 

I kinda feel awkward sometimes because I've started to see a guy and I know we'll start to be intimate and I'm a virgin and I don't want to wear a tampon and kinda wanna feel free down there when I know he would touch me and not wet all the fucking time.So long story short, I needed a haircut recently, and made an appointment for Saturday afternoon with a new hair salon that opened (and has great reviews). But tbh…I walked out feeling feeling kind of…down about my age in particular after my haircut, namely due to the interactions I had with the hairdresser.

She started off by asking me how old I am (I am 26). Afterwards when I told her my age, she literally spent the entire shampoo/prep session going on about how there’s no way I’m 26, how I can’t be any older than 19, asking me if I get fillers or Botox to look as “young” as I do (I don’t), asking me for me “skincare secrets”, telling me how I must be lying about not getting cosmetic procedures done to look so young at 26, etc. I tried to redirect the conversation several times over the course those ten minutes, but she would keep going back to that same topic. Like damn, have I already reached an age where people are surprised I look young? I thought I looked young because I literally *am* young, I’m literally still only a few years out of college…😑

She then proceeded ask me if I’m *married* once she learned I was 26. Like damn…am I already a part of the age group where that becomes a default question in getting to know a complete stranger? Do people tend to assume that by 26, the average person is married? 🤨 Last time I checked, I’m still below the average age of marriage for most industrialized countries. I guess I’m just confused at why she immediately jumped to asking me “if I’m married”…out of all the things in the world she could’ve asked (or not asked) to make conversation.

When I mentioned to her that I’m single, I also got the vibe that she sort of “pitied” me for still being single at 26, because then she reassured me that “it’s okay, I’ll find someone,” and then asked if I’m taking steps to meet someone for marriage. Despite me never giving any indication whatsoever that I’m anything but *neutral* about my current single status. Like…who asks those things within a handful of minutes of meeting someone??? And I didn’t even *ask* for any advice or reassurance. I guess it’s kind of jarring cuz even a couple of years ago, when I’d tell people I was like…23, they would ask if I have a boyfriend, not if I have a husband.

The hairdresser also turned out to be 22 so idk…I guess I was sorta surprised at some of those statements/questions (I expected her to be younger tbh by the way she was treating me). And tbh, I’m not super happy with my cut either (she went way too short for example), so idk…I’ve been feeling kind of down since Saturday. 

I feel like I sound kind of aggressive in this post, but in reality, I kind of just timidly answered her questions and tried to gently changed conversation topics or even stay silent at times and gave a 20% tip afterwards for the cut (which I don’t even like!). I kind of regret it though, and the whole drive home I was feeling sad. I am wondering if I should have done/said something else? How do you deal with situations like this?

TLDR: hairdresser kept commenting about my age…what should I do in future situations like this?

ETA: I didn’t mention this in my OP when I first posted, but another thing happened that I found upsetting….I opened/unlocked my phone at some point during the appointment to check some texts, and it was still on my IG profile, so she saw and asked to see some of my pics. And then she also began going on about how “I look like a totally different person,” etc (I don’t FaceTune my pics or anything). 🥲 So I guess I interpreted that as, “You’re not that pretty”. So I walked out feeling “old and ugly”, so to speak…I'm 18 and a senior in high school (in the US). I've gotten into most of the colleges I applied for: the community college in my town (doesn't have dorms), the public 4 year college in my town (has dorms), the private college about an hour away (has dorms), the public college and few hours away (has dorms and also no core curriculum which is quite cool), and a private college in France (obviously has dorms). 

So, I have plenty of varying options. Instinctively, I want to stay home so I can do community college at a very low cost, and maybe get a job (something I haven't done yet due to COVID/mental health/physical health). But oh my goodness, living at home is kind of insufferable. My parents are divorced and live on opposite sides of my town, which is quite big. I'm not allowed to pick a house to live at so I switch, week on and week off. My dad's house is always really dirty, and I try to clean, but it's difficult sometimes as I have OCD. There's also often tension with my parents. 

At the same time, I worry about how I would handle living in a dorm. My OCD would be a bigger problem due to more communal living. And it's such a big change. The other major factor is, if I go to 4 year college and hate it, I can't get free community college tuition (something my state does) if I decide to come home and go to CC. 

Anyone have any advice/experiences?Hey girls!!

I have questions about sex as im trying to navigate a happy and healthy sex life with my now live in bf and im struggling over here. We closed the distance on a long distant relationship so only had sex maybe 20 times prior to living together. 

First!! How on earth do you orgasm during penetration?
I can only do it via clit stimulus and its difficult to get him involved in that because our sex literally has no foreplay?? How do I get him interested in vagina because I literally have to ask him to touch it and that feels so awkward and makes me insecure that he doesn't automatically want to finger bang tf out of me. 

Second!! what is the best method for cleaning up "fluids" after?  On BC pills so he finishes inside but we've run into the issue of fluids getting everywhere and rn use a towel but it's annoying because we have to go grab a towel right b4 sex which is a small pain and not a big deal but wondering if theres better solutions?

And last but surely not least!! How do you stop a boring sex routine? Like I said earlier. No foreplay. Help a girl out. We typically get into doggy cuz thats the most effective position for  me to really feel him and then I rub my own clit til we finish. It works and is a good way to have a quick but all the time is leaving me feeling like ummmm is this what sex is? Cuz I can do this by myself.... 

I feel bad cuz I love my man's. But we are both not the most experienced. He has gotten me off with his hands a few times and they've been great times but he wants to find a way to make me cum during penetration and I feel the same because I find it annoying having to ask him to rub off all the time so I end up never asking him to and just do it myself;( please help ooo

Tdlr; How do you orgasm during penetration and what is the best method for cleaning up "fluids" after? And how do you stop a boring sex routine?I know I shouldn’t value my self worth in whether other people find me attractive or not, but it’s something I’ve always struggled with and it seems that everyone around me seems to be talking to new people and doing new things while I can’t make myself do it though I want to.
I should probably add that I’m a heavy girl and pretty short too (165 lbs ; 5 3’) but I’m 22 now and I’ve never flirted with someone and I do want to start making changes. But it is true that no one I’ve ever met has found me attractive and so I don’t know if I can handle blatant rejection 
I don’t know where to start I’m assuming my self confidence is probably the first step 
Please help 😓This probably sounds like a stupid question, but it's my number one insecurity. I'm currently 19, and despite being quite overweight I am still quite literally flat (A cups, measured by the 'a bra that fits' method) and when I was obese it was the same. When I lost a lot of weight they somehow got smaller though, going from a very small amount to completely flat.  


Is this just the way I'm cursed to be or will I suddenly hit puberty in these next few years? I'm not sure how my genes work / if this is common for the women in my family, as I have never met them.
TRIGGER WARNING - this post is me talking in detail about dieting/calorie counting.


I just want to vent about this and maybe get some emotional support. A few years ago, I lost a lot of weight - I went from 195 to 135lbs in about 6 months, and after a few more months down to a low of 122. I’m only 5”2’, so I definitely needed to lose the weight, but honestly the way I did it wasn’t healthy. I remember at one point being mad when I didn’t lose a pound in a DAY (which isn’t even really possible - obviously I wasn’t burning 3500 calories every single day). 

Then over the course of a year, I gained back to 135lbs and maintained that weight for a year, so I thought I finally won this fight with my body. Until I got pregnant. I gained 15lbs of pregnancy weight (I promise I didn’t diet while pregnant, the hormones just killed my appetite). And lost it within a few days of giving birth. But then, my weight started creeping up, because I was too tired and stressed out (from normal new parent stress) to wage this war with my own hunger. I ended up at 143ish and panicked that I’d gain all my weight back. So, a month ago, I started dieting again, and now I’ve lost 13lbs. 13lbs in a month is good, right? Because I’m short (so it’s okay to eat fewer calories) and I’m barely not overweight. I *was* overweight to begin with (a month ago). So I needed to lose weight. 

I’m posting this because all I ate today was a cup of soy milk, half a sloppy joe, a square of dark chocolate, and a drumstick from a rotisserie chicken. And I’m so disappointed in myself for eating that chocolate, because it pushed me over my calorie goal. If someone else posted that, I would tell them to calm down because that’s dangerous territory. But is it? I don’t know where the edge is.

I feel like I only have two modes. I’m either obsessing over food and eating 500 calories a day, or gaining weight. There is no in between. How does everyone else just eat what they want and not gain weight? I don’t binge or eat terrible food when I’m not dieting, and I am quite physically active - I just always end up eating a *little* bit more than I burn. Like, if I eat the same amount that I burn, I’ll end the day feeling hungry, so I’ll have a banana or some cereal or something. And that’s 80-150 extra calories every day. That’s almost a pound a month. Do that for a few years and you’ll be obese. That’s what happened to me before. So I have to count calories because if I follow my body’s natural hunger cues and “eat intuitively,” I WILL gain weight. And I cannot count calories without going overboard and crash dieting. I just am not capable of doing that much work without seeing the scale move. Am I just physically hungrier than other people? Is that a thing? I feel like I will never win.I keep having minor issues with a colleague of mine. It seems like she (25 YOE) doesn't trust me (5 YOE) to do a single thing right. She is not my superior in any way, we have the same title, but obviously she has a lot more experience. Our boss is very happy with my performance.


While the constant scepticism and nay-saying is exhausting, it's the lack of friendly and respectful communication I really have a problem with. For example a text message about a new workflow I proposed saying "And who is supposed to do that???????" or while we're on a call with an external supplier accusing me of keeping her out of the loop, saying (in an annoyed voice) "Where is this document supposed to be? You have to communicate with me!" I did btw, in writing, but that's beside the point. It wouldn't hurt her to calmly ask me to please share a link to the document or to call me after the meeting instead of accusing me in front of our boss and our supplier. Another thing is that she seemingly ignores about 20% of my emails. 


Each and every one of these things is mundane in isolation but the constant minor aggression is getting to me. I get incredibly anxious before every team meeting and avoid talking to her as much as I can. She is 100% remote and works part time so that's easy to do. It's obvious that I need to talk to her but how do I broach the subject? We almost never talk one on one anymore so that makes it even harder for me to pick up the phone just to ask her about a time to talk.


Do you have any tips or suggestions for me? What do I say to set up the meeting and then during? I don't want to argue about specifics or get lost in the concrete, minor things that happened but I also don't want to say something like "I feel like you don't respect me" because that's a very big accusation.


Or am I taking all of this too seriously and should just grow a thicker skin? Pls send help and / or hugs.I’m going to be turning 25 next week and it feels like a big milestone. I’m not going to be having a party since none of my friends are local.  

My current plan is to make myself some tasty cupcakes and go out with my fiancé for a nice dinner. I was wondering if anybody has any fun low-key activities/traditions to celebrate your birthday?  

I took the day off from work (gifting myself a three day weekend) but I don’t want to just spend it like I would a random day off.No idea how to start this but here goes!   


I'm a 21 y/o college student and I'm having a bit of a crisis. I spent a very long time learning to love my appearance, the biggest battle being my face. I finally got to the point where I felt confident and happy with how I looked, and it felt amazing to finally feel beautiful and secure that way.   


This past year I finally moved into my own apartment, and gained control of my diet and my habits completely. I've always been overweight, and I started eating well and working out regularly (from MWF to going about 5-6 days a week now) and I've really been enjoying it! I've lost \~40 lbs in the past year, and my body is finally starting to reflect the effort. I'm very happy about it.   


The issue is, now that I've lost a bunch of weight, I can't love my face the way I used to. In fact, I don't like it at all. I can't find angles that I like, I hate taking selfies where I used to love it, and being able to see my jawline and cheekbones (finally!) turned out to be a negative rather than a positive. The proportions don't feel right, and I don't like how long and oval my face shape is. My nose feels big, I feel like I look drawn and tired, and its really hard for me to cope with at the moment. I was so excited to take control of my health and get my body to look how I always wanted, and now here I am less confident than ever!   


I don't know what to do. I don't want to gain weight back, as I love how my body feels now that I'm active and I like the physical changes to the rest of my appearance. But it feels like there's no point to starting to love my body if I don't like my own face anymore. I feel stuck, and I'd love any advice about this. Has anyone been in a similar situation? What did you decide to do, or how did you cope?I noticed that wearing pantyliners causes an increase in discharge for me compared to when I don’t- has anyone else experienced this?Hey ladies!! So I’m new to the group and I am need of some advice. I am about to be 27 on Wednesday and I’ve been really reflecting on myself lately. I am a bigger girl and I’ve never really had anyone interested in me. I recently just started my first actual relationship with someone I’ve know since I was 18 and things are going so good but I’m struggling with myself. I want to be more feminine and take care of myself better. I wear band tees and jeans almost everyday, I never really do my hair or makeup. I barely have the motivation to shave my legs haha I think I’ve just been solo for so long that I never really cared but I want to start doing better and being more feminine. So any tips on where to start?Around the outside of my mouth is hurting so badly: I live in the US Midwest and we're having our typical cold weather, well below freezing temperatures but not abnormal, and my lips hurt like crazy! I think something is abnormal though because my lips have never ever hurt so badly, and it's mostly around the outside of my lips that hurt. Like, it actually burns to drink water from a glass. But they look totally normal: they are not red or chapped or cracked or anything. I've been trying all my different chapsticks: Burt's Bees, Carmex, and Nivea, and thought those might be the issue, so I bought some plain old Vaseline and that isn't helping either. I smear it all over at least three times a day with no relief. Any ideas?I'm afraid of adulthood. My family life isn't really good, and my family is lower-middle class I suppose. Once I have enough money, I plan on breaking contact with them or just avoiding them and moving to Canada. Maybe get a citizenship. Thing is, I have no idea how any of these things work, how to apply for a visa, when to pay, and if there's programs to help you with this stuff and if i'll be able to afford it on my own without my parents' support.

(I'm so mad because I spent so much of my childhood and youth in school, not once did I ever learn about something practical there. Nothing about loans, money, taxes, economy, all that complicated but essential stuff.)

I get decent grades, i'm very cautious and sometimes a little too anxious. Even though I get good grades i'm scared that I might work at a dead end job or end up homeless. I'm not bold or confident, but I have lots of patience i think. I don't really care about big houses, hell, I wouldn't mind living in a van.

I'm scared that I won't be able to pay for college fees when I leave home and am on my own, and i'm scared that i'll have a hard, gruesome life. I'm also scared that i'll be lonely when i'm an adult. I'll be so far away from my friends, my chosen family, and I'm scared that i'll be alone with noone to lean on when times get hard.

I have no idea what I want to be, my passion is art and graphic design, but I know that that won't be a viable option for me, especially if i'm planning to start fresh in a new country when I have to go to college. (i'm thinking of being a mortician, maybe, or really anything that doesn't require complex complex math. Just as long as I can get a stable enough living \[I dont plan to have kids\] to live comfortably on my own,, would a pharmacist be a good option?)

I've had this anxiety ever since I was like,, in third grade, and I think it's grown even stronger because I've only got a few years of highschool left, and things in my family has gotten very, very shaky.

How do you do it? How do you cope, and what kept you going? Especially those who immigrated alone and young, I look up to y'all a lot,,.

What degree/jobs should I consider?

Is it normal to be this anxious and scared about adulthood?

&#x200B;

Edit: Thank you so much for the responses. I wasn't expecting this much, but I can't tell you all enough how much the responses help and mean to me and how much comfort they bring me. (brought me to tears damn it !!!) Thank you so much <3Hello, I have lately been really struggling to find good quality information online about women's health, and also supportive communities for women's emotions on issues like health and sexuality. Google seemed to have changed their algorithms a lot, and quite frankly, I never found them great for women. For example, when I was younger and was trying to research cold sores, a bunch of forums came up for men talking about how gross women with cold sores were. Now, I am seeing a LOT of advertisements for products that I don't need or want and do not necessarily have a lot of research behind them. I am also seeing listicle articles come up first thing on google, and also seeing articles that make claims that are really scary (e.g., things like saying washers and dryers don't actually clean your clothing, without pointing to scientific research, and perhaps trying to sell something).

Unfortunately even on reddit, I've encountered a lot of misinformation. Not to mention, it's easy to stumble on posts where men are saying rude or cruel things about women and their bodies.

I remember there was a website that I think was directly at teenaged girls but also women in general, that had a lot of good advice about sex, but I can't find it on google anymore! I am looking for things like that, content that is comforting rather than cruel, fear-mongering, or trying to sell me something. 

I would also pay to subscribe to a really good community like that! Basically, I'm looking for high quality information about being a women. I have a life sciences background so I prefer medical/scientific research when it comes to women's health. Thank you!!Hi guys, I was just reading about avoidant attachment style and one trait of it is: “Sense of personal independence and freedom is more important than partnership”. I’m wondering, what’s wrong with that? Why wouldn’t you put yourself first over a relationship? If you did wouldn’t that just make you codependent?Does anyone have any massive meal prep ideas? Hopefully something I can cook sunday night and will last me until wednesday/thursday. I did a combination of pasta/quesadillas the past two weeks and don't think I can go a third week.

Edit: i dont currently have a crockpot/instapot but ill look into it. Any recipes in the meantime that dont require one?I turned 28 years old this January and…the feeling was bittersweet but also numbing - right now I’m single, live with my parents and don’t have a job or even a car, not exactly where you’d expect a 28 year old woman to be. 

I’ve graduated college recently and managed to get a short internship, but career wise I’m nowhere near I thought I’d be by now. My mom is a small business owner and I’ve been helping out (customer service type stuff, since I know nothing about her expertise), but that’s it. And it definitely doesn’t help seeing all your friends starting or having already started their careers.

 My family and I plan to move to a nearby city soon that has more companies that are hiring  & opportunities there so that’s my hope for now, otherwise I’ve been looking for remote jobs and doing art commissions. Regardless it just hurts to feel like I’m so far behind in life compared to all my peers. Anyone in a similar situation as me or can offer some advice?

If it’s relevant at all I’m actually an immigrant who moved to the US when I was 9.I am 26, and I lost my mother to cancer when I was 15. She was a single mom to me and my brother. My dad took over from then but we always had a strained relationship. Recently, his health is in bad shape and I feel like I am mourning the loss of my mother again as an adult. I think about how I will never have parents I can call for advice. I am starting therapy again but I am just wondering if others have gone through something similar.I work for a city. A member from our communications team emailed me out of the blue and told me pronouns are not part of the approved signature layouts. I responded and asked them if I was required to remove them, what the process is to tweak our approved signatures, and if we could have a discussion so I could shed some light on why I think it’s important. I’ve yet to receive a response. 

Many people in our city don’t have signatures compliant with our style guide, a lot of people don’t have signatures at all. I feel weirdly targeted over something so small but impactful and inclusive to our community. 

The city is typically pretty inclusive, progressive and our city manager is a gay man. Our former mayor was a gay woman. My supervisor supports me, but his supervisor told me to stand down since this is city policy and nothing personal. Am I right to feel upset? What do I do? I feel like I’m going to lose this battle, but I’m not just going to comply. I can’t go nuclear because everything is so political, but a tiny part of me wants to call the news lol. Help!As per the heading, has anyone change their career from one field to the other. Currently I’m in the legal field, granted I’m just at the start but I don’t know if I want to pursue it. I’m not that happy with where I am at life. Constantly crying, looking forward for things outside of work. I’m tired of being stressed out.Can anyone help me with how to get rid of dry skin? My legs are showing these dry patches and cracks. I exfoliate atleast once a week and sugar waxed my legs recently (not my first time though). Though i admit i always forget to lotion but i also think the one im using isnt as effective. Also is the nivea cream effective? Is it normally that thick?I’m being stalked and harassed by an ex. I’m calling the police and was hoping for some advice on what they will ask and what to expect. 
I know that these conversations don’t always go well and I’m trying to be prepared.When I was younger I had no trouble speaking with new people and making new friends. But eventually I started growing more introverted and recluse and would always stick with the same friend group. This school year I've been separated from my group and have virtually no friends in my class. Even when I do get the chance to talk to my old friends, I find it difficult to connect with them and get the feeling that nobody else really wants me there. At first I was okay with just sitting on my own during class and at break but recently the loneliness has been making me feel a lot more sad than usual ):

Please helpHi :) So whenever I walk outside, my hair gets frizzy from the wind. There's wind almost everyday where I live, so what can I do to reduce it? Like should i just wear a hat to cover my hair or...?What the title says. I'm 20, from Norway (so sorry if I have bad English at times) & short (1.63 meters) but my breast are big, like BIG coming from someone short and I'm not overweight, and as my only woman friend from the USA puts it they are an 'US 30I' cup, but they attract several glances and stares and I'm not comfortable with it, the only solution I've come up with is using hoodies from my father & boyfriend (both measuring to around 1.90 meters). 
But my boyfriend's sister is marrying and she invited me to come, and I got a SUPER gorgeous red dress (that she helped me pick, but still not as gorgeous as hers), but the caviat is that I'm extremely embarrassed from my bust size and I want to hide them as much as possible and AHHHHH, I really want to wear that dress but also don't want to show much! What do I do? :,(. (this will also help me wear normal clothes for me regularly)

EDIT:OK this kinda blew up while I was sleeping, it's 1 am where I live, and when I'm woken up I can't go back to sleep, so I'm going to prepare me a coffee and I'll be reading and replying to your comments!Any advice? I just would like to know what to expect and how to be a good customer is such situations.... Any advice appreciated!I'm 19 and look like a toddler who's not getting her way when I'm in a conversation that has even the tiniest bit of confrontation. it's not that I am demanding my way or that I'm opposed to discussing different opinions....... I just can't hold the tears back. my guy friends make so much fun of me for it and use it as ammo against women saying its why they're weaker and that kind of shit. I am not weak, but I do want to figure out how to stop myself. any tips?

EDIT: You have all been so helpful. thank u so much for ur input.I was curious what hobbies some of the people have here. I'm getting some personal things sorted out, but its really taken a toll and is mentally and physically exhausting. Many of my hobbies are screen-based, which probably isn't helping.

What kind of hobbies do you like to do?

Edit: I can't get to everyone, but I really appreciate everyone who commentsHello everyone:) I have recently graduated from a university in Europe. Unfortunately all the jobs that fit my description are out of my current residence country, and recently I got an invitation to visit another country for an interview (it is around a 2 hour flight from home). This opportunity is great, however if I did get the job it would mean that I have to move away from my home and boyfriend for an unknown period of time (until I find something back home I guess). The other option is that I stay here, keep receiving an unemployment benefit and hope something shows up. Has anyone been in a similar situation? I appreciate any advice:)So I’m very talkative when talking to other girls. If I’m in a class I can find any girl and start talking to them because I feel like I give off friendly vibes. 

On the other hand… talking to boys is sooo hard for me. I can sit right next to a boy and say nothing the whole time and I don’t know why! Most of the time I don’t even have crushes on those boys, but I don’t know how to give off those friendly bubbly vibes towards them too. 

Basically, I need tips of how to act myself around boys.Hi all,

Like everyone else, I [22F] have been absolutely exhausted for the second half of COVID. Mentally, I think I'm pretty strong, but to my surprise, it's starting to take a toll on me.

I think I went through a "loss of innocence" when I did my first rotation relevant to my career last year; it was my first experience with a full-time job. I cried almost every morning on the way not because I hated the job, but because at the end of the day, I didn't have the energy to do anything else and wondered how people don't feel like their job is their life.

Now I'm in online school for the semester, and god I can't even wake up in the morning unless it's at noon after 10 hours of sleep. The only motivation I have is the momentum of keeping up with classes. Every day, I wake up and do my lectures, and call it a day. I'm doing quite well in school, but I end up on TikTok the rest of the day just to feel something lol. I want to delete social media, but idk what to do after that.

I can't pinpoint what it is, but I'm finding myself reminiscing the happiness I felt a few years ago. The only time I feel that is when I'm with my boyfriend and I don't think that's healthy (who also I haven't really seen since Omicron). I still talk to my friends online, but it's not as fulfilling because they've all graduated and are in different cities, and COVID prevents us from really doing anything together. I feel as though my friend group has just faded out, and it has been one of the foundations of my happiness since the beginning of high school. I'm too tired to talk to anyone except my bf. I've made more new friends at school, but I can't see them in person either.

I've tried doing my hobbies, but school is too inconsistent especially when exam season comes around that it's hard to keep up with them. I feel like I'm doing nothing for myself but at the same time I don't have the motivation to because of such an inconsistent schedule. I think being with other people was a good way to fill the time pre-covid, but now I'm forced to be alone.

Maybe also because it's January, maybe I should take vitamin D.Hello :) Lately I've been really annoyed with my skin. My face is fine since I have a skin care routine and I'm on acne medicine, but my body is just meh in my opinion. I always feel gross; I always have stubble and the illusion of unshaved legs, even when they are, I have acne on my chest and back, and I have hair EVERYWHERE. I know all of these things are normal, but I just want to find ways to minimize the appearance of these things. I want my skin to glow and feel smooth, but I don't know how. Any tips?Everything just seems so much easier for themmakeup, fashion, health, mental health, psychology, lifestyle, movies, reading, self-improvement, manifesting, crocheting, cooking/baking, casual talk, studying, video essays…

anything would work :) thanks in advance!Hello, fellow girls and ladies, once again I'm turning here for advice.

For some background info, I'm 25 and have always been an introvert and kinda shy. I've never been able to make long lasting friendships but I think I'm quite friendly and have always been able to form friendly relationships with either classmates or co-workers.

Late last year I started my first proper job at a place I enjoy but most of my co-workers are double my age and a bit more. Between the age difference and the  fact that many of them have at least 10 or even 30 years of experience at this job, even though we are technically on the same position, most of them feel like my superiors. Which is fine for the most part because majority of them feel like friendly mentors helping me to learn the ins and outs of this job. Except for one co-worker who I don't vibe with for numerous reasons (we seem like very different people with different personalities and polarizing opinions on some pretty big stuff).

Now, to get to the point of this post. Being around this one co-worker makes me realize more than ever how I probably let people walk all over me and how I'll nod and smile or just keep to myself in instances when I wish I could scream about how wrong she is about certain things. Anyway, for the sake of keeping peace at work I know it's better to just ignore her sometimes but I feel like I appear too meek and she unintentionally or not, dumps her work on me. She's not my superior but since she's been at this position for longer and knows what our tasks are better than me, I look to her for what to do. But I feel like it's too easy to use that against me. I also feel like I constantly have to fake it in front of her because I don't like her and can't be honest about my opinions when we disagree on most stuff or be myself (being myself means being more honest and bitchy and fighting for what I believe in and not overly polite and smiley) but that may be a whole other issue.

Anyway, to wrap this up and get back to the main question. Have any of you actually managed to get more assertive if you started of as shy and meek looking? Especially when everyone around you is basically your superior due to age/experience level? I know there are plenty books and probably videos/articles on becoming more assertive but I'd like to know how achievable these things are for regular people, especially women.I come from a family with no education and no money (I never starved or was homeless). I'm not stupid nor smart, just average. I got a bachelor's degree (the first in my family) and working to a kinda low wage, but that's how it is with the field of work I'm in. I like the job. I have student loans though. I have the money to rent an not great 50 kvm apartment, have an old car and travel a bit (which is an important part in my life). And that is it. I won't be able to buy a house or apartment in the area I'm from, and buying a better car is a bit out of my reach for the next few years. Going on luxury vacation, no. This will be my life. It's under the standard in my country, maybe that's why I'm a bit bummed realising I'll never be able to "get it all", if you now what I mean? I'll always have to think thrice about my money and how I spend them, I'll ever experience financial freedom.
I don't know why it hit so hard today.. have you realised the same? How did you turn your mind around and became grateful for what you had? I feel both very sad and like an ungrateful bratRecently (last couple months) I have began to have more issues with self image. I’m overly self critical with body image, skin , hair and such . At the beginning of the day I feel fine but as I go though my day i begin to feel more and more disgusting. I was wondering if anyone had any tips on staying fresh and feeling good throughout the day ?The last month has been an emotional rollercoaster but I went to the gynaecologist and was told I had genital warts and I was very stressed out. It forced me to do a lot of reading about HPV and STDs in general. I went to the sexual health clinic to get them removed and the nurse was confused and called her colleague over and they both told me that I didn't have warts. My anatomy was fine and healthy and I had been misdiagnosed. They then booked me an appointment with a doctor at the clinic to reconfirm and she examined me and said I never had warts. What was mistaken for warts was general vaginal anatomy that although certain areas were slightly elevated this was just the way my body was.

In conclusion, I will be getting second medical opinions in situations that warrant it, and also vulvas truly do come in many diff shapes/textures/appearances.This is something that I have read about before, but I am having a hard time with it myself anyway. I am a young adult so this is all fairly new to me. I have had one longtime partner who was the first person I had sex with an we always felt very comfortable discussing these things but we broke up awhile ago. I am trying to get back into the dating world but since the last relationship, I haven’t shaved at all and I love myself more being natural. My issue is that I know that there are always preferences for people when it comes to leg hair, pubic hair specifically, and armpit hair. I am not opposed to shaving but I prefer to not do it and haven’t for probably close to 7 months now. How do I get over my own fear of it not being okay with the people I meet?I was seeing this guy for 3 months or so, and he just ended it. We never discussed exclusivity and now I’m feeling a bit anxious about STIs. We got tested before we did anything sexual. Do you think it’s a reasonable to ask if he was seeing other people during our time together to help ease my anxiety?Hi,

I'm 28 and while I know I'm far from being "old", I can't help but notice that I'm not "young" anymore. I still like stuff that I used to like when I was 15, like cartoons, teen movies, or young adult novels, but it doesn't feel right because I can see that these things are not designed for me and that everyone else in these communities is way younger than me. It's like I'm an intruder in spaces that are not made for me and to be honest I'm also afraid of being mocked by younger people for my age. I don't want to be seen as "cringe". I feel like I have to let go of all those things I like because I'm too old for them now, but they are still the things I like. I don't know how or what to do. It makes me feel like I'm not good at being an adult.

Anyone has any advice on how to cope with that?I’ve marked this as nsfw just cus I’m embarrassed to be asking this lol, but it’s been haunting me for like ~3 years now. I’ve tried to find other posts about this, but I’ve only found posts of people crying over shame or guilt for religious reasons (I can’t relate). I don’t know if this is just a me problem.

It started happening when I was at a really low point with my mental health, but even though I’m doing a lot better now in that regard, the crying still plagues me (even when I think I’m feeling ok). I think it was initially a result of feeling lonely, but if that were the case don’t really understand because I’ve never been with anyone or had sex. idk why at 20/21 years old would it start seemingly out of nowhere when I used to masturbate all the time with no problems throughout my teens

Anyway, I’d like for it to stop. I’d like to get back to not feeling like an emotional wreck every time I masturbate.Going on a third date after a long day of work tomorrow. I'm going through one of those weeks with a LOT of discharge and I'm not sure how to best freshen up down there before a potential hookup. Just wipe myself down before I go to his place/right when I get to his place? All advice appreciated!! ThanksI have a lot of processed sugar in my diet along with horrifyingly painful chronic UTI's. It feels like peeing acid when I have an infection and it's a nightmare. 

I plan on going on a sugar free diet or as close to it as I can because I need this to be over. Has eliminating sugar or lowering the amount helped anyone with their UTI symptoms? 

Thanks a lot in advance.

Edit: 
Things I do already:
·Shower before and after sex so I'm clean
·don't use soap there
·i don't bath
·pee after sex
·use plenty lube
·tried condoms
·i drink lots of water every day
·i almost never hold in my pee
·vitamins 
·tried no added sugar cranberry juice daily

·i was prescribed antibiotics before having sex every time 
·i tried several dmannose daily along with lots of water
·tried no hormonal birth controlsThe once a year, spring cleaning kind of deep clean. I feel like I'm mostly pretty good at keeping on top of the vacuuming/dusting, bathroom cleaning once a week or so. I scrub the kitchen sink about once a month. But beyond that, when you deep clean your house or apartment, what exactly are you doing?Hello!! Does anyone have advice on how to improve my posture? I'm always studying, and as a result, my posture is not doing great. I've had chronic shoulder pain for years now in one side (my doctor said to just keep doing daily stretches). I do yoga and stretch to help with that pain, but I'm not sure how I can properly maintain posture. thanks lovelies!I (19F) have been struggling with an eating disorder since I was around eleven years old, which has caused me to go through many intense periods of gaining a lot of weight (to the extent of clinical obesity) and then losing all of that weight rapidly. This has been an ongoing cycle for years. 

I used to have more full and perky breasts, but I've noticed that every time I lose weight they become saggier. When I gain the weight back they stay saggy. 

I am currently in treatment but was recently at a place of morbid obesity. I have lost quite a bit of weight and am almost (40lbs) away from a healthy weight for the first time since I was eleven. However, my boobs are sagging more than ever. They look like they have aged more than thirty years. When I put on one of my old crop tops, my nipples stuck out from underneath. When I am standing up they point towards the ground. 

This is making me extremely self-conscious! Are there any exercises I can do? Is this normal for this experience?I miss how when I was younger, I'd get excited and hopeful at the smallest things. For example, if I got an invitation for an interview, I'd be so grateful for that opportunity. Now, I don't feel satisfied till I secure the job. And even then, I don't get that excited. 

I'm not sure if this is a coping mechanism or maybe I'm just growing up but I feel like I've become very mellow? In the sense that I never get too excited, nor too disappointed. It's not that I always expect the worst outcome, but it's almost as if I've trained myself to never expect the best outcome either. But the thing is, I want to always expect the best outcome. I want to be hopeful, even naively so (to an extent). Even if it will cause me disappointment at times. I just want to live life more vividly. 

I'm thinking that the pandemic has been a factor in all of this, especially since I'm still a college student and the situation has greatly affected my life. But does anyone have any thoughts on this?I’m trying to organize for probably close to the first time for a bedroom. My process is taking so long and the room still looks pretty bad. I’m unpacking and reorganizing at the same time. Any tips or suggestions are greatly appreciated. When I say I haven’t really organized a bedroom I’ve never been good at it because I was never taught or given the tools growing up to do so. I’m a college student trying to organize my apartment bedroom so I can have a less cluttered semester. I hope this makes sense. Thank you for reading!So I've had a pair of piercings since I was around 5, and recently (past year or two), every time I take it out for a while and put it back in, it instantly gathers crust around it, hurts and has some kind of sticky stuff coming out of it. It's quite gross, but i don't really know how to take care of piercings, or maybe I just don't have the motivation to. I recently got a second piercing, and that hurt and eventually developed a bump. I work in fast food, so I gotta take the earrings out every time I have a shift. One day I took all my piercings out and forgot or rather.. procrastinated and didnt put them back in for a good month and a half. My recent piercing had closed, but my older one was still relatively open, after a little fiddling. Fyi, the "recent" piercing was about 9 months ago. I'm also allergic to anything other than surgical steel, gold and silver (not sure about titanium). The piercing place gave me a spray and told me to spray it twice a day for a few weeks. I did it almost tg every day for a bunch of week, but it still got affected. Anyone have any tips on how to take care of sensitive ears with piercings? I want to get lots of them in the future.I don't know where else to post about this. I'm sorry if this isn't the right place. I am a little distraught. Throwaway for obv reasons.

I'm the only woman (left) working at a very small company.

I found out after I was offered my end of the year raise of barely 4% that everyone else in my department was offered 10%.

I was asked to move to a new role at the end of last year, with the promise that I would be able to completely leave my old one and focus on my new responsibilities. It's become apparent that that's not true. I've been given a bunch of new responsibilities on top of everything I had to do for my previous role. The people who got 10% raises all had the same job as the one I had before my "role change."

It feels like a slap in the face honestly. It may not be sexism explicitly but why did I, the ONLY woman, get the short stick? My manager and the CEO have both been clear about how valuable I am to the company, both in technical knowledge/work ethic and in culture/office morale. And yet...

I made the mistake of talking to my manager, who is my best friend at the company, about my disappointment that I was worth less than half than everyone else to the CEO. I should have been explicit that I was venting to my friend and not asking for the help of my manager (or, actually, just not said anything to him, bc he's my manager before he's my friend I guess). Because he went to the CEO and relayed my disappointment. I can either assume he was trying to help me and gain clarity on why this decision was made or he was giving the CEO a heads up that I was about to swing back around to ask for more money so they could head me off. Either is possible based on stuff he's done in the past with other people on our team.

I got a very condescending message from the CEO this morning explaining that *everyone* was being asked to take on more work, that some people (those who have been at the company half the time I have) still make less than me even with their raise, and that we need to find a more appropriate way to discuss compensation. As if any of that explains why I didn't get the same bump as the guys who were at my same level?

I have *never* been talked to about poor performance, reprimanded for anything, or ever been given anything except praise about my work and my attitude until now.

Where do I go from here? Still lobby for myself like I was planning to before my manager's "help?" Just eat the fact that EVERYONE got more than I did? Or bail while it's still my choice?

ETA: Thank you gals so much for all of your thoughtful responses, encouragement, and advice. Seriously. I knew generally what I wanted to but now I know very specifically what I want and need to do Hey ladies, so I lost a ton of weight over the past 2 years (160 —-> 120) and I’m 5’8 so I guess I’m thin. However I also take meds that have affected my menstrual cycle and I only get them like every 3-4 months. When I do, I get this annoying brown old blood discharge for like 3 weeks then my actual period. My obgyn said my test results came back normal though. All my health tests come back ok.  Anyway, I felt soooo off my game today and I can’t get over it. I’m used to being a fucking rockstar and knock everything out of the park. I have my personal training sessions during the week that are tough as hell and lots of workout classes between Pilates, stretching, and other types of lifting. I am a software engineer in high tech at one of the big firms. I’m also a competitive horseback rider. I’m a very busy person. And I can usually balance all this and do well.  But I get so devastated when my period hits and I actually feel dumb as hell. I ask my coworkers to repeat themselves, I have to have my workout instructors repeat themselves, I couldn’t finish a project today that my coworker asked me to do, and I can barely do anything high performing, even if it’s just laundry! And it especially made me so depressed today that I just sat and cried. I have been making so many gains and I’m so disappointed that when my period hits I cannot deliver my best results.  How can I cope with this and stay healthy and also on top of things? I have a lot of demanding commitments and cannot fall behind. How can I stop being so hard on myself too? Any advice can help :-) thank you!Hey my diva cup using ladies! Any special solutions that you use to clean your diva cup besides water? I use Dawn dish soap and water at home but what do y’all use when you aren’t home?! Baby wipes? Just water? Let me know!Hi everyone 

I applied to a position with company a few weeks ago. Recently I saw that someone from the company (not HR) viewed my profile. We are in the same mutual interest group on LinkedIn. 

I'm wondering if I should msg them. I've already applied but I'd like to take all steps I can to ensure I get an interview. 

Any advice?

TiAThis is a question mostly to mothers and future mothers, but all women should feel free to give their perspective. Was there certain preparations you did before becoming a mother? Did you try to change your mentality about priorities? Did you change your house? Blocked toxic people from your life? I’m planning to have a baby in the near future and I already think about how I can become a better person for my kids. How did you get prepared to become a mother?Hey guys! Just wondering, is there a discord server for this subreddit? If not, I think it would be a pretty cool ideaMy hands/knuckles are SO DRY! So dry that my purple shampoo stained the knuckles. What are your remedies or suggested products for rehydrating your hands in cold weather?So, I have been wanting the Invisawear jewelry for a long time, because I am a very small girl and I know I'm totally one of those at risk of being taken advantage of. I already have a pepper spray keychain and the Noonlight app, but I want something I can wear and have on me at all times.

The reason I've been putting it off is that, I really don't go anywhere that's "high risk" or whatever. I literally go to work or school, but of course classes are going back in person this semester. I'm just not sure if the $100-200 device is worth it sometimes... I am also thinking about getting an internship out of state, so maybe that's the final push I need to buy this.

(I was thinking of buying the keychain version on Amazon, which is about $125, and then buying some zipper hair ties or some other bracelet or necklace thing I could put it on as needed... I also really just don't wear a lot of accessories at all so that doesn't help)

[https://www.invisawear.com/](https://www.invisawear.com/)

&#x200B;

\*Sorry for the probably incorrect flair... and don't have a boyfriend. Porn isn't working too well. Haven't ever tried masturbation. 
Any suggestions?I (22F) have always noticed these two pesky horizontal creases on my stomach that are prominent even when I stand. They are basically where your ab lines are (where your stomach curls in when you sit). They're darker than my skin, so they're quite obvious from far away.

I never thought much of them until I recently went to my acupuncturist for leg pain. She asked me to raise my shirt so that she could put needles in my stomach, noticed the creases, and told me that they were a sign of bad posture.

My posture is undeniably bad (a product of walking around with a heavy backpack when I was in school, hunching over my phone/desk, keeping my head down due to social anxiety), but for the past few months I've tried to be more conscious of my posture by doing things like evenly balancing my body weight on both sides when standing and tucking my chin in. However, I haven't seen any difference in the creases.

I'm not overweight; I'm 5'3" and 125 pounds. However, I am rather pudgy in my stomach area and would call myself skinny fat.

Has anyone experienced these creases and been able to get rid of them? I'm quite self-conscious of them, and after my acupuncturist pointed them out (not unkindly, I should add) I can't stop obsessing over them. Similarly, if anyone has any exercises for good posture, please recommend them.With my clothes and whatever, how can I look fairly well groomed every day? I have recently realized I really have no idea how to maintain my appearance, and looking at people who look together and well maintained it looks like such high maintenance, what I can I do? What are the basics for good grooming? I like to think my personal hygiene is good but even with that I still feel like an absolute frump, clothes, my face, everything. Even my hair which is so frizzy and prone to getting greasy really quickly. I usually tie it in a ponytail and it is always a mess.I'm in the thick of it now with two (3yo girl and 10mo boy) and I'm glad I figured out a lot of my parenting philosophies and goals ahead of time because if I was trying to do that now, I'd be basically just reacting to things instead of taking purposeful action or non action (because sometimes they do something and you have to force yourself to sit there and let them try first or fail first before you swoop in).  

Love my kids, but mom brain is real and brutal.  You will be too tired.   Also discuss these plans with your potential co-parent. 

And also remember that no plan survives first contact with the enemy. 🤣 So have a few backup plans handy. 

A good template is: " this is what I'd ideally like to happen, but I can make x or y work as well". 

Me, prior to first baby: I will ALWAYS follow safe sleep guidelines and never let baby sleep anywhere other than a Properly Appointed crib. 😌

Me, 1 week postpartum, delirious from exhaustion: ok ok bedsharing it is you adorable little monster who demands body contact for all sleeping.  😩I tried posting this in a general resume sub but immediately got a man trying to gaslight me that this isn't a valid concern. 

I have been married for 5 years, and in the same job since just before getting married. I am starting job-hunting for the first time since then, and want to make sure my employment history is easily connected. Every job I've had previously was under my maiden name. Specifically, one of the places I am applying is somewhere I interned at just out of college, so I want to make sure that they recognize my name, but I also want to make sure that when they call to verify employment at other previous companies, the HR/receptionist person taking the call won't tell them, "No, [First][Married] never worked here." I do work in a small enough industry that this is a concern. When I've been in the hiring seat, if I could not verify someone's employment history, that person was not likely going to passed along. 

Has anyone noted a maiden name on a resume? How has that looked? I'm 100% positive this is a thing I need to be doing in this case, since most of my industry contacts know me as my maiden name, so I am looking for formatting help, mainly.Before Covid hit I had sooo much fun going to concerts and raves with my friends. I was underage but was really looking forward to starting clubbing once I turned 21. Now I’m 21, fully vaccinated (with a booster) but had a pretty brutal falling out with my friend group this past summer and don’t have a single person to go out with me. I have a few other friends but they don’t drink, or if they do they don’t enjoy being in a club-like setting.  I’ve been able to learn to enjoy doing things alone that I would’ve previously only done with friends, like eating out or going shopping but feel really nervous when it comes to clubbing alone. It means a lot to me to be able to experience that part of life that brought me so much joy but as a small woman who most people could overpower if they wanted it seems a bit dangerous to get drunk at a club or bar alone. At first I thought that I would surely make new friends in time and have been pretty socially proactive, but it’s been 8 months of pretty boring loneliness and I’m realizing that I can’t depend on others to create the happy experiences I crave. It honestly kind of sucks feeling powerless in this situation because of gender and small size, i know of many instances in which guys have been able to go clubbing alone without a second thought. 

I’d love to hear what others think about whether or not this can be safe, and if there are precautions I can take to still be able to live out my 20’s how I want without depending on others.Does anybody have a magazine subscription that they enjoy? I am looking into things that will entertain me away from a screen. I am into social justice, fashion, makeup, etc.I’ve been taking antidepressants daily for about six months and over that time I’ve gained weight. I have a naturally small build (not super fit, but slim) and it’s been really discouraging to try on my old clothes only to discover that they are tight and unflattering.

I am reluctant to talk about my weight gain with my friends because I know it can be a tough subject, especially since gaining/losing weight has never been a priority for me before. I also don’t want to obsess over counting calories and working out.

I know my antidepressants have helped me, but I wonder if anyone has any advice for losing weight in a safe and healthy way whilst taking them?I'm bigger than most girls; I'm 5'8", have massive shoulders, big boobs, no butt, long frizzy/curly/wavy hair that I have no idea how to manage, and a little too much chub. I've never worn makeup and my wardrobe pretty much solely consists of sweatshirts and loose jeans. My mother is the same so she hasn't really been able to help me. I just have no clue how to start trying. I don't have the money or time to do a lot of stuff properly, but I'm tired of feeling gross. On the other hand, whenever I do wear "girly clothes" I just feel big, especially being around tiny and skinny girls. I have a really hard time finding clothes in my size that fit my body type too: everything either hangs of my top like a tent or is *way* to tight on my shoulders and chest. Plus, I find my motivation completely disappears during depressive episodes. To the point where some days I can't even get myself to brush my teeth.

If anyone has advice on starting to care for your appearance cheaply, or what to do when I lack motivation or feel uncomfortable in my skin I would really appreciate it. Thank you so much!I'd like to smell good all day long, but am not sure how to use perfume without it being overpowering, and plus because there's no point in wearing perfume just to mask bad smells.

What do you do to smell nice all day long?I tried, but after going like halfway in my vagina seemed to push it out?? I couldn’t get it further and my vagina was pretty much rejecting it.I'm a healthcare worker and decided to buy my own eye protection because I can't stand the glare from the hospital-issued face and eye shields.  I bought the Wirecutter's recommendation (Radians Mirage: https://www.nytimes.com/wirecutter/reviews/best-safety-glasses/).  Great value for $2 but I have long eyelashes that touch the lenses when I blink.  Does anyone have recommendations for reasonably priced safety goggles that work better with long eyelashes?Been trying to look through saved posts etc for half an hour, it was about losing jewellery and pretty sure there was a comment that said about losing missoma earrings 20 mins after they got them

&#x200B;

I hate loosing things too, thats probably why I saw the post but I wanna find it lmao

Any helpI've recently gained quite a bit of weight, and it's caused my thighs, hips, and bum to be covered in purple stretch marks. I've always been slim, so the weight gain must have been a bit of a shock to my body as I've gained 2 stone in just under a year. 

Has anybody got any tips? I've purchased some Bio Oil, which is coming today, but any other advice would be great!

I've lost confidence, and I want to feel and love myself again! 

Thank you <3It’s all in the title, I don’t want to master it but at least get a hang on the position and have some fun.

I feel like I suck at it and I know I do. My hips and this area feels really stiff.

Feel like I need to get more flexible, do some yoga or something. 

Thank you ❤️

Edit: your advice are all so precious to me right now, thank you so much for the thought you put into your replies - I’m so grateful 🥺Long story short I am being blackmailed after 4 years with inappropriate photos I sent when I was 17/18.

I know exactly who the person is but I’m not sure what to do and if I would even be taken serious.Hi all! Recently I(26F) was diagnosed with severe anxiety. I’ve been working with my doctor and a therapist and made some progress, but I’ve realized I don’t know how to relax, or fully remember what it feels like. My therapist has given me documentation on breathing, some apps to help, etc, but I was wondering what people here did as a relaxing hobby? I’m working on adding reading as a regular habit, and maybe playing my switch, but I was wondering what others do. I'm gonna take my first few steps into being a girl publicly in the next few weeks - I'm planning on coming out to my job next week, after which everything is gonna happen very fast.

Any advice? What should I be doing for skincare? There's so much advice out there and I don't know what to follow.

What are good sources of cute clothes that don't cost too much? I have a few skirts and dresses and belts already but I don't know where to go for professional feminine clothes esp.

Any other really useful tips in general I should know?I am incredibly lucky, my partner is wonderful, talented, does amazing things (conducting many choirs, kids, adults, everything in between) that I used to dream of doing. He's not actually more talented than I am, he got better opportunities in a field we both love and so ended up much further ahead than me musically. He's also younger than me by a year and a half.

I've started taking steps to becoming a competent director but it'll be a long while, and I can't help but look at him and think I've missed the boat, he's already doing professional level stuff at 25, and it makes me feel sad. I'm incredibly proud of him and admire him endlessly, but there's a touch of envy and "I'll never be that good" that won't go away.

How do you make yourself stop this kind of comparison? It's unhealthy, doesn't yield anything positive, and just makes things miserable.Over the past couple of years I’ve put on a few stone and I’m not quite plus size but I’m noticeably bigger. I’ve mostly accepted this in myself - sure I have the occasional insecure day but I’m not putting pressure on myself to lose any and I’m fairly confident with my body. However my friend recently posted a picture of me from New Year’s Eve that I thought I looked really nice in - but I’ve not really posted on Instagram anything where you can see my body in quite a while. 

Immediately I started stressing about the opinions of people I went to school with that I haven’t seen in years except for the occasional bumping into one in the supermarket. I have no idea why, these aren’t my friends and I shouldn’t care about their opinion of me but the idea of girls I haven’t seen for a while chatting between themselves that I’ve put on weight really fills me with anxiety. 

Why do I care about these opinions and how can I just accept that they might talk about it but it doesn’t matter even if they do? I feel like I’d convinced myself finally I was secure in my own body and then a simple Instagram post is making me second guess if I really am.I’m 25 (almost 26). Long story short, I am feeling insecure about my voice after a recent incident. Basically, I called my credit card company to care of some stuff yesterday (had to take care of some debt stuff). The  woman on the line kept on referring to me as, “*Mrs.* X” 🙁 I can’t let this go for some reason, and it’s been making me feel insecure. I’ve always been told I had a high pitched voice so I’m wondering if my voice sounds like a “middle aged woman” type of voice now, instead of a “young” voice. How do I let it jot bother me? Is it possible for my voice to sound so “deep” all of a sudden that people on the phone assume I’m a “married woman”? I know your voice changes thru your life, but I didn’t think I’d sound like a “Mrs” in my 20s.Hi everyone💕
Lately, I’ve been dealing with feeling sad for no specific reason. Sometimes, I’ll be having an okay day & it just sets in and I feel like I just need to cry for a while but it never really helps. I’m a college student, so I’m usually stressed about academics and finances. Also, I’ve been really struggling with anxiety and low motivation. It’s difficult to get motivated to do almost anything, especially working out. I really want to take better care of myself. I was just wondering if anyone has any tips for how to deal with these feelings? 
Thank you🤍(F20) I wouldn't consider myself extremely ugly, I'm fairly average looking, and I keep hearing all of these stories from friends about their first loves, their first kisses, their first time having sex, and I've done none of this. I've been asked out before, but the first time I was asked out it was a guy who I considered to be a friend and he drunkenly confessed to me while I was away in a different country for university so it didn't feel worthwhile.

I just feel like I've put all this focus into getting into a good university throughout my entire life and I got into both of the places I wanted to get into. I've always been focused on school, my parents have always encouraged me to focus on hobbies including volunteer work and music. So now I don't know what to do, I feel ridiculously behind on everything socially and romantically. I've never found getting good grades particularly difficult, but talking to guys is a whole different thing. Is this normal?I recently started using tampons and love how comfortable and non messy they are compared to pads but I haven't figured how frequently to change them. I either leak or its too dry when I pull it out. I'm trying to time my usage for different absorption ones but it's so inconsistent. Do you have a particular feeling or a cue which tells you when you change it? 
And yes, I never wear one for more than 6 hours.Hey everyone, for some context..

My whole life I've been one to avoid change as much as possible and just have everything come to me, or not putting all that much effort into stuff (work, relationships, life in general).

I'm always doing the minimum and staying in my own little bubble of comfort. For example, I rarely go that "extra mile" at my work (which I don't even like), have the same 3 friends who will soon leave the city and I'm already thinking of just staying alone, do the same 3 classes at the gym then leave, I never take any risks on anything. 

I guess there's nothing wrong if you want to live like that, heck I've had a relatively easy life so far! 

But this year I turn 30, and I want to expand my horizons and just live my life more actively, you know? I know I can't do everything at once so I'd like some advice on small steps that I can take to leave my comfort zone!

Any and all advice is appreciated.

Thanks in advance!I’m trying to look for a job at the moment after been fired last year. 

I’m a bit paranoid because an ex showed faceless nudes and sexts to his friends in the same area as revenge and to embarrass me and they showed them around where I lived. It was a ldr and he leaked them while he was abroad.

I’m worried now that no employer will want to hire me if they recognize my name or see me because I sent ex pics of my face sometimes :( i was called for an interview after I was fired last year but I changed my mind and didn’t go. I also passed an interview two years before that but I couldn’t start the job due to pandemic. 

The job I was fired from was a call centre but I feel like they wouldn’t really care about those things. I was paranoid in that job too. 

I feel like I might be a little paranoid and reading too much into things. Has anyone else been through something similar?Hey all, in need of some bra recommendations as my bra collection is crap! 

I don’t like wearing anything padded/underwired/thin strapped - they all make me feel super uncomfortable - and I also don’t like the feeling of having a prominent chest at all, or having ‘floppy’ boobs in any way - I only like them pretty much strapped down. I’ve just been wearing sports bras for absolutely everything for about the last 10 years which are fine, but I would like to upgrade to something more feminine which is still comfortable for me. I do tend to dress pretty feminine anyway, so my neon Nike bras are starting to feel a bit daft now I’m nearly 30.

Does anyone have any good suggestions which won’t break the bank? Generally a 36A, UK size 10 if this helps!When I say soft I mean really soft! I have to be careful opening cans of coke because the tip of my nail can break or bend backwards :( 

But on the other hand if I don’t use moisturiser my skin becomes dry and uncomfortable.Since I have mental health, my hygiene is non existent and seeing as I’m starting college I want my hygiene to be great. So what are the basic hygiene tips to smell/look good ?For a long time I was on the IUD birth control that made your period disappear (honestly loved it, highly recommend) but got it taken out when it expired and haven’t gone back on it as my husband and I want to have a child soon. I really hate paying for pads and tampons and want to just get a period cup. The problem? I’ve bought 3 of them, none of them fit. It’s at the point that I don’t know if my vagina is going to “accept” a cup at all. I just want something I don’t have to continually buy and offers more longevity.ok so you’re gorgeous and wearing heels and then ur ankle gives out and does the thing where it like folds in on itself how do you recover😞😞😞😞Especially another girl, but someone you can talk to about things even as private as sex. Is that supposed to exist? Am I missing out on something?These feelings hit me hardest on the weekends because I’m not working and feel responsible for filling up my time. When I sit around on the couch and watch TV, I feel guilty. When I spend my leisure time doing something “healthy” like reading a book, I still have the thought in the back of my mind that I’m not doing enough.

When this happens I resort to tasks that make me feel good about myself, like cleaning. I genuinely enjoy throwing on a podcast and organizing the pantry or vacuuming the floors, but I also think this is just another way to fill void. 

Another issue is that I’m very type A, which prevents me from doing activities based on what would feel good *in the moment*. It’s like I can’t access that spontaneous part of myself because I’m a planner and get hung up on what I ~should~ be doing.

Can anyone relate? How did you learn to enjoy free time, or what have been your coping mechanisms?I work in healthcare, and use public transport. The covid risk in my city is so high and people refuse to wear masks. I am also a full time student and my university does not take covid distancing seriously. I am always so anxious about it.

I have discovered that scent really helps me relax so have been using wax melts and candles to de-stress. I have also started drinking more herbal tea and taking more bubble baths. I really need something that just takes my mind off it!

What do you guys do?Hi, okay. So the only period product I’ve ever been comfortable using are pads. When I tried to use a tampon, one of those where it was in a case that you had to push it out of, it hurt badly. My mom said that it was fine, and that I would get used to it. I haven’t gotten used to it, because every time I try to, I get this pain in there that I don’t really want to experience. I feel as though I’m past the age to start wearing tampons, and that I have an irrational fear of anything going in there.
Is this normal? Should I be concerned? What should I do?I didn’t really start wearing makeup until the latter half of high school. I wore more in college but really only to go out, so makeup has never been a daily routine for me. I would like to make it one, however.

The problem is that I feel really awkward when I wear it, tbh. I’ve gotten shade matched and stuff so I know that my foundation at least matches me and I’ve done some reading about what makeup is good for my coloring and features. But I feel like a clown when I wear it tbh, or a little kid playing pretend. Has anyone else felt this way? If so, how did you get over it?Despite my best effort, I won’t have access to running water while camping over spring break. I wouldn’t mind not showering for a few days if it weren’t for my hair. If I don’t wash it every other day, it gets greasy, and my scalp has enough dandruff to cause irritation. Does anyone have good dry shampoos they’d recommend? Or a camping routine? I’ll have plenty of water and an entire car to fill with supplies. I’d just prefer for any equipment to be minimal and inexpensive.Hey ladies!! 

I was working pretty contently at my last job for 2.5 years, making a decent salary of 60k, working remote. I work as a designer for some context, and am 24, almost 25. Last November, I started to get head hunted by another company and decided to talk to them just to see what’s out there.

 Leading to today, I got a job offer of 118k and a sign on bonus of 5k. I am actually floored. With this offer, I am doubling what I make. The job position is still what I do now, but it is a senior level vs an entry/intermediate level. I got good vibes from their team, their company, the work, etc., so I basically had to take the offer. It is a life changing amount. My jaw is on the floor, honestly never thought I’d make this much in my entire life. I am also feeling very bittersweet about leaving my current job - my coworkers were amazing there!! Ontop of that, I am honestly like. Did they confuse my offer with someone else’s? Why would they pay me this much? I feel like I don’t deserve it. 

It’s just such a weird and conflicting feeling. Ive been happy, overjoyed, then I’m sad, then I’m feeling like a fake. It’s just a lot of emotions. ugh. How do I move forward feeling like I made the correct choice and also keeping my confidence up?I read on here that you should go to a piercing shop that's on the APP website but the one that's near me is permanently closed. Also Banter charges $35 for a needle piercing, is that normal?This has been something that has been majorly bumming me out lately and I was hoping to get some advice. I’m 22F, in my last year of college and I don’t think I really have any friends. I’ve always been someone who has a few really good friends, and to be fair I still keep in contact with a few, but we don’t see each other very often due to going to school in different states. We text, but it just feels different. 
I had friends at school, but with everything going on the past few years, we’ve all faded away from each other and don’t really talk, and when I’ve tried to reach out I just don’t get the vibe they really want to hang with me or talk like I do. I have a friend or two, but they’re so rarely available it feels like I don’t have anyone. 
It just feels so depressing to be sitting in my apartment when I see other people I know going out every other night. That’s not really my style, but some part of me is so concerned I’m missing out on the college experience, but with the state of the world everything is already so messed up, it’s a mix of me trying to be responsible and not go to crowded events, and then thinking if I should be trying to get out more. I’ve tried to meet more people. I’ve joined clubs, I’m not antisocial or anything and I try reaching out, but I go to a small school and I feel like nobody is looking to make friends at this point? Or maybe there’s just something wrong with me. I don’t know what else it could be, how I somehow am so easy to drop and forget about. I guess I’m just looking for advice or other people’s experience with this feelingI need advice because I am STRUGGLING - I got my first Brazilian in Feb 2020 and it was honestly amazing, I had no ingrowns and it took a while for everything to grow back.

Fast forward to now, I feel incredibly self conscious when I wear a bikini because I have ingrowns, bumps, and dark spots EVERYWHERE and it feels like it’s past the point of no return - It’s worse than it’s ever been now partially because when I got waxed last week the wax was very hot which made my skin a bit irritated.

I have purchased 12 sessions of laser hair removal but for reasons way out of my control I can’t go for my first session until further notice :(

I watched this [YouTube video](https://youtu.be/sdSRL3gHgZQ) and ended up going out and buying Bump Eraiser products, which have actually kind of helped. Also have an unused dermaroller sitting in my cupboard which I will use when my skin calms down.

Any more tips from you ladies will be much appreciated, I just need to get this under control 😭Does it actually matter if your lingerie is matching ?Like the title says, I’m just never really hungry. I’m 5’7 and around 115 lbs. I’m currently trying to eat more protein and less sugar. Any tips on how to eat more would be appreciated! :)I thought the hard part was over when I reported the crime, gave my statement, etc. The police collected plenty of evidence, so I assumed it was basically an open-and-shut case with no further action required on my part...

Turns out, the defendant has decided to re-traumatize me by pleading not guilty--requiring me to come to court and get interrogated by the defense. Apparently he is trying to use the angle that he "accidentally" committed the crime (i.e. no criminal intent), that I knew what I was getting into, that I misinterpreted the situation, etc.

Whether or not this will fly despite the evidence will ultimately depend on the jury. The area the trial is taking place is predominantly middle-aged and white (85%+). He is a young, non-threatening white man with a white-collar job and no criminal history. I am a minority female immigrant.

I really have no idea what to expect. I don't know how to prepare to best present my case. I don't know if I'll have the chance to speak, or if I'm just going to be interrogated the whole time by some lawyer whose job is to let sex offenders walk free. If anyone has any advice or personal stories, I would greatly appreciate hearing it! I have been contacted by victims services, but they're iffy on the details and just sent me a link to a short video which wasn't informative. Any advice or personal stories would be really appreciated!

ALSO, I was told that, if found guilty, I could read a victim personal statement. They never told me how long this is, what I can or can't say, etc. Have any of you read statements? Would you recommend spending time crafting something well-worded, or just quickly say whatever comes to mind?18F. I got a part time job as a cashier just to get some work experience but I'm finding it extremely hard. I have severe social anxiety and depression. I just about manage to make some small talk with adults, but when families come up to the counter and their little kids start talking to me about their toys or something I have no clue how to react🤣 I usually ask if the toy has a name and things like that. I have young nieces, nephews and cousins but all my family lives far away so I never see them. With poor social skills overall and lack of experience interacting with children, my mind sort of goes blank. Any advice how I should act? Thank youMain character energy vibe songs

Some of mine: Promiscious by Nelly Furtado & Timbaland, Goodies by Ciara, I do by Sza & Cardi B, Long Way 2 Go by CassieSo I hate wearing bras, plus I have nothing to hold up, so they’re useless anyways. But I pretty much always have headlights going on. I’m looking for a “nipple coverage” that can smooth out my look. 
I’ve used the gel/silicone adhesives, but I feel like they’re always about to slip off.
Any tips on good products out there for me? 
I’d even like tips on ways to soften my nipples lol.I am a 22 year old female.  

I don't have a lot of friends. I suck at making friends but still the few friends I really vibe with are male.  In my work place I tend to have interesting conversation with the opposite gender but I struggle starting a conversation with a female.  I eventually realised I actually have no female friends, no female to call me bae, no one to talk about boys, love, sex.

I also had female roommates during my university, we stayed together for four year but still there is really no attachment, like we never used to fight or anything but I can't call her my friend.  After University, we have never spoken to each, I tried calling her, but she would just rush to end the conversation.  

Why cannot I connect with another female? It is horrible.
I would be really happy if this subreddit could give me any tips on how to be good at making female friends.  How do you always have an interesting conversation with them and not get indulged in awkward silence.  How to make deep friendships with another female?

Note: I am a female.Just got my first brazillian wax. I watched videos online and this seemed different than the ones I saw. Firstly the wax was very hot. Secondly she went straight over my clitoris and labia. I was actually scared my clitoris was going to be pulled off and it hurts a fair bit right now. Thirdly, she didn't do the area closer to my bum, basically stopped at just below my clitoris (even though she put the wax over my whole vulva for some reason, there's no hair there so no idea why she did that). It's like a half job. I'm upset and feel like she had no idea what she was doing, I went to a very expensive beauty therapist. 

Going home to my boyfriend to cry and tell him I'm no longer going to completely remove my hair down there anymore, just trim.Context (skip to the bolded line for the meat of the question): I am white with very fine curly/wavy hair (hell half my hair doesn't even curl at all, it's bizarre). I've never found a stylist who can actually make my natural hair texture work for me, they always either style it straight or destroy my curl pattern and then use a curling iron. Also, despite using no heat on my hair, it is very damaged at the ends and I'm trying to grow it out. So I am looking for a stylist/salon that works on curly hair specifically and can help me get my hair healthy and styled well, and figure out what products to use.

I found a salon I really like online. They focus a lot on hair conditioning/strengthening treatments, and they call the salon a hair spa. They also do braiding/locs and a lot of the info on their site is geared toward this type of protective style for Black hair. Their website only has a couple photos, and all the clients in these photos are Black. 

I have no problems being the only white girl in the salon (social anxiety be damned) but I know that predominantly white salons often do a TERRIBLE job on Black hair, and I'm assuming that stylists who work exclusively with Black hair might not be able to help me as much with mine, since it's so different. The salon website says they work with all hair textures, but I've seen salons say that who couldn't even treat my mild curls/waves right.

**On to the question**: All that to say, I am terrified of showing up to the salon and they'd give it their best shot but because they specialize in hair that's so different from mine it'll turn out bad and they'll give me incorrect information. Since a huge reason I'm wanting to go is to get product recommendations, and I know that product needs for Black hair is different from white hair is different from Asian hair etc etc. I'd be okay calling them up and asking a question, but I don't know how to ask it other than saying "I'm white, can I still come in?" Which obviously would be... A bizarre thing to do. So how do I make sure the stylist will be knowledgeable about my hair type without doing basically that?

Please note that I'm not trying to be all woe-is-me white girl crying because not everything is for me. If I called and they said "Sorry, we only really do Black hair" I would be totally fine with that! But I am 99% sure they wouldn't tell me that outright. I am also autistic and so I'm worried I'd be missing some social cues telling me I don't belong there and basically just being in their way wasting their time on a head of hair they don't want to deal with. Or worse, that merely showing up there would make me look like I'm self absorbed thinking everyone should cater to white people. 

Any input welcome! Thank you!Hey there, I (20MtF) am really insecure about my boobs-to-be. I always had really weird chest muscles, pronounced and in an awkward shape... my breasts are budding and while I love, LOVE how they feel and jiggle, once I "use" my chest muscles... well, all gone. I can feel the buds but no more jiggle or anything, it feels so dis-heartening... thing is that I don't want much boob as well one day and I am just afraid that I am misunderstanding something here...Hi girls, wondering if any one can relate or advise... I'm looking for a suitable roll on deodorant for very sensitive skin. 

I shave my armpits regularly and I also suffer with a very mild case of psoriasis, the kind that only tends to react and form on broken skin.

I want to move to roll on for a variety of reasons, the two main ones being the environment, and also my mother has moved in and is extremely sensitive to any kind of aerosol 🤦‍♀️.

I'm a very sweaty person so I'm sceptical to find a roll on that works. I have only ever used Dove deodorant and switched to one of their roll ons which works so well on the anti perspirant side of things but causes a reaction under my arm which resembles small psoriasis patches. These become itchy and unsightly and put me off shaving until they calm down which isn't practical because I'm a pretty active person and am personally much smellier with armpit hair.

The drama! Can anyone relate? I know it's going to end up being a case of trial and error, but are there any brands that you have faith in to help me whittle down this long list of next deodorants to try?

Re xI've been wondering for a while now if my stomach is big because of bloating or fat. I've looked at stuff online, but it's kinda contradictory. 

Yes, my stomach is kinda big. When I'm standing up, I can kinda squeeze it. Not a lot though. Apparently, if it's bloating you shouldn't be able to squeeze it, but I don't think it looks a lot like fat either. It's just my stomach that bulges out, everything else is fine. 
But if it's bloating, I don't get any stomach aches. It is a bit hard to breath if I'm sitting properly, back straight and legs in the ground, or if I'm standing up a hundred percent straight (it is a bit easier if I suck my belly in...), but I'm not sure if that's a symptom of bloating. I'm seeing mixed results online. 

And if I do have bloating, how should I handle it? If I have fat, how should I handle it?? Can anyone give some advice or tips?I was just looking in the mirror and had the thought, “Wow, I look good.” ??!!!!?????!

I’ve lived my entire LIFE hating my body, be it for acne, my weight, my hair, my shoulders…. I’ve been doing some serious self-work these past few months, and for the first time, maybe ever in my life, I had a completely honest and innocent thought of “Oh, I look good.”

I used to base my self worth on how much men wanted to have sex with me. I used to want to die because of my acne. I truly never thought accepting myself was possible, and yet… months and months of hard work, and years of therapy, have given me strength I never knew I could possess. I just got broken up with and usually that would lead to a self-hate spiral, but now, it still sucks, but I’m not taking it out on my self image!!!!

It’s easier said than done, of course, but- putting in hard work to improve your self image has changed my life. If anyone needs a little push to start doing that, let this be it!!! We’re all gorgeous!!!!