I had a phone interview scheduled this morning, but accidentally slept through it. When I got up and saw that I missed it, I had the desperate urge to call and offer up excuses, in the hope that maybe, just maybe, they'd be understanding and give me another chance. 

Instead, all I did was apologize and ask if we could reschedule. That's it, one sentence, no additional information, no explanation or excuse as to why I missed the first interview. 

They replied within 20 minutes, apologizing to ME, saying it was probably their fault, that they'd been having trouble with their computer system for days, and of course I could reschedule, was I available that afternoon?

Don't ever volunteer information, kids. You never know what information the other party has, and you can always give information if asked for it later.


Edit: I still get notifications when people comment.
Keep them coming, I'm glad I've helped you out :)That’s it.Edit: thank you for all sharing your tips (didn't realise "they must need to poop" was such a common assumption!), awards and stories of how you do this in your own life. You're all fucking awesome, have a beautiful day and take all these good vibes out with you into the real world and spread them around! 🌻I just found this quote online and wanted to share it with you guys. Sorry if it’s not the right sub, please let me know. 

When I read this it really spoke to me. I’ve made mistakes in the past but I’ve also learned from them and I’m a better person because of it. 

Everyone makes mistakes and the only thing to do is deal with them and learn from it. Don’t let anyone hold your past wrongdoings against you in order to belittle or invalidate the person you are now.


Edit: Can I just say this post is not directed at American politics. I’m not from America nor do I know much about your politics. I’ve not heard of the name Biden until today, sorry! 

Also, thank you to everyone for the upvotes and rewards, I really didn’t expect this post to gain much attention! To the people who are saying they needed to hear this today, I’m so glad it has uplifted you even a little!The post nut clarity is real, without the humiliation of getting said clarity after doing something you may regret the rest of your lifeMusic helps dementia patient recall memories and emotions. Especially when specific songs are connected to previous parts of their lives.I've probably listened to my mum tell one particularly cringe worthy story dozens of times and I think everyone she knows has been told it. Every time she tells it, most of the time in front of me, I just want to crawl under the table and hide. However, that would give her another humiliating story to tell.

Just because you're a parent doesn't mean you have a right to humiliate them for a laugh.

I do think that telling about something cute they once did (pronouncing something wrong, for example) is different to an embarrassing story, but if your child doesn't like you telling about it then you should still find something else to talk about.

Edit: I mean telling stories from any part of your child's life at any part of your child's life. When I say child, I don't mean only someone under 18, I mean the person that is your child.

Edit again: This post blew up, can't believe how big it has gotten. Getting a lot of comments from the children (including adult children) involved but also parents which is awesome.

Im also getting a lot of comments about how this is a self-selecting sample and in the wider world, not as many people would support this. All I have to say is that just because there is another 50,000 people out there (or whatever number) who wouldn't care about this doesn't mean that the 50,000 here matter any less. It's not about proportion, its about that number existing in the first place. How do you know if the person you are talking about isn't one of those 50,000 people?

There is a much, much more constructive way to teach your child to be less sensitive. I laugh with my kid, not at him. We do it when we're on our own or in safe groups. If he tells me something funny he did, I laugh with him and I'll tell him stupid things I do so we can laugh together.

I don't humiliate him with personal and embarrassing stories around Christmas dinner or whatever. It's about building people up, not breaking them down. Embarrassing someone to give them thicker skin is a massive gamble between ended up with someone being able to laugh at themself and someone who is insecure, or at worst fuels the fire of an anxiety disorder. I'm not gambling with my kid.http://i.imgur.com/GOCpO4I.jpgThis is honestly one of the best things you can do for an upset friend. I use it all the time and people respond very well to it. Sometimes people come to you because they need to vent. Comfort them first, then follow up with 'do you want advice or do you want me to just listen?'. But other times, they just need to let someone outside of the conflict know what happened, and then they want to talk about something else. Talk about your own day, show them the latest funny thing you saw, go do something fun together. This question sets boundaries and builds trust. It shows you can be there in any way they need.

edit: WOW! so many awards! thanks so much. im going about pming everyone to thank them. but heres a carrd link to BLM resources and a bunch of campaigns, charities, and black owned businesses you can donate to. it would mean so much to me as an ally of the BLM movement if you put a few dollars towards a campaign of your choice. sorry, im on mobile: https://blacklivesmatters.carrd.co/Edit 1:Woo, front page! All from a stoner moment while listening to black keys - weight of love. 
Love you all!

Edit 2: Obviously this isn't meant to be a blanket statement or a diss towards black keys. Just a way to maybe find some new music. 
Also look into the song writers, or anybody else that was involved with that specific track. I think this needs to be reminded.Whoa! Front page! And all because I stumbled back in my house, half-asleep and jet lagged from Vegas and noticed my house really smells like my dog. I have so many people to thank! And so many dogs to thank! Like mine, for example. 

Edit: Thanks for the gold! And to the rest of you, uh, go Bears and Trubisky is the future. Lots of TV and films depict a proposal as this dramatic, surprising moment where someone finally realizes their true feelings. While it may make for good entertainment, in real life your significant other should be well aware of where the relationship is heading.Unfortunately, I learned this the hard way. I work for a small business who put huge emphasis on everyone being friends and building a strong team, but it just means it hurts more when someone inevitably stabs you in the back. I'm not saying go around and be a dick to people for no reason, but it's better to build relationships outside of work or in places where there aren't any politics or power imbalances.

Edit: Wow I didn't expect this to blow up and there's too many comments now for me to keep up with. It's kind of vindicating but also sad that so many people feel the same or have had similar negative experiences. For the "my workplace isn't like this" and "my co-workers are my family" people - I hope it stays that way for you, I really do, but I'd maybe read some of the stories on this comment thread and be wary. It's better to be safe than sorry right?Edit: Relevant study for anyone interested: [Here](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1080/01650250143000373)

Edit2: You guys are really great, I've really enjoyed reading through your personal experiences :) Please stop messaging me asking for acting advice though, what did you see on my profile that made you think I'm an actor?"Sometimes I let people take advantage of me", or "I take criticism personally" are bad answers. "I'm too honest" or "I work too hard", even if they believe you, make you sound like you'll be irritating to be around or you'll burn out.

Instead, say something like, "My biggest weakness with regards to this job is, I have no experience with \[company's database platform\]" or "I don't have much knowledge about \[single specific aspect of job\] yet, so it would take me some time to learn."

These are real weaknesses that are relevant to the job, but they're also fixable things that you'll correct soon after being hired. Personality flaws are not (and they're also none of the interviewer's business).Had a coworker put in his notice until the end of the year. Told them he’s going back to school starting the first, but wanted to give enough notice to hire and help train someone to take over for him so we wouldn’t be down a person. 

They decided that two weeks is enough, so now he won’t be getting paid, except for potential unemployment which is significantly less than what he makes now, for the next two months. If he would’ve just kept his mouth shut and not tried to help them, he would’ve continued to get paid and then could’ve given a two week notice. 

Don’t try to help the company. They have no interest in helping you, just helping themselves.More examples: If you want to find out what 2% of 20 is, do 20% of 2 instead and you'll get 0.4. So, 2% of 20 also equals 0.4. 

Or, 12% of 25 can be alternatively written out as 25% of 12 instead, which would be  3. 

Explanation: Commutative Property. So, 0.07 times 50 will always equal 50 times 0.07.

I hope you found this interesting and/or helpful! 

**Edit #1:** Thank you for the gold! 

**Edit #2:** You can also solve percentage problems by multiplying the two numbers (7 times 50, which equals 350), and then taking the product and dividing it by 100 (so the answer would be 3.5). Thank you to everyone who pointed out this alternative method. This only affects the display on your browser, but it's a simple way to bypass the infuriating "create an account" or GTFO situation on shitty websites when you just need quick info

Edit: Thanks for the gold!

There is some amazing tips in the comment section, it's not easy to edit them in on mobile, I'll mention the best ones once i'm home.

Edit 2 : Here are some other tips from the comment section that are IMO even better than mine

/u/reversedfate : In Chrome, press Ctrl+Shift+c, to instantly select elements.

/u/browndizzle and /u/Bloorim : I prefer to right click and say F*ck it. Glorious extension here:
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/fck-overlays/ppedokobpbdajgiejhnjfbdjlgobcpkp

/u/DaughterEarth : Easier is to right click the offending bit, choose inspect element, hit delete, then escape

/u/lookatmemomnospans : Command+Shift+C For MAC users

/u/squidgod2000 : Behind the Overlay Chrome extension—very useful: 
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/behindtheoverlay/ljipkdpcjbmhkdjjmbbaggebcednbbmeIf you have a friend or coworker who you have invited to do things with you or your group of friends and they continually decline, don't stop inviting them unless they specifically tell you not to invite them any more. Some folks really would like to be included but really do have other obligations, or maybe they're just super shy and need to be invited several times before they feel like they can work up the courage to go. Or perhaps they are battling depression. Don't give up on that person. You may be just the person they need to get them out of their shell or to eventually become the kind of friend that helps them see the good in life and want to continue going on living. Be awesome

Edit: Thank you for the awards kind strangers!You don't have to waste your energy everytime.My son hit his head almost 8 weeks ago. He had a concussion, broken skull, and brain bleed. He’s now admitted to an inpatient psychiatric facility for suicidal tendencies. He’s 12. You don’t want to go through this.

Edit: I can’t thank you all enough for sending so many kinds words our way. He is getting the best care we could find, and is expected to recover. We are proud of him for being open to help. But please, protect your brain.

Edit 2: I’m sorry I can’t answer all the questions directly. He fell off a golf cart actually. One wouldn’t think he would need one on it, but I’ve learned when in doubt wear one. He was mentally stable before the accident. And we have no idea how he is doing. We can’t even visit him in the hospital due to Covid. Please protect those you love.

Edit 3, a month later: For those who may still see this and are curious, he is doing marvelous now. He still has a road to recovery, but my son is himself again.If things have gone sour but you think they're on shaky ground, hold your nerve and stay the course. Your future self will thank you for it.

Edit: Lots of debate about whether you are getting fired, laid off, terminated, fired for cause, or whatever. The point is: you don't make your situation better by quitting right before they fire you. Their documentation will be the same: terminated for xyz.

Edit2: The 'severance package' might amount to just securing a supportive reference for your next job.As I'm listening to the birds, I realize not a lot of people know this. You can tell a lot about weather and other animals just by listening to birds. I'm not sure how city birds such as pigeons work with this tip, so let me know! A few things you can tell are:

1. Birds go CRAZY when there is a snake nearby. I don't mean like mating season crazy, I mean constantly screaming and sometimes dive-bombing the actual snake. Use this to locate the snake and keep yourself or your family safe.

2. Birds 'go to sleep' when rain is coming and stay quiet in their nests. 

3. If it is raining and the birds are still loud outside, the rain is going to continue for a long time (8-10+ hours). They're basically panicking and trying to solve the problem of running out of food soon.Edit: A lot of people are asking about cooking time. I didn’t include that because it’s very subjective. I like the florets browned and the stems crunchy. 15 minutes at 400 degrees is a good guess for that, but if you like softer veggies and less browning you might want to decrease the temp to 350-375 and go a little longer. The stems won’t have as much “bite” that way.

That said, you’ll want to check in on it and see for yourself. I use color more than time to determine doneness.As a medic, whenever I was loading a patient in the ambulance, a family member would inevitably run up to me, keys in hand saying “I’ll follow you to the ER”. 

No. 

People in an emotional state following another vehicle will develop tunnel vision and forget all traffic laws. You will blow stop signs. You will follow me right through an intersection even if the light has already turned red for you. And you will slam into the back of the ambulance if we need to make a sudden stop. Remember, the patient faces backwards and can see out the back window as you blow a red light and get t-boned by an overloaded ice cream truck. 

After we leave, wait ten minutes, take a deep breath and slowly make your way to the hospital.Edit: I was the cleaner in this case, I’m not a passive-aggressive poster. It’s more of a “Hey there! Found yourself in the great position of having a roommate occasionally cooking for you? Don’t F it up by forgetting to clean!”RIP my inbox. Thank you redditors for the awards, the varying opinions and valid counter arguments and  a special shoutout to all the toxic haters who helped me make the front page.I work in software. My whole company has been working from home for the past two months, and performing at 100%. Now management is forcing us all to come back into the office on June 1st, for no discernible reason.

I don't want to work for a company that cares so little about the health of employees and their families, ever again. I'll be looking for something new as soon as it's practical, and I will definitely be asking prospective employers this.

EDIT: Unsubscribing from replies now because I can't keep up with them. Thanks, all, a lot of good responses here! And a few weirdos who are somehow personally offended by the very *idea* of asking an interviewer about working conditions. Reddit is a strange place.There's a huge difference between the disinterest of "I dont care" and expressing to someone that as long as they're a part of it, you're down for anythingEdit: u/iwantmyteslanow had posted this in AskReddit too (which I saw after posting here)Have a Samsung smart TVs with ads that were annoying as hell. Found out they can be blocked and tried it. It worked!This was a hard lesson I recently came to terms with in life. I am fairly young (26) so don’t really have any hard feelings about it. I always felt I needed others to enjoy the same hobbies as me to actually enjoy doing them. This made me miss a lot of opportunities to just enjoy life. 

If you want to do something (anything, be it physical, mental) just do it. By all means, extend an invite to others, but if nobody makes plans, just go do it yourself. 

Instead of asking “hey, we should go out and do ______ some time”, say “hey, I’m going to go _________, did you want to come?”

This way you already have plans to do whatever it is you’re doing, and you’re just extending an invite. Not actually basing whether you will do thing on someone else. 

Hope this helps someone!

Edit: A lot of comments are pointing this out. Obviously with Covid you need to be responsible about these “activities”. In my case, fishing alone outdoors really doesn’t have any covid complications.1. Go to Church even if you dont belive and talk to people ask for help or work.

3.  If you find a place to sleep DONT TELL OTHERS!
4. Try not to look to homeless if you can . People want to help someone "down on luck" not someone who has "given up"

4. No alcohol ,No Drugs you are ealready in a bad place dont make getting out of it more difficult.

EDIT: thankyou for all the storys you guys share . i try to talk to a few people where i can . Stay save whatever happens and dont give up if you are about to be homeless it will not be easy . you will have to fight but i belive in you and you got this !

EDIT 2: to make this clear i was homeless from 16 to almost 19  i am 35 now .and i am from germany not the USA

EDIT 3 : i am awake again and try to respond to you guys . again Thanks for all the Storys. some of you did have it way worse .Some of you did escape .

To the question on how i think you can help : Help the professionals. they know the situations they know what the people need .I just want to remind everyone that you should always discuss pay with coworkers. Do not let your managers or supervisors tell you it is tacky or against the rules.

Discussing pay with co-workers is a federally protected action. You cannot face consequences for discussing pay with coworkers- it can't even be threatened. Discussing pay with coworkers is the only thing that prevents discrimination in pay. Managers will often discourage it- They may even say it is against the rules but it never is. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lilly_Ledbetter_Fair_Pay_Act_of_2009Edit: My first gold and oh, so many awards...you are too kind. I am trying to read everything. 

Since many are mentioning it...this is not meant to be a written contract. Life changes people, couples need to change with it. Some couples are great with communication and do it organically. Others may not think to ask...and learn there are major differences when it is too late. This tip is simply to ensure communication starts early and hits on all topics (some you may not even realize are issues till you start talking about them), and to set a path for continued communication through the years. Take care of each other and yourself!

Edit 2: A number of people have mentioned it, and /dead_b4_quarantine called me out on it...Let's talk about SEX, baby.....Let's talk about you and me....Let's talk about all the good things....And the bad things that may be....'Mark Cuban says this one small change gave him the motivation to succeed'

Edit: permaban from r/wallstreetbets since this post went crazy lmao[16,568 - Public Libraries in the US. There are over 116,000 if you include academic, school, military, government, corporate, etc](http://libguides.ala.org/numberoflibraries) 


[14,606 - Starbucks stores in the U.S. in 2018](https://www.statista.com/statistics/218366/number-of-international-and-us-starbucks-stores/)

[13,905 - McDonald's restaurants in the United States in 2018](https://www.statista.com/statistics/256040/mcdonalds-restaurants-in-north-america/)

Edit: This post got more traction than I was expecting. I’d really like to thank all of the librarians/tax-payers out there who got me to where I am. I grew up in a smallish town of 20k and moved to a bigger suburb later. From elementary school through medical school, libraries have helped me each step of the way.

They’ve had dramatic changes over the years. In high school, only the nerdy kids would go to the library (on top of the senior citizens and young families). A decade later, I can see that the the library has become a place to hang out. It’s become a sort of after school day care for high school kids. Many middle/high school kids have LAN parties. Smaller kids meet up together with their parents to read (and sometimes cry). My library has transformed from a quiet work space to more of a community center over the past decade.

Even though I prefer pin-drop silence, I have no issues with these changes. **It’s better that kids have a positive experience in an academically oriented community environment than be out on the streets, getting into trouble, etc. And putting younger children around books is always a great thing.**

Plus, they have a quiet study room for pin-drop silence people like me!I do not condone looting and am only bringing this up as stories of protesters and reporters being arrested, blinded, and assaulted with chemical weapons becomes more prominent. You are by far, much safer with a group that will be held legally accountable watching over you.I was trying to make a career change in my mid-20s and was having problems getting my foot in the door. I visited a loan officer at my credit union in the middle of my job hunt and mentioned it to her. her eyes lit up and said that the person that she had just had a meeting with worked in HR at this kind of company that I was looking to get into. She said that she could pass on my information if that was okay with me. She did and within 24 hours this person contacted me and I had an interview at his company and was hired the next week. If I had never mentioned it to this loan officer, I wouldn't have gotten my foot in the door when I did.I’ve often seen people try to raise interest in movies by saying something like “oh plus there’s an AMAZING twist ending”. It might be common sense for most, but simply saying this can ruin how someone experiences that movie because now they’re guessing what the twist could be the whole time. When you know a twist is coming, it’s a lot easier to guess what it is.

Edit: apparently this was posted on r/books recently, had no ideaRecovering alcoholics struggle because a lot of people don't understand that 'just one' can't be done. Also, nobody should owe you their medical history just because you think not drinking with you is 'uncool'. 

If the person was just objecting to the TYPE of alcohol you offered, believe me, they'll ask what else you have on hand. Or you can just say, 'We have other drinks, and these are the non-alcoholic drinks I have: blah blah blah."My wife has taken hundreds of pictures throughout our marriage and I only recently started. She has basically documented the whole time we’ve been together and I am extremely grateful for it. She has pictures from the day we met that we wouldn’t have if she didn’t snap a quick ‘for memories’ picture. You may hate the way you look, but years from now you will be glad you ignored that and took a photo. 

I also want to comment on the people who said ‘people didn’t always have technology’. That is a horrible excuse to not preserve memories. Because you’re too old fashioned? Cameras are a century and a half old at this point. You’re just being stubborn and pseudo ‘mystical’ to say you want to cherish the ‘spirit of the memories’ and never take a single picture. Lots of tech was lived without a long time ago but using it as a tool and not a crutch can bring us closer together as people and as a family.You'd be surprised how many people nearly double their salaries just by applying for jobs.EDIT: Wow, this blew WAY up. And my first time on the front page too. 

I guess I can shut down some of the disagreement by saying that every field does things a little bit differently, but this is what’s worked for me as a soon-to-be college grad, with little truly significant work experience, and wanting to go into education. Most American employers/career help centers I’ve met with suggest keeping it to about a page because employers won’t go over every resume with a fine-toothed comb right away. Anything you find interesting but maybe less important could be brought up in an interview as an aside, perhaps. 

A few people have mentioned LaTeX. I use LaTeX often in my math coursework, but I’m not comfortable enough with it outside of mathematical usage for a resume. Pages (on Mac) has been sufficient for me.

As far as LinkedIn go, it’s a less-detailed version of the master document I keep, as far as work experience goes, but I go way more in depth into relevant coursework and proficiencies on LinkedIn than I do on paper. 

TL;DR- I’ve never had two people or websites give the same advice about resumes. Everyone’s going to want it different. *Generally* in the US, the physical resume could afford to be shorter because it leaves room for conversation if called for an interview. I'm in the midst of hiring which is no small thing in this COVID world.  I had one applicant who stood head and shoulders above the rest, she was exactly what my org was looking for.  

Unfortunately, during the interview process she informed us via email she was no longer interested in the opportunity.  So, we moved on to our 2nd pick candidate.

Fast Forward 2 weeks.  I get a call from the applicant wondering if we had found someone and expressing interest in the job...  I told her that she said she wasn't interested and I showed her the email she sent us.  Apparently, she didn't send the email.  

She had recently broken up with her boyfriend during her applying for this job and he "hacked" into all her accounts and fucked her life up.  He deleted all of her social media and also sent us a false email saying she was no longer interested in the job.

Unfortunately, we hired someone so that opportunity is lost to her forever.

If you are in serious relationship then your partner has all of your passwords.  They do.  It is ridiculously easy to get someone's passwords if you have access to their phone or computer.  It is to your advantage to just assume someone you are serious with has all your passwords.  BEfore you break up with them you need to change all, yes ALL, of your passwords.  

It is amazing how evil and vindictive people can be when they are heartbroken.  Even so-called "nice" people can have a moment of temporary insanity after a break up and torch your whole life if they have the chance.  

Don't give them that chance.  Change your passwordsSince this has gained a lot of popularity, I want to add in that anyone with questions should visit the good people of r/Greyhounds.

They can help you decide if you're ready for a retired racer, prepare you for the difficulties that come with adopting one, and clear up any questions you may have about the breed. They can also give you some insight into how retired race dog rescue works. Dogs are a big responsibility that you shouldn't take lightly, but if you prepare yourself and do your research you can face the challenges with confidence.

As many here have said: ALWAYS DO YOUR RESEARCH BEFORE ADOPTING ANY ANIMAL. ALWAYS, ALWAYS, ALWAYS! This should always be your mindset. Mindfully, never point a firearm at anything you do not intent to kill. Never put your finger in the trigger guard unless you are ready to shoot. A firearm should only ever be considered "not loaded" once it has been dissembled. Do not tolerate bad firearm etiquette from those around you.    


There are no gun accidents, only stupid people.You grow so accustomed to your own body odour that you eventually don't realise that you have one. When you can start to smell a little bit of your odour then its gotten to the point where you need to seriously take a deep clean. Had to learn this the hard way.G'day mate! Looks bloody awful over in America, those wildfires are right nasty. Lucky, us Aussies have been surviving through all that and much worse for at least a couple centuries, and I'm here to give you guys the inside info on how to survive. 



1 - If you live on an upslope, ridge, or narrow forested road, get the fuck out early - no help will come. 


People here who stayed then changed their minds later, and couldn't escape because trees fell within minutes and blocked exit routes.


Firefighters were either unable to get in, or were forbidden due to extreme risk of being cut off themselves - 1200 litres of water in a Cat7 is like pissing into a hurricane, especially if you're up on a ridge.




2 - if actually caught and unable to escape. dig in and cover with  DRY WOOLEN BLANKETS!

Please fill your bathtub before it hits - water tanks will melt real fast and you'll have no water - the thing that MIGHT make the difference between life and death could be as simple as layers of wool blankets,  a low sheltered concrete corner, some sheets of tin, some DRY wool blankets, and one moist towel to protect from radiant heat.

Wet clothing or sheets are inferior to a wool blanket and you will boil alive. Do not cover any yourself in anything wet!




3 - If defending your house - wool or cotton long sleeves and leather boots, and wear LEATHER GLOVES if possible. You can throw burning stuff back but without gloves, no way.




4 - Remember that the only safe area to run to is often INTO an area already burnt - you can also survive by having a shallow grave and laying in that under dry blankets, a layer of wet stuff and tin, and breathe through a wet cloth to avoid suffocation. You'll collapse real fucking fast without oxygen and remember also, many houses are made with plastics and toxic gas-causing materials so.... yeah.... stay safe out there and honestly, if you live on a ridge or uphill slope... run now.  Your life is worth more than stuff.



5 - If you think you can defend, don't forget to protect your water tank and exposed poly lines - if that goes, you're fucked. 


People on gravity feed systems, this is your weak point. We were lucky enough to have a small Honda pump and Cat7, but our tank was on fire several times - if that had gone, we'd be gone.  Remember this, especially if on a bush block with some tank uphill off in the scrub. If you're not gonna be able to save that tank, forget about it.  You're going to lose your house, get out now.




6 - Remember, fire can move up to 400km (250miles) per hour uphill. If you change your mind and live on a ridge, you are quite likely fucked.  Don't die for stuff.  Escape, and we can hunt down the corrupt fucks who made this happen later. Channel that anger to the ones who sold us out and gave away our water and our future to line their own pockets.

Stay safe America!

: EDIT :


I had no idea this'd blow up so much, and it's great to see so many people invested in keeping fire safe, you're all fuckin legends 💪 and thanks to everyone who's put forward awards. I'm not sure what they do, but I appreciate y'all care so much.

: POINTS WORTH CLARIFYING :

A Cat7 is a type of firefighting engine available in Australia. Not sure what your American equivalent would be.

NEVER use water to cover your blankets or yourself, EVER. Use it as an external barrier to embers on the outermost towels.

Actually I'm a chick ✌️

Large bodies of water are good to venture out into if necessary, but keep in mind you need a decent level of physical fitness to maintain treading water whilst also inhaling smoke at the same time.

NEVER use synthetics or anything with a synthetic blend. Wool is best on a budget, duvetyne is probably the best material available, 100% cotton towels will also work in a pinch. Never synthetic .

: EDIT 2 :

Wow this really blew up. I'm fucking honoured, and I'm glad to see so many people out there really giving a shit about fire safety. 

All your suggestions, feedback, and positive discussion really reignite (haha) my faith in humanity. We can all get through this if we work together 💪

I'm working my way through all your comments (and there really are a lot of them), and trying to answer as many questions as I can.We want to know that YOU want the job, not just your parents.Do it every time for a couple of weeks and you're golden

Edit: this is my second front page of reddit in two days with two consecutive protips. that must be some kind of record, right?!

love y'all!You might also need them in the future.I know I’d feel nice receiving this, so I’ve been doing it for the past few years. I have a terrible memory so I put an event on my calendar so I can remember to text them that morning.Years ago my siblings and I were taken from my parents due to child abuse/neglect, and my grandparents were the ones getting us with Child Protective Services. My grandmother went and saw that our laundry baskets were full so she just grabbed that as she wanted to get us out of there ASAP. Her logic, all the dirty clothes are things we chose to wore, and cleaning them would take a few hours, but in this moment it takes a minute to just grab them. If we were to try and pack our clothes, it would just extend the amount of time we would be in that toxic situation of crying, yelling, and screaming. Luckily my brother was a stickler for laundry and had gotten each of us our own basket. Older siblings, and grandparents are the best.

I've remembered that ever since, and every time I've needed to leave in an immediate hurry and didn't have time to pack for whatever reason but would have time to clean the clothes later, laundry basket. I've told this story for 18 years to people, and I can count on both hands off the top of my head the amount of times someone told me this actually came in handy. I've been told of abusive relationships, emergency evacuation situations, and several other random situations that required the gathering of clothes immediately.

I happened to remember this due to having a dream about that incident, and don't recall anyone sharing this tip. It surprisingly saves a lot of time, hassle and effort if you don't mind working a little later. Worst case scenario most people wear a piece of clothing once and stick it in the dirty clothes basket, technically you can get away with wearing something again in an emergency. Whatever works.

**EDIT!!!: I thank you all for the awards, the gesture is appreciated, however you should donate to a non profit that helps during abuse situations, or natural disaster reliefs or something of that nature.** [**Here's a list of child abuse/neglect non profits.**](https://www.childwelfare.gov/organizations/?CWIGFunctionsaction=rols:main.dspList&rolType=Custom&RS_ID=75&rList=ROL) **There's also a nice list** [**here for non profits that help out in natural disaster relief as well.**](https://www.galaxydigital.com/blog/disaster-relief-organizations/)

**Please consider donating to these non profits rather than giving me an award, I thank you for the consideration, but your money can be better spent towards these organizations of your choosing. Thank you!**Cheap suits are cheap because the store can sell them to the maximum number of people with the fewest variations. That means making them boxy, and adding baggy trousers. 

If you can get a suit that fits in the shoulders (the one place it can't be cost effectively altered), then it can be made to fit you by shortening the sleeves, slimming the waist and adjusting the trousers. 

Celebrities look good in their suits not because the material used is especially good, but because the suit has been altered to fit them right.

If you take your Goodwill suit to an alterations tailor (your local dry cleaner will recommend one) then the bulk of your budget is being spent on making it right *for you* rather than on the initial acquisition.Edit: Wow, it's been a lively morning with lots of discussion surrounding this topic! Exactly what Reddit was originally meant to do.

For those of you who got hurt or offended by my LPT, I don't apologize. It is my perspective from a guy living in a tourist area and this is what I see.

Remember, I might be a dick, or maybe I'm not a dick, who knows? And who cares, this is the internet.I recently had an experience that made me realize why you should not be using your home address as drop off or pickup location. Use the closest intersection.

&#x200B;

I shared a Lyft ride with my female friend. The Lyft driver immediately started hitting on her. When he asked who was being dropped off first, I told him she was first stop. He started berating me for scheduling a ride and having her as first stop, started yelling about why he could not drop me off first.... During his tirade he got lost and when I tried giving him directions he just yelled at me. It was not amusing, it was scary - because now this drunk/high/creepy a-hole knew her address and mine.Something I’ve had to grow out of that has cost me so many opportunities. Growing up with severe social anxiety I found it so hard to accept things people offered me: drinks at their houses, going on outings with people who I think are inviting me out of kindness, money, job opportunities. There is NO shame in saying yes when someone offers something and usually they’re asking because they WANT to help. Help yourself out, you don’t have to do everything on your ownI always feel guilty when people say, "I miss you, you should really come visit me in [city that's a several hour drive away]." It always eases my mind when I remind myself that this person is equally capable of visiting me and isn't doing it either.I’m a mechanic/auto shop owner. I figured I’d put some stuff together for anyone interested in buying a used car but doesn’t know anything about cars. Obviously the best option is to take it to an auto shop to have it thoroughly inspected by a professional before you buy it. The key word here is BEFORE you buy it. I don’t know how many people I’ve had come to my shop for an inspection after they bought it….ugghh. The $150 or so you spend is worth not buying something that may have thousands of dollars of problems. But if that’s not an option, here are some tips to help keep you from buying a lemon:

1-Buy a cheap OBD scanner/reader. You don’t need to spend a lot, as they’ll all do what you need here. A bluetooth OBD reader and the TORQ app for you phone seems to be pretty popular/good choice. Practice using it on some cars. Some of the stuff I'm going over may seem daunting, but if you practice it on a car a few times, you'll get the hang of it, and this will all make sense. You could be saving yourself thousands in repair here, so take a few hours to practice it. It's not hard once you do. You should be able to do all of the stuff I'm going to talk about with your scanner in under 5 mins total. You don’t have to worry about reading and interpreting data. The main thing you want to do is check for codes in the engine and transmission ECUs. ECU stands for Electronic Contrul Unit. Basically, it's the computer that controls the engine or transmission. They are sometimes referred to as ECM, or Engine Control Module, and TCM, or Transmission Control Module. Sometimes they'll be referred to as PCM, or Powertrain Control Module. This is what it's called when only one computer controls both the engine and automatic transmission. The PCM may be one physical computer, but logically, it's 2 computers. So if you connect your scanner to a PCM, you'll still see two separate options, one for engine, and one for transmission. Do note that if you have a manual transmission, there won't be a transmission computer.

So when you connect to each one, there should be no codes in either. If there are codes, there’s an issue. It may be minor, it may be major. Google it if you want, but not knowing what the codes mean, your best bet is to walk away. If your scanner is a better one, you can also check other modules (computers) for codes. However, it’s pretty common on newer cars, especially European, to find obscure codes in obscure modules. Normally they’re not an issue. Focus on the Engine and Transmission. ABS (antilock brakes) and SRS (safety restrain system...airbags, seat belts, etc) modules normally shouldn’t have codes lingering either. Make sure to also check after test driving. The codes may have been reset by the seller to hide a problem (more on that in the next paragraph). They may have returned during your test drive, so check again!

Use the scanner to check the monitors on the engine ECU/Computer. Monitors are a series of self checks that the ECU does on the engine. All applicable monitors should be set (passed/complete). They get reset when you clear the check engine light, or when you disconnect the battery (usually). If all of the monitors haven’t passed, then it’s quite likely the person selling it has reset the check engine light recently (may be trying to hide a problem), or there’s a problem that isn’t allowing the monitor to complete. Not a good sign.  Walk away. To complete all of the monitors can take quite a few miles and sometimes several days. So there's a good window there for you to catch someone doing some hanky panky.

2. Crank the engine without starting it. What you want to do is listen to the engine during a continuous crank. On American cars and on Mazdas, this is easy, as they have what’s known as a Clear Flood Mode. You turn the key to the on position, wait a few seconds, depress the gas pedal all the way, then try to start it. The engine will crank away without starting for as long as you hold the key (or in the case of a push button start, until you hit the button again). If the engine starts, quickly let off the gas so you don’t revv up the engine too high and try it again. You’ll want to listen to it for a good 10 seconds or so. This is a very easy way to check compression on an engine. The main thing you hear when cranking an engine is the electric starter working to try and spin the engine. As a piston comes up and compresses the air, the starter has to work harder to spin the engine, and the speed/pitch of the starter changes. Once the piston comes back down, it’s easier to spin the engine, so the speed/pitch changes back, and then repeats as each consecutive piston moves up in the compression stroke. Every engine sounds different, but they all should have a very steady rhythmic starting noise. Kind of a WAAA WAAA WAAA WAAA WAAA. If one or more of the cylinders has low compression, you will hear the starter have an off-rhythmic sound that repeats. So for instance, if you have a 4 cylinder engine with one low compression cylinder, it would sound like WAAA WAAA WA WAAA WAAA WAAA WA WAAA WAAA WAAA WA WAAA etc. Every 4th pitch change will sound different than the other 3.

For reference, here’s what a normal cranking sound should be: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6v0h\_Ygqox0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6v0h_Ygqox0)

Here’s what a low compression cylinder cranking sounds like. It’s at about :55 secs :[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pOghpmVhVng](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pOghpmVhVng)

If you listen closely, you’ll hear the unsteady rhythm. Loss of compression is usually piston rings, valves, or head gasket. All costly. If the engine sounds funny when cranking, walk away.

If the car you’re looking at doesn’t have a clear flood mode, you can remove the fuel pump relay in the engine compartment fuse box, which turns off the fuel pump. Most cars have one, but some don’t. Some cars can be a real PITA to disable it from starting. Google the car you’re looking at with something like “YYYY Make Model clear flood” or  “YYYY Make Model disable fuel pump” and see if there’s an easy way to achieve this. I'm sure there will be a Youtube video showing you exactly how to do this.

Practice this beforehand on cars you have access to if possible to tune your ear to the sound. You can also do this periodically on your own car to see if any problems are arising.

3. Check the fluids. All of the fluids will have minimum/maximum marks. If fluids are low, someone has not been maintaining the car well, or it has developed a leak. Not a good sign. When checking the engine oil, it should range from clear to black. If it looks like chocolate milkshake, there is a major problem. RUN AWAY. You can also smell the oil on the dipstick to see if it smells like gasoline. If it smells like raw gasoline, the engine is either injecting way too much fuel or you have bad piston rings. Either way they're bad. If the oil level is WAY above the full mark, like an inch or more, then either some other fluid is making it's way into the engine (very bad) or someone sucks at doing an oil change. Remember to check the oil with the engine off and on level ground. Some new cars don’t have dipsticks (mainly European). If so, you’re SOL. Check the coolant in the reservoir. It should be green, pink, red, yellow, orange, blue, or purple, depending on manufacturer. If it’s rusty, walk away. Remove the radiator cap (only if the engine is cold) and look at the cap and in the radiator. If you see any rust or chunky/gritty brown stuff, walk away. If it’s just water, walk away (be careful here, Ford’s yellow coolant almost looks clear). Check the automatic transmission fluid. For the most part, it should be red, but sometimes amber or green. It may be black. That’s dirty. Not a deal breaker, but they haven’t been keeping up on maintenance. It should not smell burnt, though. That’s bad. If it looks like strawberry milkshake, that’s really bad. Also, remember that you should check the level on automatic transmissions while the engine is running in Park and after driving it and getting the transmission good and hot. The only exception is most Hondas. That’s checked after driving but with the engine off. Google it for the car you plan on looking at to make sure. Many new cars don’t have a transmission dipsticks, so again, you’re SOL there.

4. Start the engine and listen for any noises. The engine should be cold. If it’s at operating temperature, the seller may have warmed it up to hide some cold start engine noises. Be wary. If it makes any noises, walk away.

5. Look for maintenance records. If it has consistent oil change records at an oil change place, at least they’ve been changing the oil. Unfortunately, oil change places only check easy profitable stuff. It’s better than nothing, though. If the records are all at an independent shop, that’s better. Indy’s will usually do a pretty thorough check up on the car when servicing it. If it has all dealer records, that’s the holy grail. Dealers will find any nick nack that’s wrong and upsell it. They also commonly don’t do thorough diagnostics (this is an unfortunate effect of the way dealer shops operate). So if it needed repairs, on top of having new parts that needed replacing, it may have other new parts that it didn’t even need. Plus those new parts will be good quality OEM parts, not chines junk of questionable quality.

6. Check that everything works on the car. Check the A/C, the heater, the windows, the locks, the mirrors, the head/parking/brake lights, etc. If the owner neglected to fix obvious problems, what else did they decide not to fix?

7. Look under the hood and look for any hokey work. Random zip ties holding things on, tape, broken plastic pieces, a battery that can move around if you push on it, wires hanging, etc. If it looks like unprofessional work has been done on what you can see, how bad is what you can’t see?

8. How does the car look? Is it dirty, full of scratches, stained? If the owner cares so little about the interior/exterior, they probably have the same attitude towards the mechanical part of it.

9. Check the tires. Aside from general condition, do they all match? If all the tires are different, they’re cheap/broke, and have probably cheaped out on a lot more than just tires. Lay your hand flat on the tire tread and light feel around the tires. If you feel a repeating pattern of flat spots/dips, you have suspension problems.

10. Try and stay away from used car dealers. Used car dealers get the majority of their cars from auctions. A lot of cars that go to auction are sent there by someone that doesn’t want it, usually because there are problems. Not all, but many. New car dealers send trade-ins that are too old or the wrong make to put on their lot, and some of those are decent. However, the small used car dealers usually buy the bottom of the barrel cars at auction. They’ll fix the minimum needed with the cheapest parts possible to maximize profit. They’ll make it look pretty, though. Good chance you’re buying a polished turd. Not all used car dealers are bad, though. Check reviews. Look at what they have on the lot. If they have a lot of high resale value cars on the lot, they're buying the good stuff at acution. If all of their cars are under $10k, with a lot under $5k, move on.

11. Obviously, test drive the car. Drive it at different speeds up to highway speeds. Brake easy, brake hard. Find a crappy road or railroad tracks to drive over. Make sure there are no noises or vibrations. Get it good and warm. When you’re done, open the hood and take a good whiff. Make sure there are no strong smells (like burning fluids or other things). Look under the car and see if anything is dripping or the bottom of the engine is covered in fluids (bring a flashlight, it can get dark under there). Don’t be alarmed if you see water dripping under the car at about the same area as the base of the windshield/firewall. If the A/C or defroster was on, that is just condensate from the A/C system. Touch it. If it’s not oily and looks/feels like water, it should be OK. If you’re test driving a manual car, the clutch engagement point should be somewhere in the middle of the clutch pedal travel. If it’s right at the top or right at the bottom, clutch repairs are in the near future.

12. This one is a little more advanced, but not too difficult. It’s also pretty important. You’ll need your OBD scanner. What you want to do is look at the engine data and search for the fuel trims. An engine computer injects fuel based on a bunch of sensor inputs. It has a base fuel map programmed into it that it references, based on those sensor inputs, and injects XXX amount of fuel. There is an oxygen sensor in the exhaust system that analyzes the exhaust gas and acts like a quality control inspector. It tells the computer whether it injected too much or too little fuel. The computer then makes adjustments to that base fuel map to make sure it’s injecting the proper amount of fuel. Those adjustments are called fuel trims. A 5% fuel trim would mean the computer had to add 5% more fuel than the base map. A -5% fuel trim would mean that the computer had to reduce fuel by 5% from the base fuel map. In a perfect world, fuel trims would be zero. However, that’s rarely the case. Fuel quality, different atmospheric conditions, engine wear, engine or sensor problems, etc, make it so that the base fuel map is never perfect, so the computer is always adding or subtracting fuel (usually it’s adding, but sometimes it’s subtracting). I don’t like to see a computer adding or subtracting more than 10% fuel. Any more than that and there may be a problem. Any more than 15-20% and there is definitely a problem.

So what you’re going to want to do is look at the data on the engine computer. You want to make sure you connect to the computer using the GENERIC OBD2 option on your scanner. Different car manufacturers will call these fuel trims by different names, and display the percentage in different ways. If you connect to the engine computer the standard way, you may be confused trying to find and read the fuel trims. But if you connect using the generic obd option, it’s always going to use a standardized display format across all vehicles. Some really cheap OBD scanners only connect using the generic OBD protocol. You’re going to see a long list of a bunch of different data. Scroll through until you find “short term fuel trim” and “long term fuel trim”. I'm not going to explain what the difference between those two data parameters are, as that doesn't matter here, and may end up being confusing. I'm just going to tell you what to do with the values you see.

Short term fuel trim, depending on your scanner, may be displayed as: Short term fuel trim, STFT, ST, or ST%

Long term fuel trim may be displayed as: Long Term Fuel Trim, LTFT, LT, or LT%

Let’s assume your scanner uses the more common STFT and LTFT designation. You’re going to see a number after the letters, so STFT1 and LTFT1. The number means the “bank” or side of the engine. A 4 cylinder engine only has one “side” so you’ll only see STFT1 and LTFT1. However, a V6 or V8 engine has two sides of the engine (3 or 4 cylinders on one side, and 3 or 4 cylinder on the other side, hence the V6 or V8). The computer controls fuel independently for each side of the engine, so you’ll see a STFT1 and LTFT1 for one side of the engine, and STFT2 and LTFT2 for the other side. Don’t be alarmed if you’re looking at a V6 or V8 engine and you only see STFT1 and LTFT1. Many late 90s cars and some early 2000s cars didn’t control fuel separately for each side of the engine, and lumped both sides into one bank.

When looking at the short term and long term fuel trims, you’ll notice the long term fuel trim number stays pretty steady, but the short term fuel trim number may change a lot. This is normal. What is important to note is that they are cumulative. So if STFT=4 and LTFT=3, then your total fuel trim is 7%. Let’s take a look at some examples on a V8:

STFT1 : 3 ...  STFT2 : 6

LTFT1 : 2 ...  LTFT2  : 1

So the total fuel trim on bank 1 is 5% (3+2) and the total fuel trim on bank 2 is 7% (6+1). Each bank is below +/- 10%. That’s pretty good.

STFT1 : -5 ...  STFT2  : 3

LTFT1 : 3 ...   LTFT2  : 1

Bank 1 fuel trim is -2% (-5 +3) and bank 2 is 4% (3+1). Again, that’s good.

STFT1 :  6 ...  STFT2 :  7

LTFT1  : 10  ... LTFT2  :15

Bank 1 fuel trim is 16% (6+10) and bank 2 is 22% (7+15). That’s not good. Walk away from this one.

Here's one more that's a littlte different:

STFT1  : -20 ...  STFT2  : -20

LTFT1  :  22 ...  LTFT2  : 20

Hey, 2% and 0% total fuel trim on each bank. SWEET! this car is running almost perfect! Well not really. Why is the LTFT adding 22% but then the STFT is taking  a bunch of it back? There may be an intermittent issue going on here. So add the absolute values together as well (treat -20 as 20) and see what that total is. Here we have 42 and 40. There's some interpretation required here that you'd need some experience to do, but I'd say anything over 25 when adding absolutes is cause for concern.

Check these numbers with the engine running at idle, and rev up the engine and hold it at about 2500rpms and check it there. Like I said, you may see the STFT number change pretty quickly, so just use the average of the numbers you see for that one. If you have someone with you, you can have them check the numbers while you drive as well.

Practice this on a car you have access to beforehand.

13. Last and not least, don’t trust the person selling the car. Trust your eyes, your ears, and your instinct. You don’t know this person, they may be lying about the car, or try and tell you that the thing you’re worried about is no big deal, it’s just this or that. Or they had a guy check it out and it’s a really easy/quick fix. Be patient and find the right car. If something is fishy or doesn’t seem right, move on to the next car. A car is a pretty big expense. Most people budget for the purchase price of a car and don’t consider there may be considerable extra expense in fixing major problems. Minimize the possibility of those extra expenses by inspecting the car the best you can.

I would recommend running through these things, and any others you want to add, on your current car, your parents’ cars, friends’ cars, etc. Do it several times. Get comfortable in making these checks so that when you’re doing them in front of some stranger on their car, you won’t forget anything.

&#x200B;

EDIT7 - I'm putting this above my other edits so it gets seen. I totally forgot to talk about Titles and their pitfalls. u/BossMaverick has made an excellent post [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/LifeProTips/comments/egs81p/lpt_some_tips_for_buying_a_used_car_for_people/fcc67tp/?context=3) talking about it, and a few other good things as well.

&#x200B;

EDIT- Forgot another tip regarding possible accident repairs. When you look under the hood, the color of the metal in the engine compartment area should be the same color as the car. If you see different colors or primer, it's had body repair. Also, if you look at the reflection in the car's exterior paint up close and at an angle, you'll notice that the reflection has a wavy pattern to it. That's called orange peel. Every car has it from the factory, except super high end cars. The orange peel pattern should be consistent all the way around the car. If the pattern changes in certain parts of the car, it's been repainted in that area. Good chance it had an accident. Another thing you can do is take a small magnet with you. You're going to place the magnet against the car in as many areas as you can. Make sure you wrap it in a microfiber towel or something  soft so you don't scratch the car (it's not your car). The magnet should attract itself to the body and even stick to it. If there are spots where the magnet doesn't stick as strong or at all, there is body filler there. It's had body work. Do keep in mind that some body panels aren't magnetic on some cars. If you can't get the magnet to stick anywhere on an entire panel (like the fender or hood) then you probably have a non magnetic body panel (maybe fiberglass or aluminum). I guess it's possible that the whole body panel is covered in bondo, but that would be rare, as that would be an extremely poor repair.

&#x200B;

EDIT2 - Fixed some formatting

&#x200B;

EDIT3 - Thanks for all the replies and awards. I'm glad people found this useful. But seriously, no more awards. Save your money for gas to return all those Christmas presents you don't want.

&#x200B;

EDIT4 - There are lots of comments and questions. I'll try to answer what I can but there are so many. I'll get back to most of you eventually. Gotta get some work done....working on a Saturday (sucks)

&#x200B;

EDIT5 - I'm back from the dead!

&#x200B;

EDIT6 - added some good info brought up in comments, expanded on a few things, laymanized it a little more, explained some technical stuff. Still can't get the STFT and LTFT examples to format the way I wanted. Best I can do

&#x200B;

EDIT 8 - Good night everyone. Thanks for all the awards and comments and conversations. I replied to all the PMs and chats. Tried to reply to as many comments as I could, but holy cow there were just too many. I just hope I did better than Woody Harrelson.[Explained here- I found this and thought it was really useful for people to know](http://lumpatronics.tumblr.com/post/174840086944/service-dog-psa)The pain scale isn't necessarily used only to tell us how bad your pain is, it's supposed to be used to tell us whether your pain is getting better or worse. If a patient says their pain is a 7 in triage, and later says it's pushing a 9, that X-Ray or CT scan might get expedited.  But if your constantly barking 10 or 1,000 your comments aren't going to be taken seriously. A (good) nurse knows a 10 when they see it, and if you walked in, you are not in 10/10 pain. That guy from Saving Private Ryan with his legs blown off on Normandy beach screaming for his momma, that dude is in 10/10 pain. Also, Kidney Stones.This especially applies to durables like speakers, vehicles, housing, etc.Edit: Reddit detectives have found my steam (not well hidden)I sometimes have trouble falling asleep and this works like a charm everytime.Example: Primary email: Bob@gmail*.*com

Modified emails (all go to the primary):

Bob+1@gmail*.*com

Bob+2@gmail*.*com

Bob+3@gmail*.*com

This can be used to endlessly register for free trials like Netflix.

No need to even sign into the new address because all the confirmation emails go straight to your normal account that you are already logged into.

Edit: Apparently you can add anything you want after the plus sign, so you can do Bob+netflix or bob+netflix1, or whatever! Thanks for the additional tip u/PM_ME_A_PLANE_TICKETThe following is from a Harvard Business School neuroscience based behavioural course I did.

Your brain is your hype man, and tries very hard to prove you right using emotions as feedback. Once you decide on your goal, emotions are the hints your brain uses to help you decide whether a certain situation HELPS or HINDERS your progression towards that goal. In turn, this influences your behaviour. Thoughts - Feelings - Behaviour. Nothing is inherently good or bad, it is all relative to what you are trying to achieve. Read that sentence again.

If your goal is avoidance, then any progression or confrontation is going to feel very uncomfortable because your brain will be going "nope, this is bad. This is not what you wanted. Sending bad feedback." You can just as easily shift your goal (this is what mindset is, and it IS up to you) and in turn, change your brain's response to the stimulus around you (emotions). Even if it is an uncomfortable situation, your brain will recognise that it's helping you achieve your goal, so the feedback it gives you (emotions) will be much more positive. It all starts with what you want to achieve and if you don't know, then spend some time figuring that out. Goal clarity is like giving your brain a quest marker.

You are hardwired for struggle, go forth in courage my comrades!If you are strapped for cash and need food, instead of trying Ramen and Noodles, buy a big bag of potatoes, there are so many ways of cooking them and almost all are delicious.Some of us are born with good looks, or work hard to achieve a gorgeous body, or naturally grow into a chiselled jaw line... For various reasons you might not be able to do these things, but you **can** be *tidy*. 

It's honestly surprising how far a neat haircut, clean well-fitting clothes, and subtle aftershave will go in a...
• job interview
• date
• any social event!This is an opt out system meaning it will be enabled by default. Not only does this pose a major security risk it also strips away privacy and uses up your bandwidth. Having a mesh network connecting to tons of IOT devices and allowing remote entry even when disconnected from WiFi is an absolutely terrible security practice and Amazon needs to be called out now!

In addition to this, you may have seen this post earlier. This is because the moderators of this subreddit are suposedly removing posts that speak about asmazon sidewalk negatively, with no explanation given.

How to opt out:
1) Open Alexa App.
2) Go to settings
3) Account Settings
4) Amazon Sidewalk
5) Turn it off

Edit: As far as i know, this is only in the US, so no need to worry if you are in other countries.Saved a couple we were touring with recently. They got their luggage back 24 hours later.This happened to me way back in 2003 - on a date with a rather nice guy. I was so nervous I swallowed funny and my food caught in my throat! I remember clearly my thought processes: "can't swallow, can't cough, can't breathe, can't talk - I have 4 and a half minutes until brain death unless someone in this restaurant knows the Heimlich. There are about 40 people here, I bet the odds are pretty good...and you know, my date's a handy guy, bet he might be one of them!" I stood up and started waving my hands around, forgot the "international sign for choking" (hands around the throat) but mimed the Heimlich and pointed at my mouth. My date figured it out, thankfully, did the Heimlich on me in front of 40 shocked onlookers, and saved my life! I found out 2 weeks later though that an acquaintance of mine had DIED in exactly the same circumstances because she had gone to the bathroom alone to try to clear her airway in private, and that this is a very common thing to happen. She literally died of embarrassment, of being too polite to make a fuss. Don't let this be you! **If you're choking, get attention!**

Oh and FWIW that rather nice guy and I have been married 16 years now :)

EDIT: IF YOU ARE ALONE AND CHOKING you can do the Heimlich maneuver on yourself! [HERE is a very useful demo!](https://youtu.be/ljL9JcK6RnM) Thank you to u/RanierMT for the link! The next time you see a mass post or “share this on” message asking for information like this, remember you’re sharing important personal information which may be dangerous to share openly with others. There’s a good reason why so many of them rely on your funny answer being made up of your mother’s maiden name, first pet, favourite teacher or street you grew up on...

Always be careful where you’re sharing information, consider whether it’s really necessary to share it, or consider using incorrect answers - either to the post, or to the security questions themselves (as long as you can remember what you set them to).Inspired by Neil deGrasse TysonEdit: if you're deleting the app, consider switching to [Ruqqus](https://ruqqus.com)The price of four-year universities in the US, among other countries, is huge and growing. There are many situations where the degree is worth the cost, but not for everyone. Obviously if you wish to be a doctor or lawyer, a college degree is inevitable.

If, however, your desired path isn't so rigidly grounded in universities, or you just aren't sure what you'd like to do, take some time to think about alternatives before applying to colleges.

**To high school juniors and seniors:** 

Your parents/guardians might be pressuring you to go straight to college because that was practically a guarantee for a good life in their time, but things are different today. If you're going to broach this subject with them, get your sources ready ahead of time. [Here](https://www.thesimpledollar.com/why-you-should-consider-trade-school-instead-of-college/) is a good overview, but you should find other data, analyses, and opinions before fighting that battle.

**Why are skilled trades more relevant now?**

These jobs have been around for a long time, but baby boomers have been over-represented for decades. As that generation retires, demand for skilled trades will be a lot higher than it was twenty years ago. According to [this article](http://www.careerprofiles.info/skilled-trade-worker-shortage.html), 53% of skilled tradespeople are over the age of 45. Anecdotally, I work in an industrial setting with a lot of tradespeople, and almost all the hair here is grey. 

**Is there any money in it?**

There definitely can be. Unlike some college-bound fields, you won't likely be making six figures right out the gate, if ever. That doesn't necessarily mean you'll be worse off. Assuming you go the apprenticeship or military routes, you can be making money the day you start, and won't have any crippling debt to deal with. I'd recommend reading up on personal finance for more details on the matter, but if you start contributing to your retirement at 18, even with less income, you could certainly retire with more money than someone who had a higher income, but couldn't contribute until [_ years to complete degree + _ years to pay off debt] later. 

That's assuming the college grad can get a job right away. There are plenty of highly educated baristas and retail workers in this country who may never be able to retire thanks to student loan debt. Moreover, one can't get rid of student debt by filing bankruptcy. You're stuck with any loans you take for school.

**What are my options?**

There are a ton of ways to start a career, but I'll talk about a few.

**Apprenticeships** are a great way for experienced tradespeople to pass their hands-on knowledge to pupils that will some day replace them. Apprentices will generally be paid very little at first, but the cheap labor is in exchange for valuable training. Once an apprentice is proficient enough to work on their own, they will generally be making a nice, middle-class wage. 

A recent [report](https://www.npr.org/2018/01/04/575114570/robust-apprenticeship-program-key-to-germanys-manufacturing-might) from NPR took a look at how apprenticeships play a part in Germany's industrial success. The US government is also pretty aware of the potential, even if they face challenges in funding programs. The federal program is [here](https://www.dol.gov/apprenticeship/) and you can take advantage of some of their resources in person by finding the nearest [American Job Center](https://www.careeronestop.org/site/american-job-center.aspx)

The federal government is definitely the only organization pushing apprenticeships. In a lot of cases, labor unions organize and administer apprenticeships and training. One example would be the [IBEW](http://www.electricianapprenticehq.com/how-to-join-ibew-apprenticeship/) for electricians, but there are a too many unions that vary from place to place, so I won't bother trying to list a bunch. Searching for unions near your area may be a good place to start identifying other opportunities.

**Trade Schools** can be a good way to get the kind of classroom training you might expect from college, but much more focused and time/cost-efficient. Many community colleges offer trade programs that lead to certifications and associate's degrees. There are also standalone schools that might specialize in a single trade, like welding. [Job Corps](https://www.jobcorps.gov/train) is a national program that can be a good option if a person isn't in a good position to pay for training. It isn't for everyone as I understand it is very structured and somewhat militaristic, but I know a few people who have completed training there and gone on to nice careers. 

Training doesn't have to be years long though, especially in the arena of computer sciences, "boot camp" programs are becoming very popular. A computer programming boot camp might be a big expense for such a short program, but its much less expensive than a degree in computer science, and could give you enough tools to land a good job right away or even to work for yourself.

**Military** training can also be a great economic ladder. The pay and benefits are good from the start. Depending on the specialty, the training can be really valuable (and free). Plenty of employers offer some hiring preference to veterans. There are some huge risks associated with this route though, so I would reserve it as a last resort. 

Regarding benefits, the basic wage isn't a lot higher than minimum wage, which is often the subject of salty memes. That is not the only income, though. In most cases, living expenses are taken care of, so no need to budget for food, housing, or utilities. That's the bulk of what the working class is trying to stay on top of, so you could plausibly invest every dollar of pay you earn if you didn't have a cell phone or car. Even then, if you are sensible, it would be easy to live below your means. Another huge benefit is free medical for the whole family. On the outside, that would cost a lot.

Regarding training, if you win the "job lottery" you could receive extensive training in a really valuable field. Some people can walk away from four years of service making over $100,000/yr. You could also be a bus driver. You don't really get to choose, and that is the first big risk. I would say it is much better than a 50% chance that the job training you'd get in the military would be worth more than a high school diploma, but if you don't want to be a cop, and they make you a cop, that is a lot of wasted time.

Regarding lifestyle, it can be a great time. I really enjoyed most of the time I spent in the military. There were a lot of people around me who absolutely hated it and had to suffer through a six-year-long mistake. The good stuff is, you're part of a community, you might get travel a lot, you might have really exciting work to do. The bad stuff is, the culture can be very very toxic, you might have to be away from family for years, and being the military, there is an above average chance of being killed, injured, assaulted, or developing a mental illness.

I know that sounds dramatic, but a person shouldn't consider it lightly. In reality though, chances are high that you could walk away with a pretty good financial start and good opportunities to have a satisfying career.


**TL;DR**

If you want to get smart, go to college. If you want a good job, and don't want to become a slave to your own debt, consider a skilled trade.




**Edit:** Based on a lot of comments, it appears that some military branches handle job selection different than others, and these things evolve over time. As a general rule, even if some branch guarantees you a specific job, proceed with caution. Enlisting on an "open" contract is generally a terrible idea, but to clear up some confusion, the AF lets you pick some jobs you want, and requires you to select one of four open aptitudes. "No thanks" is not an open aptitude, but if orders come down for you to enlist "open general", that can be worth thinking long and hard about turning down. 

Also about the military, I offered it up as a last resort, and I mean that. Plenty of commentators are saying "DON'T EVER THINK ABOUT JOINING THE MILITARY FOR TRAINING!" I don't know their stories, but there is probably something to it; so many people can't be wrong. You would literally be trading your autonomy up to your life in exchange for a chance for some economic mobility. If you aren't really interested in the military, it's not a great idea.

Regarding ROTC, it is better than nothing. I intentionally didn't mention it though. My philosophy is based on my wife and several other relatives doing ROTC vs my immediate family and I enlisting. If you do ROTC, you have 8 years from starting school to leaving the military. After 8 years, you walk away with at least a bachelors degree, the ability to check the veteran box, some work experience, and whatever money you saved up. If you enlist, in 4 years you can absolutely attain an associate's and bachelor's degree while you are in if you set your mind to it, especially in the AF, can't say how easy it is in the others. So you walk away with a degree, the ability to check the veteran box, some work experience, and whatever money you saved up. From a benefits standpoint, you can save yourself some time by back-loading the school. Additionally, I had a way better time than ANY officer I know, and I didn't even like the military. The lifestyles, politics, corruption, and cultures are way different between officers and enlisted. I wouldn't wish my understanding of the officer's life on anyone.

Still relevant to ROTC, but about school in general... A ton of people are very happy and successful thanks to their college education. I'm not out to say they are wrong, but "Go to college if you want a good life!" is neither a compelling nor useful LPT. You have surely gotten that line from someone else already.Edit: Thank you stranger for this Gold.

Edit: u/PaintersOfBlindFaith Thank you for the proof, http://imgur.com/qEa6qeiAlso, threatening to call the brands corporate line will get you absolutely nowhere. Majority of hotels are franchises and the brand will just call the hotel and ask what they want to do. They can't do anything without the hotels permission.I was watching Pleasant Green's youtube video [Can You Really Get Paid to do Amazon Reviews?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YjEdaU1xTc) and noticed he used Fakespot.com to check for fake or counterfeit reviews. In addition, the website gives the seller a grade (A-F) and their Fakespot Adjusted Rating (0-5 stars). Their overview includes how many reviews were altered, modified, removed by amazon. I thought it would be beneficial for everyone who buys from Amazon.It doesn’t have to be large. You can pay in cash so as not to leave a trail. You can slowly transfer things of value to that space, because when your SO gets mad, the things you find precious will be the things they destroy first. You can also begin stashing things you need if you pull the “fuck this shit” rip cord, like clothes, toiletries, cash etc. because sometimes when you have to get out, you have to get out fast and leave everything. If times get real bad and you have to bail, you can go there. They are gated and video monitored and your SO will be looking for you at places that you would likely go, like friends or family. If the weather is harsh, you can duck out there for a few hours out of the elements “organizing” your unit.

Edit: I have seen such an outpouring of hope and great advice and experiences. We all learn from each others experience. I hope to continue that feeling of inclusion, that we are all in this together, until we can all find happiness.Yes, bring on the inevitable and endless masturbation comments. Obviously there are limitations to this, but dropping out with only a few accredited hours remaining could be more financially burdening than just finishing given the potential loss of future revenue.  I know for a fact my company weighs in this criteria when creating an offer for positions that dont require a college education.This is a very common tactic to bring customers to the lot. Half of the work in selling a car is to get the buyer to come to the dealership. I have found that most of the dealerships that pull this tactic are not ones to be trusted; they showed you that they are willing to trick you so you can come to them, they have a mindset of tricking their customers for profit. If they don't have your vehicle then leave and continue your car search, dealerships like these are more trouble than they are worth.Edit: Wholy crap I didn't realize it'd be this big of a response...I get it for all of you that have kids (I do as well he's just a lil one so I'm not there just yet hahah) But someone else in the comments I think said what I was trying to say in my LPT but much better:

Do all your chores (yes I know thet never end but the ones that seem most pressing) before your weekend, if possible.If someone changes their mind and behaviors over time, it’s more likely a sign of correcting errors in premature decision-making or undoing bad habits. As life goes on, people gain more experience, perspective, and information to make better, well-informed decisions. Change is a sign of growth so it’s best to be supportive throughout that process.Wow didnt think this would blow up over night, thanks for all the advice anyone.

I personally graduated an electrical apprenticeship at a shipyard after failing out of college twice.  I wish I found the apprenticeship straight out of high school, but my school, and I'm sure many others, really pushed you to get a degree.

I now work for a military contractor making a pretty good wage.  I encourage anyone looking to get into an apprenticeship to reach out to their local trade union. Not only will they provide quality OJT, but most places will provide a free college degree like mine did.Psychological safety makes or breaks teams. Aggressive language should therefore be avoided at all time and actively eliminated from corporate cultures. The tip above helps flagging that insults are not accepted in the workplace.My mother has been really mean to my sister and I lately and is always yelling and on edge. It shouldn’t be my job to walk on eggshells just because she is stressed due to her work.Edit: Thanks for all the silvers everyone! I got fired a few weeks ago because I told my coworker I was having trouble memorizing the alcohol we had at the store and for taking off for surgery (I'm assuming.) I'm having a hard time so it was nice to see everyone with the same problem. Hope y'all learn this lesson through me and not how I did lol.This is something I learnt while in Grad School/academia but no doubt works in most professional settings. Note this is a very powerful technique, use it sparingly or you are likely to piss people off.

As an example, instead of asking "Are you ok for me to submit this manuscript" you would ask "I am going to submit this manuscript by the end of next week, let me know beforehand if there are any issues/amendments".

People dont reply, not because they haven't read your email, but because they read it and stuck it in their "reply later" pile. This bypasses that.First of all, you would assume that “being polite” wouldn’t need to be said, and we should all do it just as a standard practice. But if common decency isn't adequate motivation, just be aware that usually customer service people have a lot more options for providing different solutions, but we are very unlikely to engage them if somebody is snapping, raising their voice, or overall just being rude to us. I have both been a customer and I’ve worked in customer service, and I’ve seen both sides of this. If you’re nice, treat the person like an actual human being, and are patient and understanding, I’ve seen them bend over backward and I’ve truly saved hundreds if not thousands of dollars just by being nice. I’ve also spent additional hours and have gone well out of my way to support customers who treat me with dignity instead of assuming that I am below them or lesser than them for my customer service role. Sometimes there’s nothing we can do, but oftentimes we can do more than you might realize, but again we will conveniently “forget“ for somebody who treats us like shit.

**Edit to add:** All the people PMing me or commenting that I'm "bad at my job" for what I've outlined in this LPT, I never said I wouldn't do my job. I will do my job, and *only my job.* If a customer is reasonable and polite, I might find an extra coupon, expedite shipping, suggest an alternate solution to a problem. If they treat me like shit, I will do *exactly* my job and nothing else. Being shit on is not in the job description and y'all who say that we should be sugary sweet towards people yelling at us have clearly never worked in customer service and it shows.&#x200B;They will always listen to you, appreciate just you being there. Win-Win for both uwuI'm one of those people who constantly find themself up at 5am watching some men build a swimming pool out of dirt. I used to try and fix my sleeping schedule by going to bed early the next day but obviously I couldn't sleep because I had slept late previous morning. It then took me several days and potentially and all-nighter to fix my sleeping pattern.

Recently, I've discovered that the best way to recover from this is by setting an alarm for the morning. Yes you may be a bit tired during the day, but it means you will fall asleep earlier that night and hey presto you are back to being awake in the day time.

Edit - thank you for the awards! I didnt expect my first big post to be about sleep deprivation but I guess it does make sense.Throughout their life they've experienced an unbalanced give and take, so their instinct is usually "I'll figure it out on my own". So please Check in on the "helpers" in your life.ETA: Thank you, kind strangers, for all the awards! I posted this right before picking my sister up from the airport and packing her a slice of homemade cheesecake. She really appreciated it, as she was coming from across the country and wanted to keep her mask on until she left every public space.

To those asking why you'd be hungry after a flight, in the U.S., you don't get food on domestic flights, unless you want to purchase the world's most expensive cup of instant noodles or something similar, and that would require you to remove your mask to eat it, of course.  Between the flight time, airport wait time, and time to get to the airport, it could easily be eight hours since they last had a proper meal, even with a direct flight.

To those that are hostile towards the idea that you might consider doing an additional nice thing for someone on top of an initial nice thing: You don't have to do it, and the person isn't obligated to eat it. Sometimes it just makes me feel good to do nice things for people I care about to make them happy, especially when they've had a tough day/week/year. And aren't most people having a tough year?

Edit #2: I love all the comments from people remembering times they appreciated unexpectedly having a snack upon being picked up from the airport!

Also, despite the first edit, I still woke up to hundreds of hateful comments. To those, I add: I hope you someday experience the feeling of being excited to pick up someone you love from the airport. I hope you someday feel joy yourself when you make someone else feel happy and loved and cared for with a small gesture rather than being filled with scorn and disdain for them. It's amazing!The details are still being worked out, but there are a few really important things to know:

1. The government will not ask you to pay anything up front to get this money. No fees. No charges. No nothing.

2. The government will not call to ask for your Social Security number, bank account, or credit card number. Anyone who does is a scammer.

3. These reports of checks aren’t yet a reality. Anyone who tells you they can get you the money now is a scammer.

Predict that the scammers are gearing up to take advantage of this.  So, remember: no matter what this payment winds up being, only scammers will ask you to pay to get it. If you spot one of these scams, please tell the Federal Trade Commission: [www.ftc.gov/complaint](http://www.ftc.gov/complaint). W

The FTC encourages you to keep up to date with the latest Coronavirus-related scams at [www.ftc.gov/coronavirus](http://www.ftc.gov/coronavirus) or by [signing up to get these consumer alerts. ](http://www.ftc.gov/subscribe)

FTC notice reference: [https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/blog/2020/03/checks-government?utm\_source=govdelivery](https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/blog/2020/03/checks-government?utm_source=govdelivery)

Edit 3: WOW THIS BLEW UP, THAT'S AWESOME! Lots of questions in the comments about the $1,000 - Please keep in mind this post is to educate yourself and others about the scammers that have probably already started scamming people. 

Edit 2: if you sort by ‘Q&A’ I made a‘copy text’ so you can share these three tips easily

Edit: since this has exploded (which I am grateful for!) I would like to also point out some things...

I’m not sure of the numbers but people fall for the classic “CONGRATULATIONS MR/MRS; PRINCE of x country wants to give you a MILLION dollars!!!!! if you give us your information” all of the time. And that is 100% a lie, but people STILL FALL FOR IT. 

Think about this.. the news is telling people the government is giving them $1000. So when someone calls requesting their information, the news told them its happening so it has to be true. Like, holy shit people! This is going to get so many people and it’s not getting the attention it deserves on a national level! 

Please please please spread this! If I could I’d trade all the awards (thank you for them) on this post to save ONE person from being scammed out of (what is probably) their life savings I would. Thank you everyone. Please spread this!Learn from my infuriating experience!!

Edit: holy crap this thing took off like a rocket ship. I have nothing to add here other than I genuinely, from the bottom of my heart, wish you guys the best of luck on your painting projects. I hope the awful experience I had with painters tape serves as a cautionary tale and hope you don’t make the same mistake I did. :)

Edit 2: almost 42k upvotes. This. Is. Insanity. I knew my undergrad and grad degrees in English would pay off. TAKE THAT MOM AND DAD!!!!!!!!!!

Edit 3: After my rags to riches story where I became a billionaire with this post, my inbox has been dessimated. Currently looking for someone to sift thru it and to only save the nudes. You can find the job posting on LinkedIn if interested. Good luck to all the candidates.

Edit 4: \* Decimated.For example, if you have a queen bed, get a king blanket.So I just spent the last two and a half months working for a company as seasonal labor. Customer service during the busy time of the year. Over the past couple months all 13 people who were hired as seasonal have been told that 3 full-time positions would be given out to those with the best performance.

Now that the the date for our temporary position is two days away they have sent emails to people informing them of whether or not they received a position. the email stated that there was only a limited number of full-time positions and unfortunately you were not the one chosen.. As if they thought we would not talk amongst ourselves we found out that all 13 people were told the same thing.

In other words there were no full-time positions.

One person in our group was the smart one. When they got hired on they asked to see details of pay, benefits and the likely schedule of the potential full-time position. The job recruiter could not provide this at all. She said that they dodged this question multiple times and she knew right then and there that there would be no full-time positions given to anyone. Because the position did not exist.

So from now on when I get hired on a temporary basis with an expectation that it can lead to a full-time position I will be asking for the details of that potential job and you should too.https://www.coursera.org/learn/the-science-of-well-being?ranMID=40328&ranEAID=EHFxW6yx8Uo&ranSiteID=EHFxW6yx8Uo-Uci2hsujbjhLhsPVPPWGCg&siteID=EHFxW6yx8Uo-Uci2hsujbjhLhsPVPPWGCg&utm_content=10&utm_medium=partners&utm_source=linkshare&utm_campaign=EHFxW6yx8Uo

Edit: the response to this has been wonderful. I don't mean in karma and awards (give your money to a food bank please!), but in the sincere thanks people have been sending. I will try and respond to everyone who has messaged. We're all in this together friends.If you’re filing your taxes with turbo tax and it says you have to pay to file, don’t do it. Just compete the full process and on the VERY LAST PAGE, there’s a link to click to review all the documents just before you submit.

That shows you each form, completely filled out with all of the correct information. Now with that open, you want to go to the IRS website and use one of their linked sites. Find each form that is on the turbo tax review page you have open, and match all of the fields. Then submit with the other site and exit turbo tax.

You’ve now filed your taxes for free!

Edit: Woah wasn’t expecting this to blow up like this lol thanks for my first gold!If your dog takes off in a panic when they are in unfamiliar terrain it may take them a good while to stop panicking and running. By the time they calm down they may be completely lost. If you have to stop searching at night you should leave your coat or a blanket that smells like you/your home/your dog at the place you were last together. If the dog retraces its steps at night and finds a familiar item they will often just lie down on top of it. If you make sure you are back at first light in the morning you might find them there waiting for you.When someone's sharing something difficult that they're going through, so many people get this urge to "empathize" by replying with similar struggles of their own. This is one of the worst things you can do when someone is trying to get something off their chest to you.

Instead of talking about yourself, just listen to them. Make them feel heard. Ask questions and help them work through it themselves. More often than we realize, people just to need to feel validated and heard when they're going through something personally difficult.

Years ago, I suffered a great loss, and turned to one of my friends for emotional support. His immediate response was, "Oh man, I'm really sorry to hear that. Because *I* remember when *I* had a similar loss, it was really rough for *me*. And what *I* felt was... etc." My friend wasn't trying to be insensitive or rude, but it reminded me that many people accidentally do this when dealing with someone else's grief.

I felt that my problem that I was trying to convey to my friend was lost on him, and I really just felt worse afterwards. But if he listened to me and made me feel heard, as another one of my friends did later on, I would've felt much better. Remember this if a friend or loved one ever reaches out to you to hear something they're going through.Example: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_mechanics) is super complicated. [https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum\_mechanics](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_mechanics) is way easier to understand

&#x200B;

This really helps when you want to understand complex subjects without slogging through pages of details that you don't want. It's like ELI5 but for Wikipedia. It doesn't work on every article but the vast majority have a simple English version.

EDIT: Thanks for the gold but use that money to support Wikipedia instead of me!

EDIT 2: ...HOLY CRAP! Hi r/all! I'm honored and I'll be reading literally every last one of your comments.I’m on a trip with three doctors right now and they’re ranting about US ER procedures and prices. Apparently, ERs rarely receive payment. This means that you can call the hospital when you receive the bill and negotiate it down to a much lower price. For instance, my gf negotiated her ex’s bill from the ER from $10,000 to $4,000 by guaranteeing payment immediately.

Other tips i’ve picked up from my gf’s parents:


-never order tylenol, advil, anything a family member can bring you.


-if you’re insured **do not sign the form that says you agree to pay what your insurance does not. the er can not turn you away.**

**UPDATE** Let me be *very* clear: I’m not suggesting taking the medications without medical recommendation and clearance. I’m suggesting that you do not take the medication from the ER because the prices are inflated. Instead, have a family member bring you the medication.I don't drink simply because I don't enjoy alcohol. However, I still enjoy going to bars to socialize with friends. If I am clearly just drinking water, I am always inundated with questions about why I'm not drinking. People get very nervous drinking around a sober person. 
I learned this trick from a friend who is a recovering alcoholic and it has made my social life much more enjoyable! I typically ask for a seltzer with a shot of grenadine.
A lot of times the bartender won't even charge you, which is another nice benefit. But remember to tip them regardless!

Edit: but don't go to bars or social events during pandemic

Edit 2: I have gotten the comment many times that you shouldn't be friends with people who judge you for not drinking or pressure you to drink. I 100% AGREE. **However, this is really a problem in large social circles with acquaintances, at family events such as weddings, and especially at work functions. This tip is just a way to avoid being harassed about why you're not drinking in those situations.** It's particularly bad for women, who will get asked so many times if they're pregnant. Sometimes it's more worth it to just fake it than to be confrontational, especially if you want to just relax and enjoy yourself!When i was young my parents used to make a lot of jokes regarding my friend (which eventually led me to stop meeting with her not to give my parents an opportunity to joke about) . It made me really insecure about talking with them about girls. Even when i was already an adult there was a period when i didn't feel safe to talk with them about my relationships. When your child tells you about some friend of opposite sex don't assume anything. I hope my parents wanted to talk about my relationships as I was young instead of assuming and forcing jokes about it (Even on family gatherings, which was the worst).The reasoning being if you type "free", generally you will be advertised to or get the LITE version which will only have some of the functionality and then will be up-sold to.

Open source does what it says on the tin - the code is open for anyone to examine and even adapt and is usually available in-full for free, occasionally accepting donations if you are so inclined. 

This has the added bonus of ensuring there are no nasties like crapware or reporting your user history back to their servers etc. because open-source equates to peer-reviewed and open to be examined by anyone.

EDIT: just because it was mentioned, being open source doesn't MEAN that a program is virus-free, but it is a substantially lower risk than closed-source software. Either way, you would be better off with open-source in general.

I am assuming you will be excising a modest amount of caution with what you download by checking it against trusted reviewers/communities.

Edit 2:

As this thread has gained a lot of traction let's address some points: Yes, we know you can torrent a paid-for application. Hilarious as it is for you to keep posting it, you don't need to tell us. Open source is still valid for those of us who believe in privacy, transparency and actually supporting a developer. We are aware of pirating websites, I promise.

Point 2: "Free speech, free beer!"

>usually available in-full for free

>usually

>*usually*

>**usually**


Programs:

>Photoshop = GIMP

>Lightroom = Darktable

>Adobe Illustrator = Inkscape

>Video Editor/3D modeler = Blender

>Video Editor = Kdenlive

>Media Player = VLC (find a video format it can't play, I dare you!)

>Streaming/recording software = OBS

>Windows = Linux - Ubuntu with Cinamon or MATE desktop environment is the most Windows-like, ~~else-wise, there's actually an Open Source Windows called Windows 10 IoT Core (not really for desktop use though)~~ sorry not open source.

>Microsoft Office = LibreOffice

>Food = ha.ha. But it actually exists [in a manner of speaking](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yYB559Is9Y0)

>Minecraft = [actually a thing](https://minecraft.net/en-us/edition/pi/)

>Unzipping program = 7Zip

>Java = OpenJDK (though Oracle Java might be open source anyway)

>Virtualization = there are a few choices, but for non-commercial use, VirtualBox would be the way to go.

>Browser = Chromium (not chrome) or Firefox.

My favourite iTunes alternative is Foobar2000, but I don't believe it's open source. I've heard good things about Audacious, which is, though.

Please remember to support open source software you like with donations if you can swing it - the developers deserve a kickback!For me personally, I already have a lot of things going on at any given moment and struggle with anxiety. Instead of saying “hey we need to talk” and refuse to give any context, say “hey when you get a chance I’d like to talk to you about X” or “hey later on I’ve got a couple questions about Y”. If people would let me know what needs to be discussed, I would have a better chance to have an intelligent discussion as opposed to entering the situation already on edge.

Edit: Damn. Went to sleep with 10 updoots, woke up with 25k and a ton of awards. Thank you all for the internet points, random strangers. Hopefully this is 25k fewer people that needlessly give someone crippling anxietyThere are a plague of "companies" (fronts) out there that prey on college grads (particularly grads that don't have an immediately applicable non STEM degree) desperate for a job or retail workers that desperately want out of the big box retail store scene. They will list these jobs as being "Event Coordinators" or "Marketing Associates". It's a lie, you can find these people at stores like Costco trying to sell some useless appliance that no one wants or going door to door trying to sell other appliances that no one wants.

And the recruiters that craft these resumes are VERY good at just bending the truth enough that  what is on the job description isn't technically a lie, but any reasonable person's interpretation of the description is nothing like the reality of the position. That's why the title is what it is: if they list sales, that is what you will be doing and nothing else.

An easy way to avoid this is to google the name of the company you are applying to. Either nothing will come up or they will be associated with other companies that are accused of doing the same thing.

TLDR: Be careful which companies you invest time into when you are applying and interviewing for a job.

Edit: Something that I should have clarified is that I don't have a problem with sales jobs or people that work them. The point is that if the company feels the need to hide what the job is or lie about it on the description, something isn't right.

Edit 2: Thank you for all the awards kind strangers. I think this is the first real post I've put up on Reddit and the fact that it blew up so much is really encouraging.

Edit 3: I've been told that the majority of these types of jobs can be found under the umbrella of two companies named Cydcor and Smart Circle. When approaching tasks, errands, projects, etc., somehow, my instinct is to throw the thought of doing it at all out the window, rather than do what's possible or even just easy. The thought of not having time to completely clean my room, may deter me from making my bed, which would go a long way to make the room clean, inspiring me to actually finish it. 

I have been trying to get back into the gym regularly too. When I do make the trip, especially if I haven't been in a while and my usual reps are hard to achieve to the point of not achieving my initial goal, I can still say to myself "Dammit, I went". 

That may sound a little pathetic and being content with mediocrity, but it's usually a step in the right direction far enough that I'll want to go the next day too. 

I've been putting away $75 a week for a few months. Times are tough right now, but instead of saying "Eh, I just won't invest this week" I'll put $25 away, even though it's miniscule. The value might change but the mindset does not. 

As dumb as it sounds, I say to myself "Something is something, and nothing is nothing." 

Because truly, doing something incompletely, is better than doing completely nothing.

Edit: I am truly humbled by everyone’s thoughts and feelings regarding my post. If one person takes one step closer toward their goals that makes me happier than I can put into words!Edit: thanks for the awards kind strangers! I was absolutely a day/week late with this but while I don’t have kids I wanted to share something my dad did for me growing up that made the day really special- the Lego set was something I always looked forward to and thought others might like to try as well- happy holidays!For example, ours involves our son texting asking if our dog is okay. Then we can come get him and tell him he *needs* to get home. Parents look lame, not the kid.

Edit: whoa, thanks for all the coins and constructive comments and everything!! Never slept through a FP post before!

Couple of generic replies to the more common replies:

- to “why do you need a coded text, nobody else will see it?” - have you never ever had someone looking over your shoulder before? Or you hand your phone to someone for a different use and a text comes in? Etc 

- to “don’t teach your kids to be lame, they should stand up to peer pressure” - yes, they should, and that is in fact how we roll. And sometimes it’s really goddamn hard and if they need a backup, they have one.  And considering how tough teenage life is these days, I don’t exactly think it’s teaching them anything other than “I have a parent who cares about my being and might just understand what I have to go through”...The news is designed to alarm and outrage you. There's not much you can do about it anyhow. The news-cyclers produce a false picture of life by accentuating the negative events.

An informed electorate is essential, but a short weekly perusing of the major headlines, with any additional web search for points of interest or depth is plenty enough to keep informed. Balance it out by seeking the positive acts of human beings. You'll be a lot happier, and see that humans are wonderful creatures.I saw this as a post by Hamdia Ahmed on Twitter. She writes: 

"I was really upset that homeless people did not have access to the $1,400 stimulus check. 

"I just found this out. If you are homeless, you can go to a tax return office where they will file something called EIP return. They will put the money on a debit card after."


If you see or personally know someone homeless, let them know!Doctor showed me this the other day. You slide dental floss under the nail as far as possible and leave a piece on both sides hanging. This will alleviate the pressure and a lot of the pain and after a few days (taking care to change it daily) your nail will start to grow upwards and out of your skin.

Edit: [visual](https://i.redd.it/39j841pg0oc41.png) Courtesy of u/errorcache

Edit 2: Some people only go under the corner that the ingrown is on, it’s a preference thing. Also you just need to put it under the white part of the nail, as well as you can.I didn't learn this until my 40s, but I have passed the advice on to my kids and my nephew. My nephew, who was very timid about telling his boss he couldn't work, finally used this tactic and it worked like a charm.

Edit: this blew up more than I thought it would, thanks for the awards, kind strangers!  

Edit 2: First gold, thank you!If someone tries to scam you while you are driving a vehicle, do not inform the scammer that you have a dashcam. They will just leave the scene immediately. Instead, just call the police. Do not exchange insurance info without police present. When the police arrive, allow them to get a statement from the "victim." When they come to you for a statement, show them your dashcam footage. Falsifying a police statement is illegal, and they will not only be caught red handed scamming someone, but their charges will be more severe for falsifying a statement. Plus if they are in a vehicle when they tried to scam you, their insurance premiums will probably go through the roof. Remember, if they tried to scam you, they have tried to scam someone else, and are likely going to continue trying to scam others in the future. Let's stop allowing them to get away with it so easily.

Update: Lots of really good discussion. Plenty of people who think my LPT is crap, and that's fine! Happy to see people having good discussions and sharing their own experiences, and how/why this LPT might not be good advice for people in their areas. 

Also, lots of questions on what dashcam to purchase and how they work. I got a $45 dollar dashcam from Amazon. It had pretty good reviews, which is what I look for in a product. They come with a memory card, which stores the video as your drive. When the card gets full, it should automatically delete the oldest video's to fit the new videos. If an accident occurs, your pull the memory card and plug into your computer to save the video you want. The dashcam plugs into your vehicles cigarette lighter. As far as I know, no dashcam records multiple viewpoints. You will need to purchase more than one dashcam if you want front, rear, and side facing dashcams. Hopefully this helps to address some of the questions I have seen.

Update #2: someone says  dash cams that record multiple angles at once do exist. I didn’t know this, but great info! The commenter couldn’t remember the brand but I am sure someone can give more info.This LPT is based on personal experiences and I think it’s kind of self explaining. 

I a nutshell many people (including me for a long time) are trying to avoid confrontations with supposed friends and other “related” people, although they are really uncomfortable with the friendships they have. 

Not a long time ago I had a friend which had a very negative impact on me in a psychological way and I always believed I had to be there for her but the truth was, she just wanted to feel better by pulling me down. But i wanted to adapt all the time and became more and more losing myself.  

You don't always have to adapt! 
When you feel to lose yourself around certain people be yourself! 
Name your point of view and don’t be afraid to lose toxic people around you after confronting them.

EDIT: It’s my first post here and I am so overwhelmed by this positive response! Wish you all the best and stay strong!

EDIT2: First I want to thank you for all the awards, it’s really insane!  
Second I want to reach out to all the people in this thread who can relate to my experience and going through a hard time right now. 
I think it shows that we are not alone with this emotions what motived me personally a lot! 
Feel all hugged :)

EDIT3: Some people say in this thread it’s not a real LPT and I can understand what you mean by that. But I think on the other hand an advise can be a LPT and more or less obvious at the same time. 
If someone told me me this advise a few years ago I would be very greatful. 
I read a lot of comments of people who where grateful too and considered this post as helpful. Personally that is what count for to be a LPT at the end.Attention men and ladies who like ladies: scratch your girl's back right where the bra band sits. It feels amazing! Especially after a long day!

Edit: OMG! This blew up! Thank you so much for the awards! Scratches for all!

Thank you /u/hopleaflet!

Edit 2: Holy shit! Thank you! Thank you so much for the awards! All because I like my back scratched LOL!In light of the class action lawsuit against Google for continuing to track visitors' private sessions, I went down a rabbit hole to see if it was possible to avoid being "fingerprinted" by websites like Amazon & Google.

Turns out, it's almost impossible. There is literally almost *nothing* you can do to stop these websites from tracking your actions. I can't believe there haven't been MASSIVE class-action lawsuits against these companies before now. The current private-browsing suit doesn't even scratch the surface.

Even when you delete your Cookies, clear your Cache, and use a VPN or a browser like Brave (effectively telling websites you do NOT want to be tracked), these websites will still track & build every action you take into a robust profile about who you are, what you like, and where you go.

This goes deeper than just websites. Your Spotify music history is added into this profile, your Alexa searches, your phone's GPS data, any text you have typed into your phone, and more. Companies like Amazon and Google purchase all of this and build it into your profile.

So when you are 'Fingerprinted' by these websites, it's not just your past website history they are attaching to your session. It's **every single thing about you.**

This should be illegal; consumers should have the right to private sessions, should they chose. During this time of quarantine, there is no alternative option: we are forced to use many of these sites. As such, this corporate behavior is unethical, immoral, and in legal terms, a contract of adhesion as consumers are forced into wildly inappropriate terms that erase their privacy.

**TL;DR LPT**: You are being fingerprinted and tracked by Google, Amazon, every other major website. Not just your website actions, but your Spotify listening history, phone GPS data, Alexa searches, emails, and more are all bought & built into these 'fingerprint' profiles. Private browsing does not stop this. Don't ever assume your browsing habits are private.Many people enthusiastically bring home a pretty houseplant for the first time, and proceed to water it every day to keep it happy. While understandable, you're setting yourself for heartbreak and frustration.  It is natural to assume that the one thing we know we have to do to plants should be done often, and the more often the better, but root rot is usually not fixable and will slowly kill your lovely plant. Underwatering, on the other hand, can be fixed very easily. As a rule of a thumb, once a week is perfect for most plants. 


Missing the outdoors and ending up with about 60 houseplants through a year of lockdown, I have learned that majority of them prefer to be left to their own devices. Here is a rather conclusive guide working for vast majority of widely available plants:




- give them a sunny spot. Seems obvious, but we might be tempted to place them for aesthetics out of sun. There are plants that don't mind (ferns are the best example), but most do. Give them sun or grow light. Remember that more sun makes them dry up more often (so on a sunny window sill, water once every 5 days, in a shadowy corner, once every week)



- once every 2 weeks, take a soft cloth, slightly wet, and clean the leaves. Dust sets on them as well, and it makes it harder for them to undertake photosynthesis properly. It is also a rather soothing activity. Everyone wins. 




- get a plant food. They are usually cheap and you can also make your own, and they can make your plant grow like crazy. Don't overfertilise tho - about once every 3 months enough. Too much fertiliser is a thing, and it can burn them. Don't fertilise in the winter. 



- ⚠️ on the topic of eating, many houseplants are toxic to pets if ingested. If you have pets, particularly playful ones, make sure to research ahead to avoid trouble! 



- Don't rush to repot. I know you want to put them in these cute pots you got, but keep them in nursery pots for at least a month. Many plants experience environmental change shock between you taking them from the store and bringing them home, so don't make it harder for them, they will thank you with many happy years in those sweet pots of yours. 



- speaking of pots, always have drainage. Try not to put plants straight into a decorative pot without drainage - get a bigger planter and put it in with nursery pot and tray.




- chop of leaves that go yellow - they won't go green again, and the plant is wasting resources on it. 




- if cactuses or succulents, you still have to water them, albeit rarely. Many people recommend cactuses as the most beginner houseplants, but you can absolutely kill both cactuses and succulents, and not only as a beginner (I'll be the first one to admit I've killed a few). But even if they do not die on you, they will not look as lush as when bought in few months unless quite a lot of care is given. If you really want an unkillable plant, get a pothos or peace lily. They both droop when thirsty (so they give you a clear indication as to when to water them), have a lovely chunky foliage, are quite cheap and very sturdy. Another great ones are snake plants. Most cactuses and succulents would go on 4th and 5th place on the "hardest to kill" list. 





- your plant may experience a bit of a shock after about half a year since you bought it, as the fertiliser given in store usually runs out around that time. Don't panic, it is not dying, just give it a little love and plant food and it will be happy again. 



Follow these and you should be just fine for the majority of plants.



Houseplanrs are awesome decorations that can light up any place, and more than you think are extremely low maintenance. It is a nice hobby for the soul, and don't stress if you kill one, happens to everyone every now and then. Some species are drama queens, and some specimen of no-fuss plants are ungrateful bastards. That being said, most will comply, because they want to be alive just as much as you want them alive. [Here](https://youtu.be/l6huWZZaZek) is a little guide on what to expect from common low maintenance species. Good luck! 💚Or, if it just needs to get done, suck it up, buttercup. We don't get gold stars for effort in real life.

An example of what I'm talking about here is that I used to make my husband a cup of coffee and bring it to him every morning. Often he would barely even acknowledge me putting down the coffee much less thank me for it.  At first, this bothered me, how could he not appreciate this nice, loving gesture and getting fresh coffee served to you in the morning?  The answer is that he really doesn't mind making his own coffee and doesn't notice much whether I do it or not. Now I don't bother and it's one less thing on my mind in the morning.

I also noticed that I was organizing a lot of light social events at work - birthday lunches, holiday parties, happy hours, etc. People would come but nobody ever really made a point to say  that they appreciated I was doing it. I stopped bothering most of the time and nobody really noticed and it frees up a lot of my time. Now I only do it if I feel like having drinks out or giving a friend a lunch party.

These are all things *I* would appreciate if someone did *for me* but that doesn't mean everyone else feels the same way.Animal shelters fill up with unwanted "presents" in January. If you hold off just a little, you can be a part of the solution AND find a pet that jives with you and your family's personality.My friend worked at Wal-Mart for 7 years and when he came up for promotion they fired him officially for "using the bathroom too much." The company asked him to write a letter apologizing for it and it caused him to lose his unemployment and a judge ordered him to pay back all the unemployment he'd already gotten.

Do not say or write ANYTHING that can be construed as an admission of guilt.How to properly use "$" in a formula, the VLookup and HLookup functions, the dynamic tables, and Record Macro.

Learn them, breathe them, and if you're feeling daring and inventive, play around with VBA programming so that you learn how to make your own custom macros.

No need for expensive courses, just Google and tinkering around.

My whole career was turned on its head just because I could create macros and handle excel better than everyone else in the office.

If your job requires you to spend any amount of time on a computer, 99% of the time having an advanced level in excel will save you so much effort (and headaches).Chances are they already have it, or have a higher quality version of it, or don't really want corny paraphernalia about it. If anything, ask them what’s on their wishlist related to that topic, or buy them something related to your common interests.

Edit: Wow I really expected this to die in new, so thanks to everyone who commented. I just want to add that I am approaching this from the perspective of a gift giver. Yes, I want the person to know I was thinking about them and what they love, BUT I also want to spend my money on something they really enjoy or will actually use. Why spend hard earned income on something they’ll probably let collect dust?

I think that gift giving culture excessively pressures people into giving gifts as surprises. That combined with the social norm to always say “I don’t want a gift... just get me whatever” makes it very difficult to know exactly what people want because you can’t ask them. That’s why, IN MY OPINION, it’s fine to write someone a heartfelt card and then give them a voucher or gift card to let them treat themselves to what they want.

Ultimately it’s your choice how you want to spend on your loved ones. This is just my philosophy.This way, if the house owner/landlord is trying to take your deposit or claiming damage at the end of your lease, you can show him the pictures. Take a picture, even of the **FLOOR**. Make sure the date and time are stamped on the pictures as well. This can be best done by emailing the videos/photos to yourself.

Edit : **This applies to ANYONE leasing/renting, not just students.**

A video walkthrough is also a good method.

I'll be adding tips from others in the comments as well.

Edit 2: Thank you kind redditors for the awards. I hope this tip saves you and other you know some money. :)If you say good things about people behind their back, you come across as genuinely thinking these things and as a really positive person. It works in everyone’s favour and will boost your image! In my experience it’s helped me be more well-liked and fit in better in the workplace as well.I worked in the auto industry for several years and this is something I feel is important for people to know.  Everyone wants a luxury car and buying them used isn't usually too bad, but when they break and it comes time to fix it; what would normally cost $200 on a Honda is $1,200 on a BMW.

Be mindful of the repair costs on a car before you buy them.Plus there are a lot of them. It's a win win for every one involved.

Edit:  So as a few people pointed out,  adult dogs are not perfect and can come with some quirks.  Make sure you do your research and are fully prepared to take on the responsibility of a pet whether it's a puppy or an adult. 

Also,  check with the shelter staff about obedience training. They often know good schools or sometimes even do it in house. 

Please adopt responsibly.

Edit 2: Wow RIP my inbox. Thank you kindly for the golds and even a silver!  Im glad this LPT has reached so many people because that means so many people are more aware about the joy of adopting adult dogs from shelters, and it's also been great reading the comments about how people have adopted adult dogs and are so loving in their families.

Edit 3: Don't forget about cats!

Edit last:  Man I've loved seeing all the sweet stories of adoption in all the comments. And I've learned a lot from the not so sweet stories as well, they are a great balance to the rose tinted glasses as it were. 
Spread the love reddit! 🥰under any circumstances unless they have received verbal permission from you or your wife/husband. This is any easy way to avoid people proposing, announcing pregnancy or preventing people from speaking when you don’t want them to.If you pay close enough attention, you might notice that a fair amount of finance offers exclude Iowa residents. This is because Iowa has some of the most robust consumer credit laws around that - among other things - put limits on interest rates and late payment penalties, AKA, helping prevent predatory loan practices. This isn’t to say that *all* companies who don’t do business with Iowa residents are predatory, but I don’t think I’d want to take out a loan with a company that won’t do business with consumers who have laws that protect them from being abused by creditors. 


https://www.doctorofcredit.com/why-are-some-credit-card-offers-not-available-to-residents-of-iowa/


https://www.legis.iowa.gov/docs/ACO/IC/LINC/Chapter.537.pdfIt’s a common saying that someone “lives off ramen” when they are broke, and most of us have been there. But instead, try potatoes. They are more nutritious, aren’t filled with preservatives and sodium, and will keep you full longer. Also they are an excellent source of potassium. And cheaper.Both professionally and in my personal life, I know a bunch of people that refuse to admit to having made a mistake. When I mess up (and we all do at some point,) I just own up to it right away. By accepting responsibility, apologizing, and saying what I'll do to keep it from happening again, I not only avoid getting a lecture about whatever I did wrong, I also get thanked by my boss/friend/whoever.Edit: thanks for the response you lovely peopleWell this blew up. Glad I could help guys. 

So I'm seeing that 0 locks some of yours. 0 works on mine. Look at the numbers carefully, one of them should in very small print say "mute", even if it's not the 0. Yours might be the number 1 or 2.EDIT: it seems that in California police need a warrant for biometrics as well

To those saying you shouldn't have anything to hide, you obviously don't realize how often police abuse their power in the US. You have a right to privacy. It is much easier for police to force you to use biometrics "consentually" than forfeit your passcode.Forgot a comma.
EDIT: ATTENTION! I have received some messages referencing studies done on the primacy effects and recency effects that say that my LPT is scientifically entirely untrue. I will let you decide for yourselves however: 
https://www.polleverywhere.com/blog/how-to-structure-a-presentation/
I personally tend to hold the first speaker as the more dominant and would be more forgiving of any mistakes simply for the fact that they took the pressure off of the group. I also would, as I mentioned, be so nervous about my own that I wouldn't be paying much attention to anyone else's presentation until my time came up.  It has definitely been interesting to see both sides of the opinion though.Source:  me, a 50 year old man who can still see his father sitting on the couch, reading the evening paper and drinking a Falstaff after work.  Rest in peace, dad.Edit: whoo, front page! 

Lots of people seem offended at, “explain how broke you are.” That was meant to be a little tongue in cheek, guys. The LPT is for talking about money if someone says, “yeah well I only made $10/hour in the 60s,” or something similar.   it’s just an idea about how to get everyone on the same page.

Edit2: there’s lots of reasons to discuss money with family. It’s not always to beg for money, or to  get into a fight about who had it worse. I have candid conversation about money with my family, and I respect their wisdom and advice. This is a strange belief we get alot. It's lead to funny incidents of:

"I swear he's never taken anything"

"So that needle in his arm..."

"... It was just once!"

We don't care. Tell us immediately what you've taken. It's important so we don't accidentally kill you with medication. This includes Viagra which if we don't know you've taken it has a strong risk of killing you if we give another vasodilating medication.

Edit:

I write this as a UK worker. As many have pointed out sadly this is not necessarily the case in countries across the world. 

That being said. I still do believe it vital that you state drugs you have taken so a health care worker can support you properly.To freshen a load of laundry, try 2 cups of distilled white vinegar. For mildew odors you can double and triple this amount. Hot or warm water works best. I have a top loading machine — I let the drum fill with water and put the vinegar in once it fills, right on top of the clothes. I’ve had my washing machine over 10 years and vinegar hasn’t shortened the life of my machine or my laundry for that matter. I have used an entire gallon on kids clothes that came back from summer camp filthy and damp with the worst mildew smell. It also works as a fabric softener. It’s the best. Just lost my pop to a long fight with Alzheimer's. It sucked watching the kind, warm, and generous man I knew become a shell of his former self.   


During his decline, he showed all the hallmarks of the disease: forgetting family faces and names, telling stories about false memories, and, in the end, a bit of belligerence (the kind you might typically see in a toddler).   


Throughout his decline, I saw my family approach it in one of two ways: some would try to correct his mistakes over and over (to no avail), and some would just roll with the punches.   


Playing along with things in the moment always seemed to keep him more centered and grounded. Not only did it help calm him down, it made those painful visits a little less so by knowing he felt comforted by my validating his reality, and not trying to yank him out of whatever timeline/alternate universe he was visiting.   


A simple example would be if he asked where his (long dead) mother was, I would just say "she's visiting with your sister and will be back soon." What good would correcting him do? Then he'd have to re-live that trauma of losing his mom all over again, possibly many times a day.   


Or when he would say something outlandish like, "I used to be a senator, you know" I would just say, "oh that's right, I forgot all about that, tell me more!"   


I have to give credit to a [TEDMED talk](https://www.tedmed.com/talks/show?id=526821) that I saw describing this whole approach, many years ago. I'm so glad I saw it because it absolutely changed the way I spent time with my dad, and made it easier, richer, and more gratifying in spite of the misery of the disease. Hope it helps you, too.   


And fuck you, Alzheimer's.

Edit: I can’t keep up with all the replies and awards, but I am so grateful to everyone for your kind words. I’m glad you’re able to find this useful; it totally changed how I talked with my dad    

Best wishes to all of you.

Edit 2: This is not a magic wand that wipes dementia away. It’s an approach to managing some of the challenges of its effects. I am definitely not a doctor, do not take this as medical advice. YMMV depending on each individual.

Edit 3: For the love of god, the (attempted) political jokes are just not landing, please stop. You’re embarrassing yourself.Obviously this only works if you shout loudly ("OWW!") and stop playing if a bite or scratch is too hard.

I've only been scratched or bitten by cats that weren't properly socialized in this way. Cats that have been socialized this way have always shown amazing skill at not scratching or biting. For example, I have a cat who goes nuts over a hair tie and I can hold it in my hand as the bats at it without fear because she perfectly and expertly keeps her claws in to avoid scratching my hand, even in the fervor of the chase. But once the hair tie is away from my hand, all claws are out.

Similarly, there was I time I had to quickly grab my cat in a way that hurt her, and she had a natural reaction to crane around and bite my hand in her pain, but it was just a gentile mouth touch, even in her distress. This goes for vet visits, holding cats down to take medicine, cleaning wounds, etc. Properly trained cats will have better restraint around bites or scratches, but cats that never learned restraint are more likely to.Obviously only do this with unimportant accounts and only if your name isn’t important for legal reasons, but I’ve done this for apps, conferences, demos, etc. Just recently I got spam email that said “Dear XYZ App Trial, don’t miss out in these deals!” - so I knew XYZ App sold the data.

Edit: To those asking what you can do, if a company sells your data without your permission you can file a formal complaint with the FTC here: https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/blog/2015/08/want-privacy-tell-us-about-it

2nd Edit: I've been made aware in the comments that others have had this idea and posted it to the sub before and that I'm an idiot. My apologies for not knowing that, I hope I didn't ruin anyone's evening too badly.I did it and have been able to buy my wife flower arrangements with the same types of flowers that were in her wedding bouquet on special wedding anniversaries (e.g., 1st, 5th, 10th, the year we became parents, etc.).  I also keep a photo of the bouquet to show the florist.  She was so surprised the first time I did it.  It went over really well. She immediately recognized that all of the flowers had been in her bouquet.If your cat has shown in the past that it likes belly rubs, that's an exception of course, but the average kitty just wants you to know that you are trusted by exposing its most vulnerable area to you.My son has always hated falling asleep. I would sit with him and like every frustrated parent, when I would get up from my chair, he would reach out and say "Where are you going mom? Stay here." So instead of saying "Are you awake?" before getting up (which invariably always wakes someone up it seems); I started saying "I love you." In doing that I noticed a few things. (a) If my son was awake, he was comforted and usually went to sleep within minutes of me saying this (b) The response back was always, "I love you too mom" which would leave us both in a great mood for going to bed and (c) if there was no response, I knew I was safe to get up. I do this with my husband too and the affect seems to be the same.Colleges and universities will try to  get you to use their "internal" reporting systems when something bad happens.  That system is there to help the school protect their image, not to protect you.   They will waste valuable time at best, and some may even try to talk you out of filing a police report, or they may even trick  you into reporting to a campus authority instead of to police.  If you want a  law enforcement response, get it yourself.  You can report to the  school later.  The college will have a harder time covering the crime  up if the police are already involved.

Source: I have worked for multiple colleges that pull this kind of crap.

BTW: This is just as true of lower level schools too.  If your kid is assaulted, threatened, or victimized in another criminal way, don't call the principal first, call police first.  Let the principal catch up later.There are a few exceptions, but most will send them to you for free, and will be genuinely delighted to do so.I travel a bit for work, and when I’m home I sleep best with a somewhat firm pillow that supports my head.  At most hotels the pillows are to be incredibly soft, and I feel like my head sinks almost all the way down. For me at least, it’s hard to sleep like this. I’d bring my own pillow, but they are usually too bulky for air travel.

So here’s my trick: I take one of the large bath towels, fold it to be about the same rectangular size as the pillow, and carefully tuck inside the pillow case with the pillow itself. If I do it right, it’s not lumpy at all but is completely flat inside. This adds a bit of firmness and prevents my head from sinking like a stone!

Anyway, it helps me, hopefully it’s useful for someone else…Unlock Developer Options:

Settings > About Phone > 7x tap on Build Number


Decrease animation time:

Settings > System > Developer Options > Set all Options with Animation Scale to x0.5 or less

Enjoy your fast phone

Edit: Wow, my first gold, thanks a lot! Glad you guys like the LPT :)

Edit Edit: As others have pointed out, Build Number in Samsung phones is apparently in About Phone > Software info. Also this works on Android devices other than phones.

Edit Edit Edit: The exact options to tweak in Developer options are called Window animation scale, Transition animation scale and Animator duration scale. Alternatively you can also turn the animations off via System > Accessibility > Remove animations!There are always exceptions and expectations, but in the current US labor situation your employer loves to see salaried employees stay to make up the missing labor. You won't see more help or higher wages if you keep working for free.I used to be an extremely negative person, and I still have a lot of trouble fighting my instinct to tear everything down. That's what gets the most attention in online spaces, complaining about or deconstructing something. This became doubly intense when I hit my angry atheist phase around 20. I actually remember alienating potential new friends by shitting on every movie/game/activity/belief system they brought up, and when they would stop texting me back I'd think "I wish this person wasn't so boring." I wanted them to play the negativity game with me. 

A cool decade later, I've figured out that they weren't boring at all. I was. Everyone knew not to float an idea my way, because I'd predictably tear it apart. I now run into people who act like I used to act, and I feel so bad for them. I wish I could tell them "hey, if you shoot down everything everyone says, nobody is going to want to say anything to you anymore."LPT I found out one of my students (college) was temporarily homeless and living in her car. She did have a part-time job and I convinced her to join the local gym ($15 per month) where she can not only work out but shower, use wifi, use a clean bathroom, and study while on the bikes. I also hooked her up with the college pantry as well as other pantries in the area. She graduated top of her class and to this day I still get letters of the utmost appreciation from her. Luckily her homelessness only lasted 3 months.

EDIT- Thank you everyone from the bottom of my heart for all the wonderful comments and awards. I also need to add that I didn't want to overstep my boundaries with the student-professor relationship so I bought the student a cart full of groceries, all non perishable, and toiletries. I had a friend of mine deliver it to her at the college. It was such a wonderful feeling to just help her get started.Edit: if anyone is wondering, I heard this from my Engineering Thermal Science prof last semester and he said it was just a general rule of thumb so you know for sure no serious damage can occur. I decided to post this after seeing so many college freshmen moving in their mini-fridges sideways this week and I figured they had no clue about the anatomy of a refrigerator and would just plug them in right awayYou are a number in an equation.  If they need to balance the equation they will remove your number.   
I am posting this based on the number of people I see who buy into "corporate spirit/culture".  You should always keep your options open for a better opportunity and don't NOT take it because of misplaced loyalty.Ever notice how homeless people who have dogs - their dogs are amazingly calm, follow their owners everywhere?  They have life experience.  They've been out, seen the world a lot, socialized a lot, and just want to follow and hang out with their owners.  
If you were kept in a room your whole life, you'd freak and spaz and mis-behave the couple of times a day you were let out too.

(I have been working with dogs for over 20 years)


EDIT:  I should note that no, I don't take them into restaurants to mooch off diners, let them run around on airplanes, or through grocery stores to pee in aisle 6.  I thought that would go without saying, but I guess not.  :)

EDIT:  People on reddit seem to take everything literally.  When I say everywhere I mean everywhere that you can.  Again, I didn't think I needed to specify this doesn't mean 24/7 go to the movies with them, play tennis with them, etc.

ALSO:  NO WARM CARS with the windows up!!To get you started:

[Ethics of Manipulation](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethics-manipulation/)

[Tactics of Manipulation](https://labs.la.utexas.edu/buss/files/2015/09/tactics_of_manipulation_1987_jpsp.pdf)

[Logical Fallacies in Argumentative Writing](https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/academic_writing/logic_in_argumentative_writing/fallacies.html)

[15 Logical Fallacies](https://thebestschools.org/magazine/15-logical-fallacies-know/)

[20 Diversion Tactics of the Highly Manipulative](https://thoughtcatalog.com/shahida-arabi/2016/06/20-diversion-tactics-highly-manipulative-narcissists-sociopaths-and-psychopaths-use-to-silence-you/)

[Narcissistic Arguing](https://psychcentral.com/blog/psychology-self/2018/08/narcissist-arguing)

[3 Manipulation Tactics You Should Know About](https://medium.com/an-injustice/three-manipulation-tactics-you-should-know-about-2e4fa65dfede)

[How to Debate Like a Manipulative Bully](https://thepowermoves.com/ben-shapiro-debate-techniques/) — It is worth pointing out that once you understand these tactics those who use them start to sound like whiny, illogical, and unjustifiably confident asshats.

[10 Popular Manipulative Techniques & How to Fight Them](https://www.inc.com/jessica-stillman/10-popular-techniques-used-by-manipulators-and-how-to-fight-them.html)

[EthicalRealism’s Take on Manipulative Tactics](https://ethicalrealism.wordpress.com/2013/08/30/manipulative-tactics/)

Any time you feel yourself start to get regularly dumbstruck during any and every argument with a particular person, remind yourself of these unethical and pathetically desperate tactics to avoid manipulation via asshat.

Also, as someone commented, a related concept you should know about to have the above knowledge be even more effective is Cognitive Bias and the associated concept of Cognitive Dissonance:

[Cognitive Bias Masterclass](https://www.masterclass.com/articles/how-to-identify-cognitive-bias)

[Cognitive Dissonance](https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-cognitive-dissonance-2795012)

[Cognitive Dissonance in Marketing](https://smallbusiness.chron.com/cognitive-dissonance-marketing-55693.html)

[Cognitive Dissonance in Real Life](https://www.everydayhealth.com/neurology/cognitive-dissonance/real-life-examples-how-we-react/)

[10 Cognitive Distortions](https://www.healthline.com/health/cognitive-distortions)

EDIT: Forgot a link.

EDIT: Added Cognitive Bias, Cognitive Dissonance, and Cognitive Distortion.

EDIT: Due to the number of comments that posed questions that relate to perception bias, I am adding these basic links to help everyone understand [fundamental attribution error](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_attribution_error)  and other [social perception biases](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_perception). I will make a new post with studies listed in this area another time, but [this one that relates to narcissism](http://www.columbia.edu/~da358/publications/ames_kammrath_mindreading.pdf) is highly relevant to my original train of thought when writing this post.Due to the shortage of employees, most employers are desperate for good help. That means you should be seeking pay raises, promotions, and increased benefits.

Unless you are completely satisfied with your job and your income, shop around. Chances are you will find someone desperate for help and willing to pay more than your current employer. If you like your job, shop around anyway, then politely ask your employer to match/beat those offers.

Look after yourself! This employment opportunity will not last forever!Been with my wife for almost 23 years, and she has always gotten me great gifts, even early on when we didn’t have much money to spend on each other.  About 10 years in we got into a conversation about how I find it so difficult to come up with thoughtful gifts compared to how adept she seems to be.  When I asked her how she did it, she casually said,

“I pay attention to what makes you curse!”

And I’ll be damned if the vast majority of the gifts that I found most memorable and oft-used were the direct result of the thing that guys often catch a bad rap for trying to do for others.......solving problems.

Did I trip over a power cable multiple times building out her chicken coop?  Cordless drill.

Was I always complaining about how I can’t get my pillow to support my head throughout the night?  Contour pillow.

Remarking how much I hated constantly cleaning out the gutters underneath a big oak tree?  Gutter covers.

That’s it.  Simple stuff that often doesn’t break the bank.  

That being said, of course there is room for gifts that don’t have to solve a problem and are a little more extravagant or frivolous and just make somebody happy, but I’ve put this technique into use in the years since and always come up with great gifts for the guys in my life.

Understand that this LPT isn’t exclusively for men, of course.  I think it can be applied fairly easily as long as it just comes from paying attention to your friends/family......at the very least it will make them feel great to know somebody is paying attention.Let me start by saying I'm not an* idiot. I usually can spot a scam. Today, I didn't. 
 
So I'm sure this has been said before in some shape, form, and/or fashion, but let me tell you how good these hackers are. Today I received a call from BBT. THE CALL CAME FROM BBT. From their* number I have personally called many times and have saved in my phone as BBT. It was their* fraud department and they wanted to let me know that there is suspicious activity on my account. A few minutes of verifying info and everything was cleared up. My account was locked and a new card was ordered. I was given a 1 time use login and password to re-setup my BBT online account and was told to allow 6-8 hours for everything to take effect.  Or so I thought. 
 
Within a few hours, I was wiped clean. $1.26 left in my bank. So I call BBT back to find out what's going on. I find out that I did not speak to BBT earlier today. I had instead been call spoofed by hackers and that I actually gave them all the info they needed (or better phrased, the last little bit of info they were looking for) to wipe my ass clean of all my money. I talked to the service guy for about 30mins. We hopefully have it official straighten out now. With my account actually locked and a legit new card on the way. There is a chance I may have to get a whole new account period. 
 
The one thing the service guy told me was that if I ever get a call from (my bank) to hang up and call back at a number I know is theirs. If it truly was them, they will know what the call was for. If they have no idea of any reason to call you, you were called by a hacker.
 
Edit: This has gained a massive amount of traction. I would like to thank this [comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/YouShouldKnow/comments/ejq9oy/ysk_to_never_trust_a_call_from_your_bank_always/fczynoa?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share) for the idea to post it here. It has been interesting reading all the stories. Some with similar outcomes, some with way better outcomes. Either way, it has been a nice topic of discussion. 
 
If nothing else, I hope this post saves at least one other person from going through what I went through. 
 
Edit2: It seems in my slightly frazzled, yet still very amused, state last night, that I missed a few proof reading spots. I appreciate the red pen marks fellow redditors. Keep up the good work.
 .
 
.
 
.
 
**************Update*************************
 
. 
 
.
 
2 week edit. As it sits right now, the money has been refunded (minus an overdraft fee incurred during the event), new account has been made, new card has been received. 
 

 
To clear up some misconceptions, here's is some added info. 
 
1. BBT called me. It was not an unknown number. It was BBT's main contact number you can find on the back of your card. I usually do not answer the phone for anyone that isn't family. What led me to answer it that morning was that I had already received a fraud alert text from BBT about 5 mins before. Turns out, that was fake as well. BBT only uses one short code messaging system. 
 
2. I didn't give them any personal info. My SSN was not shared. My account number, routing number, or debit card number was not given out by me. They already had (almost) all the info they needed. My address, my telephone number on file, the email used for my account, the debit card "that was hacked". They used the info they had to tie my card to Google Pay. They only thing they needed was the code that got sent to my phone. Actually 2 codes. One to reset my password for the app, and one to add the card to Google Pay. He played it off that the first code had expired and had to send another one. He said the code was to "lock" the online account so that the fraud could be looked into. 
 
3. This LPT, like many others on here, is not accurate 100% of the time. They can and might call you. They should never make you verify your info. If you read the comments though, it is definitely a great practice if you get suspicious. Hang up and call from a different land line number or a cell phone. Read the comments for more info on the different land line stuff. 
 
4. The amount of money that was taken is kinda irrelevant. $1000 to me, is different then $1000 to you. Or to the guy living paycheck to paycheck. The part that matters is that it was everything I had at the moment. The spending money for a weekend date. Junk food for the kids while we are out on our date. Running money for 2 weeks. You get the idea. All gone. (Luckily, we had gift cards from Xmas and still got our date night.)
 
5. Lastly, thank you all for all the kind words and reassurances. It did all turn out fine in the end. Lesson was learned.I've seen a lot of posts in r/tifu and r/maliciouscompliance that were both really long, and just one massive block of text. I personally have a hard time not getting lost in text when it isn't spaced out every now and then, to the point where I don't even try to read it when I see posts like that. 

I'm sure your post is great and interesting, but I would bet that I'm not the only one turned away by massive text walls.

Edit: My first front-page post is me being a grammar nazi. Great.

In all seriousness, thanks for the awards and stuff! <3

Edit 2: For some reason this hit #1 on the front page. I love you guys <3

Final Edit: (this one's actually relevant) apparently, you have to hit enter twice for the paragraph to separate properly. Hopefully this helps!I used to criticize my in-laws for only getting their news from Fox News. Then I realized that although I read news from several sources, most were left leaning. I have since downloaded AP and Reuter’s apps and now use them for news (no more reddit news) and my anxiety and stress levels have dropped significantly.

Take a look at where you get your news and make sure it is a neutral source, not one that reinforces your existing biases.Make sure you preface your request by asking that people only choose party-specific songs (or whatever other preference you have).

Also, have a bunch of your own party songs pre-loaded on the play-list to give people an idea of mood/genre.

*Disclaimer: For many people, this is an LPT for post COVID. I hope everyone is keeping safe in the meantime.*

Edit:

**Regarding the risk of people adding silly songs to the playlist / adding duplicate songs:** ensure you do an audit on the day of the party, and lock the playlist so no-one can make further edits.

**If you are concerned with what the flow of music at the party will be like:** ask people to stick to a couple of specific genres.

**Regarding 'giving people homework' before a party:** you don't have to make it compulsory.It might seem like they're bragging sometimes but usually they just wish that you acknowledge their accomplishments.I've found this most useful when starting a new hobby. I usually just find someone that already knows what they're doing and get a brain dump from them.

Its kind of amazing what people will offer to do for you when you genuinely want to learn about something they find interesting.Example: You get an expensive bill for a $1,000 unfortunately. U.S. healthcare really shouldn’t be so expensive in the first place...but the first thing you should do is call and ask for a review of the level of care, and while on the phone the next thing you do is ask for an itemized bill with every single charge. 

They make bills unnecessarily expensive because in the backend of things, they rack up ridiculous charges like $37 for a bandaid. Once you call and request what I’ve mentioned, they’ll knock all the BS charges right off before sending you the itemized statement.
 
Some bills can go down from $500 to $45. It may not be that drastic for everyone, but many can be reduced by several hundreds of dollars.

If you or anyone you know has been to the ER recently, tell them to try this. It can majorly help!

You can try to even further this by looking for medical debt reconciliation companies. They make money by cutting down on your debt, even in cases like these.

If you have insurance, you can contact your insurance company and ask for a breakdown of what was billed as well.  Most services you were billed for likely weren’t even done. So yes ALWAYS ask for an itemized bill, they get scared and remove a whole bunch of items!

You can also apply for medical financial assistance (MFA). Every hospital has it, you just need to submit financial info and they will pay it all or half. Sometimes you can even get medicine and visits waived for 6 months or more. 

Another thing you can do for extra help is ask to apply for charity. The charity department will ask questions about your income situation however, but many people do lie about their income. There’s a chance you’ll get approved and your account is adjusted to zero balance.

EDIT: this may be a bit simplified and there’s some contradictory statements in the comments, but I don’t think you should be discouraged from trying it because it has 100% WORKED for many... such as people in this thread saying it reduced their bill firsthand, hospital employees confirming this, genuine comments on twitter of people sharing their experience with it and how much it lowered their bill, and other videos of people explaining their situation showing gratitude for having learned this info because it saved them a lot of money... no “propaganda” or angrily fueled desire to spread misinformation. Many of these people didn’t get much recognition for sharing their experience either, it’s not like they’re just lying to go viral. They’re not all wrong.My cousin is in her late 20s and going through this thinks she needs to be a (famous) artist because that’s her calling. I tell her you can always be an artist and find a way to earn a living along side. I don’t wake up excited to do my job every day but I get satisfaction out of it because it matches what I am good at and is new and different every day. 

Edit: Thanks for all the love! Also my first awards! If this helped one person understand that they are ok who and where they are in life I will be ecstatic!!

Edit 2: Clarity that she is a great artist just doesn’t have to make it or live some crazy artist lifestyle to be fulfilled. Added Famous in there.Hi!

That's it. Nothing more to add.

You're welcome.Last night someone I’ve volunteered with on-and-off for 2 years, I’m pretty sure forgot my name, so I worked into conversation said something like *“I have a tendency to leave things till the last minute, and my roommate is like ‘Alybank! Why are you like this?”* I could see the relief on the other persons face when I said it.A lot of people don't know how to cook or season vegetables apart from steaming them, maybe with a little salt or butter/oil. Steaming is easy to overdo, and works best with very fresh seasonal veggies - anything that is frozen, canned, or even just spent more than a few days on the shelf will most likely wind up mushy and unappealing. Learn how to grill, roast, or even fry different vegetables, try out different seasonings or sauces, and be amazed at the horizons of deliciousness ten-year-old you never knew existed.

EDIT: Apparently this is a sore subject with some people! You \*PROBABLY\* don't hate vegetables, but individual tastes and physiologies differ of course. No one should ever be harassed over allergy or sensory processing issues. The point is to learn to cook things different ways before you write them off. Sorry that people have given you a hard time about this, but if your reply begins with "my mom/dad/wife/etc does know how to cook" and not "I know how to cook" then the source of the issue is pretty clear.

EDIT 2: Holy crap, that's a lot of awards. Thank you all, and I discovered the real LPT, which is that people with food limitations know exactly what does and doesn't work for them and often share lovely tips for alternative ingredients and techniques, while picky eaters tell you to f--- off. Also, buying an e-sim card upfront is always the best option.Edit: This is meant for those that want to maintain a healthy balance between work, personal life, and technology. I consider a reply timely and professional if it’s within 24 hours. Obviously if it’s an emergency you should respond sooner!Thank you for the gold and silver.A state by state list is here: [https://www.acf.hhs.gov/fysb/grants/fysb-grantees](https://www.acf.hhs.gov/fysb/grants/fysb-grantees)Just click the state and then click Runaway and Homeless Youth in blue.

The real value of the places outside of the material support they provide is that they've been there! Wondering what happens if you runaway at 17 years old in a specific state when you're being neglected? They know! Did you just move to a new state and are considering reporting abuse by your parents but don't know what the foster care system looks like in you new state? They do! Can you open a bank account without a parent, etc. - they likely know! They also take calls from siblings, parents, extended family, kinship placements, child welfare workers, etc.

**There are 5 very important services funded by the RHY program.**

**Basic Center Program:** Shelter program which includes counseling, trauma-informed care, life skills, and other help. Usually for kids under 18, depends on the state.

**Maternity Group Home Program:** Shelter for youth with kids, must be between the ages of 16 and 22 to enter the program. Life skills, child development, parenting help, budgeting, nutrition, etc.

**Transitional Living Program:**  Must be between the ages of 16 and 22 to enter the program. Life skills, job help, nutrition, budgeting ,etc.

**Street Outreach Program:** My favorite program. Outreach workers meet youth where they are at on the streets, in parks, etc. These outreach workers adjust to whatever level of support you need- they could just drop off food and warm clothes or they could help you access emergency shelter and sign up for health insurance.

**National Runaway Safeline:**  1-800-RUNAWAY or [http://www.1800runaway.org/](http://www.1800runaway.org/). They were an actual switchboard back in the day that would allow kids to contact their families if they ran away. Now they have forums on their website where thousands of kids ask a ton of questions FROM ALL OVER THE WORLD about how to be safe. They work with Greyhound to provide bus trips home for runaway youth and also do a lot of outreach around issues concerning runaway and homeless youth.  


 

In lieu of awards, please google your local youth/adult/domestic violence shelter and donate to them! Or start a group with your friends to help people out!

These are agencies in my area (Northern AZ) I fully support!

[https://northlandfamily.org/give-to-nfhc/](https://northlandfamily.org/give-to-nfhc/)

[https://flagshelter.org/](https://flagshelter.org/)No, your joke isn't creative.  Yes, they know the reference.  They've heard it many times before. And a good chance that even if they say "haha, that's a new one" it probably isn't and they just want to spare your feelings.  In fact, not acknowledging the low hanging fruit and simply responding with your own name will probably be more appreciated by them and they will think of you as more mature and likable.Edit: Should’ve clarified, I’ve got social anxiety and find it difficult to have long conversations especially about myself. My friends know this and recognise it as an attempt to let out how I’m feeling.From years of experience of being with family members who thought that making a child cry was “cute,” if you’re playing a prank, making a joke, or having fun with a child, or literally anyone regardless of the age, and they begin to cry or become upset, stop what you’re doing and address it. Continuing to laugh and make fun of a child while they are crying is confusing for them and they will feel completely vulnerable and torn down, and they will remember that you were being unsupportive of their pain.Brian Hogan posted this on Twitter. I thought it was very simple and profound advice if you’re in a toxic work environment and are considering making a job change.  There are a lot of parents with this philosophy of "What I say goes, I'm the boss , everyone bow down to me, I can do no wrong". 

 

Children learn by example, and they pick up on so many nuances, minutiae, and unspoken truths.

You aren't fooling them into thinking you're perfect by refusing to admit mistakes - you're teaching them that to apologize is shameful and should be avoided at all costs. You cannot treat a child one way and then expect them to comport themselves in the opposite manner.For example, I require 7 hours of sleep. On days where I sleep less. I'm annoyed, my memory and concentration ability is affected. I feel mentally sick through the day. Once I went a few days like this and then one day I had a good sleep. I realised how important sleep was. Your brain functions so much better. Everything is more clear.
Just pay attention to how you perform on less sleep to understand this.

There are many studies showing association of poor sleep with dementia and Alzheimer's.

There are studies that showing association of poor sleep with high blood pressure and cardiovascular diseases.

Edit 1: Many had asked about source for my claims

https://www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/sleep-deprivation-increases-alzheimers-protein


https://www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/lack-sleep-middle-age-may-increase-dementia-risk

https://www.npr.org/2020/11/16/935475284/scientists-discover-a-link-between-lack-of-deep-sleep-and-alzheimers-disease

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6286721/

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4651462/#:~:text=More%20specifically%2C%20when%20one%20sleeps,help%20maintain%20its%20normal%20functioning.

"Until recently, the latest research developments have concluded that sleeping has much more impact in the brain than previously thought. More specifically, when one sleeps, the brain resets itself, removes toxic waste byproducts which may have accumulated throughout the day [2]. This new scientific evidence is important because it demonstrates that sleeping can clear “cobwebs” in the brain and help maintain its normal functioning. More importantly speaking, this paper illustrates the different principles of sleep; starting from the non-rapid eye movement (NREM) to the behavioral as well as mental patterns with chronic sleep loss as well as the importance of sleeping acting as a garbage disposal in the body."

Edit 2: Yes I agree. Not just Quantity of sleep but Quality of sleep matters as well

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5449130/

Edit 3: Amount of sleep required varies from individual to individual

http://healthysleep.med.harvard.edu/healthy/science/variations/individual-variation-genetics

Edit 4: For people saying nobody says that. 
My mom did. I followed the 6 hour thing for very long till I realised, that wasn't true and I needed 7 hours. I used to wake up at 4.30 AM to push more hours of studies ( after 6 hour sleep) man let me tell you. I was extremely sleepy and tired in class. I stopped doing that later. Couldn't keep doing that.

When I was a teenager, they never let me sleep over 8AM, even during summer holidays.

About Boss and Coworkers....In 5 months I'll become a doctor. Healthcare, depending on your speciality and job is one sector where sleep and mental health is actually ignored. I see my interns/ house surgeons staying awake   36 hours. Sometimes the job requires it. Night duties are a part of the job. Even during our undergraduate it's considered very normal to lose sleep over studying for tests and exams. Most of them sleep hardly 3 -  5 hours before  University exams. It has kinda become the norm. And yes I've heard my own friends bragging about how less they slept the previous day. It's pathetic.

In our student life these kinda extreme situations happen before exams and our exams go over a month.

When we don't have exams, I keep my sleep the highest priority more than my studies and try to eat well and exercise. I'll take the stress when I have to, just before the exams.

During internship, half the interns I see are sleep deprived and stressed.

Brings me to another point. It's not possible to have a good sound sleep all the time, but we can have good sleep atleast most of the time.I am in charge of a team at work, and every time the company sends a survey I emphasize the same point. I strongly believe that in a real survey there is no right and wrong (I'm talking surveys about how you feel regarding certain subjects), yet as we all know since we're in the internet right now, anonymity gives people a huge sense of security and disregard for potential consequences, so the idea of anonimity can make people see a survey as a blank slate to vent, joke or throw insults around.

&#x200B;

Always assume any survey from your company is NOT anonymous, keep it honest, but keep it respectful.The major reason for nausea and hang-over effects from drinking is dehydration.  The body requires a lot of water to flush the toxins from your system.  After you're done drinking alcohol, if you start drinking plenty of water (even though you probably won't feel like it), it will greatly mitigate the negative effects from over indulgence.if you're ever buying LEGO sets secondhand, a lot of sellers will increase the price because they include the original instructions, or even sell the instructions separately. but if you go [here](https://www.lego.com/en-us/service/buildinginstructions) you can download PDFs for ~~every instruction manual ever~~ many instruction manuals, all for free. if course if you really want that physical booklet go for it, but if not the LEGO company's got you covered

or if you just have a jumble of bricks you're pretty sure are a set, this is a good resource to help you recreate your old sets. and the search interface is *very* good

eta: I've been informed they do not have every instruction manual ever, but still a very large amount

and thank you for the awards!

eta2: thanks for the gold! i'm so sorry if i misled people on the "every set ever" bit, i've changed the post to reflect that. i'm glad at least this resource exists at all and is as comprehensive as it is, and i'm happy to have brought it to so many people's attention

eta3: u/minionmemesaregood has [brought to my attention](https://www.reddit.com/r/LifeProTips/comments/j7zt7w/lpt_the_official_lego_website_has_a_section_where/g89bcgk/) a site that has a lot of the older 20th century set instructions, though also maybe not 100% complete- lego.brickinstructions.com

and many others have mentioned bricklink.com and brickset.com, more great LEGO resourcesThis honestly is the single thing that bystanders do to make my job hardest. Blocking the door can really hamper my access to the patient, when you actually just want to help me.

Context: For every job in my metropolitan ambulance service, I'm carrying at least a cardiac monitor weighing about 10kg, a drug kit in the other hand, and usually also a smaller bag containing other observation gear. For a lot of cases, I'll add more bags: an oxygen kit, a resuscitation kit, an airway bag, sometimes specialised lifting equipment. We carry a lot of stuff, and generally the more I carry, the more concerned I am about the person I'm about to assess.

It's a very natural reflex to welcome someone to your house by holding the door open. The actual effect is to stand in the door frame while I try to squeeze past you with hands full. Then, once I've moved past you, I don't know where to go.

**Instead, it's much more helpful simply to open the door and let me keep it open myself, then simply lead the way.** I don't need free hands to hold the door for myself, and it clears my path to walk in more easily.

Thanks. I love the bystanders who help me every day at work, and I usually make it a habit to shake every individual's hand on a scene and thank them as a leave, when time allows. This change would make it much easier to do my job. I can't speak for other professionals, this might help others too - I imagine actual plumbers carry just as much stuff as people-plumbers.Edit: I’m just saying don’t lead with “you look great!” Say “wow! Great to see you! What have you been up to?” People will usually respond with an answer that lets you know if they have changed their lifestyle. Then you can say “yeah! You look amazing” 
I’m a super nice person. Not a jerk for those of you saying I’m a robot or making mean comments or saying I should have known the difference. Wow.
This man had just lost maybe 7-10lbs. It was early on in his illness. He eventually get losing weight and passed away...
So I was giving this life tip so people aren’t haunted like I am. In that moment I reminded him he was dying and I hurt him.As soon as you drive up to the speaker, we get a beep over our headsets and the transmission begins. If we don't answer you right away - we can hear everything. If we apologize and say we'll be with you in a minute - you're not on hold, we can hear everything. If you've ordered but the drive-thru line won't let you pull ahead yet - we can hear every single thing you're saying. 

I wish I could forget some of the stuff I've heard.

On the flipside, some of the stuff I've heard has made me give the customer a nice little bonus on their order when it sounds like they need it.
Your loved one is cold, invariably, and they can't control their arms. I have a really hard time dressing the residents when all they have are the quarter zips. I will forever love you if you can send the full zip sweaters so I can grab it and dress your mom or dad in 20 seconds or less. 

I love my job. Get ya sweaters right.

EDIT: YAY my post blew up! Let me add a few things, since a lot of my fellow healthcare workers have chimed in. 

1. CD Players: YES PLEASE. Plus your loved one's favorite CDs. 
2. So many photos. All of them. You can't go overboard. I will sit there and go through every photo with them every day, if you want me to. I really don't mind. 
3. Clothes, one size larger. Please label them. I will do it myself if you can't but don't be upset when/if you see Mom wearing roommate's clothes. Maybe you didn’t send enough, maybe the washer is broken. Maybe you didn’t label correctly. Kindly point it out and someone will explain or rectify the problem. 
4. Food gifts are almost always allowed, just be sure to check with nursing staff first. If your loved one is on a low-sodium diet and you keep bringing them McDonald's, that's a yikes. Also be careful about sharing with other residents. Your loved one's roommate might be on a special diet and you keep giving them french fries and we can't figure out why they're not feeling good. 

Additional points:
OH MY GOD YOU ARE NOT A BAD PERSON FOR PUTTING YOUR LOVED ONE IN A COMMUNITY. CARING FOR SOMEONE WITH DEMENTIA IS A FULL TIME JOB, LITERALLY I HAVE TWO DEGREES TO HELP ME DO IT. IF YOU ARE 90 YEARS OLD AND YOUR SPOUSE HAS AN AGGRESSIVE FORM OF DEMENTIA AND THEY HIT YOU IN THE MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT, WHAT ARE YOU SUPPOSED TO DO? Keep your judgement out of my inbox. I have now worked in a geriatric psychiatric ward too- and these 90 year old women who have literally been assaulted by their once-loving husbands at 2am have to hear your fucking bullshit about how they can’t care for their spouse and what the fuck is wrong with you? Jesus Christ use your brain. Maybe your grandma insists that she needs to get to the bus stop at 4pm, right when you’re getting home from work every day- do you want to quit your job because she can’t stop wandering into the street? Can you afford a loving, caring facility that provides a lock on the door and 3 square meals every day with 24/7 nursing care? THEN BY ALL MEANS, GO TAKE A FUCKING TOUR OF IT AND SEE IF IT’S A GOOD FIT! THERE IS NO ONE-SIZE ALL FIT FOR DEMENTIA CARE. This is a full-family journey and the focus has to be on the DIGNITY, SAFETY, AND EDUCATION of all involved.  

I. Love. My. Job. Mind. Your Business.

EDIT 2: I'm enjoying the hell out of everyone's energy on this post. Keep your questions and DM's coming, it's 1am EST but I'll be up for a bit longer if I can help support you either emotionally or with advice if this journey is relevant to you.

EDIT 3: Big shoutout to the guy who wants to know if I have two degrees in "wiping ass" because this job takes "no brains". Foolish question, everyone knows that WIPASS-201 is only an undergrad course.

In all seriousness- both of my degrees are psychology based but geriatric specific. I am NOT clinical- I am the program director. Basically the cruise ship captain.

EDIT 4: I keep getting this question of what the hell a program director is, so I'll post my response here too:

As the program director, I am in charge of scheduling, coordinating, and facilitating the activities. I either lead the activity or I delegate it to an aide who works in the afternoon. I interact with and update the families as necessary or on a schedule. I come up with creative solutions to behavioral problems and advise/inform staff and management on layouts of how to address concerns resulting from cognitive impairment. I work closely with the nursing staff to coordinate the best care with behavioral interventions paired with the pharmacological interventions. It's a huge team effort. Takes a village.I learned this from Andrew Huberman, Ph.D., a professor at Stanford who studies how vision and our brains are interconnected.I once had a manager who didn't like me that much, but the customers loved me and kept saying so, and now I have that manager's old job. Positive feedback is so rare in customer service. It's 99% complaints about stuff that isn't your fault. But those few kind words from customers helped me get through some hellish shifts and advance in my career.

Edit: Obvs this will vary from workplace to workplace and it can be inconvenient for the employee and manager in question if they're super busy at that moment. Comment consensus tips are: keep praise vague (they may have skirted policy to take care of you), mention the employee by name, fill out any survey on the receipt or at the end of the phone call with max scores and the employee's name so there's a record, tell the employee why you're asking for the manager so they don't get scared, leave a great name-drop review in online spaces, if sliding into the dms of a corporate account be sure to include the store location along with the employees name.

Edit 2: Some of y'all work for shitty managers. That sucks very much and I'm sorry. It's a bad situation that isn't your fault and you deserve better. I hope you'll be able to get out of that job soon and get into something better where you can shine.

Edit 3: "Wow, this blew up" time. Thank you for all the kind messages that came with the awards. They mean more than the awards themselves. It feels like you're telling my manager (reddit) that I'm doing a good job.I work at a towing company, sometimes when people call in with damage claims complaints etc. we just mute the call and listen for a minute or two, usually someone slips up to a friend what ACTUALLY happened and we just blow them off/ give them the run around from there.
Most calling services listen in while your on hold for training. So mute your side if your going to say something you wouldn’t want the person you trying get a hold of to know.A 'C+' worker becomes an 'A-' with the right attitude. Honestly, in many jobs you could practically skate by just being a delight to your co-workers. This motivates me like nothing else. When I am NOT in the mood for something (eg buying milk, stacking the dishwasher, bathing the dog) I just think "do it for future OP" and it works every time. It also gives you a little "Ima be my own hero!" feeling.

Then later on, when you benefit from that chore (eg drink that morning coffee, have clean dishes, snuffle your dog's clean lil head) PLEASE PRACTICE GRATITUDE. Just a "thanks, Past Me!" goes such a long way to make you feel loved and like it was totally worth it.

You will be stuck with yourself for the entirety of your existance. Be your best mate. Xx

Edit: Aw shucks, my first award! Thank you, I hope something magical happens to you today!

Edit 2: y'all are amazing. For those procrastinators saying they are the opposite and leave all the worst things for "future you" - sometimes present me needs a break man! Future You might have to show some compassion and understanding. Delegate with love, sometimes go halves in the chore, maybe get Future You a snack for when it's done. Be there for each other 😊"I have tinnitus and it is high pitched synthesiser and it's all the time. The rest of my life. I am a former 0311 marine (infantry). Open your mouth if you see a shockwave and cover your ears. Also turn away" — u/toolfan73

Comment about the explosion that happened on Beirut, Lebanon. Stay safe everyone!

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

**More LPTs from the comments:**

"And step away from the window asap. Stop filming and hide!" — u/angeAnonyme

&#x200B;

"They tought me in the army to be on my elbows and knees, facing away from the explosion, abdomen not touching the ground, put your thumbs in your ears, your fingers over your eyes, and open your mouth.

It is to prevent intestinal, ear, and lung damage caused by explosives, oh and to prevent your eyes from leaving the sockets." — u/xyrt123https://old.reddit.com/Doesn't matter what happened that day or who you/they are, treat bed time like a separate universe where nothing even remotely bad or negative exists or happened, especially if you're not the best with kids. Dump everything you have into bed time, stories, I love yous, tuck ins, everything and don't let any negativity from you, them, videogames, or anything slip in. Bed time is unique as it's their reset button for the next day and is huge in their development as it's the precursor for sleep which is vital emotionally, physically, mentally, spiritually, everything. It's their only true alone time even if they don't remember the dreams. If you can only be nice at one point in the day for some reason, make it bed time.



Edit1: Woow holy moly thanks everyone, warms my heart reading the stories and hearing the gratitude. Glad it's helping some people! Love you all, everyone gove yourself a hug for me please. :) <3

Edit2: Also thankyou very much for the awards! They're the first ones I've ever gotten c':

Edit3: I love you all, sorry I can't reply to every comment haha but I'm getting to what I can. Thankyou all again for sharing your stories and everything! <3It doesn't matter why they've requested it but there's a good chance that it's for your own dogs safety.

Perhaps the person is scared of dogs.

Maybe they're with a child who is scared of dogs.

They might have a dog on a lead who is dog aggressive or scared of other dogs.

There could be machinery that's dangerous for your dog to be around.

They might have livestock with them.

They might have spotted other wildlife that could either cause harm to or be harmed by your dog.

But it doesn't matter. Honour the request and call your dog back, then if you're curious, you can ask why or what's happening. If you don't take heed of the warning and your dog gets injured then it's your fault. If your dog is improperly trained and you *can't* call your dog back then A) it's again your fault if it gets injured and B) it has no business being off lead.I actually judge the potential of the candidate by how they format their resume (typos? grammar? formatting? style?). If you format it as a PDF, I see your resume how you want me to see it. If you have it as a Word document, margins, fonts, etc may be lost or adjusted when I open it.

Ensure you show me your best self by converting it to a PDF.

And please... proof read it. Give it to a friend or family member to proof read it thoroughly. I will likely not recommend you for interviewing if you have poor grammar or obvious typos. I assume you are providing me a sample of your work when I look at your resume. It shows either that you don't care or aren't detail oriented when you have typos and I assume I can expect the same if I hire you.

Edit: There is a lot of conversation about Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS) and how they can vomit on PDFs. So, please be aware of this when submitting to systems that may utilize this.Edit: “Most likely backfire on you” damn auto correctIf you plan to party, have a planned out ride or safe way to sleep it off.

I'm no saint, I've spent more than a few evenings sleeping in my car to sober up.

If you plan to ever sleep in your car, have a blanket and a few insulating jackets handy. Also, a beanie is great to block out the light and some noise.

When you wake up, drink water and get out of your car to walk around for a second to make sure your equilibrium has entirely returned. If it has, you can safely drive home.

**Edit: I don't support Uber or Lyft explicitly, i just want a safer New Years.**

Many are saying cabs can be cheaper on holidays, and considering these price surges from the ride sharing apps.. Uber and Lyft should instead be offering discounts, if anything, on nights like this.

That being said, please still tip well, it's your driver's holiday too.

It's also really endearing to hear about Coors' and AAA Insurance's free ride services for tonight. All these programs I'd be oblivious to without your comments. Thank you all, please take care.

**Edit 2:** For all those saying this post is common sense, yes, "don't drink and drive" is common sense. Although not common enough imo.

However, perciving the perspective that an even an $800 Lyft could cost less than a DUI, (I'm hoping) could possibly make at least one person think twice before deciding to write off the safer options of getting home tonight.During the summer my house gets filled up with flies because my kids are always running in and out of the house. So I carry a spray bottle around with me. The minute I see a fly in my peripheral vision or if it lands on something I spray it. The fly can’t see the water coming the way it would see my hand or a flyswatter coming. Once it gets wet it’s wings don’t work anymore and eventually it will fall. That’s when you squish it. Works every time.Credit goes to my mom for teaching me this one. Once you start blabbing the cops will write down things you say. Even one slip up or misspoken word can now be used as testimony against you. Innocent people go to jail all the time because of misspoken statements. Prosecutors can and will ignore all the stuff you say that doesn’t help them prosecute you. They can and will use anything that helps them prosecute you even if it is cherry picked from the many things you say. There is zero benefit to you talking since your statements to police can’t be used in your defense.
Sometimes cops can’t remember everything you say in the moment so they write it down later. Now not only do you have the problem of you misspeaking, but you have the possibility that the cop misheard or misinterprets what you said. Since cops are expert witnesses, their testimony is given extra weight in the court room. Go in peace and remain silent.

This is a generally good guideline but of course every situation calls for observation and assessment to determine the best course of action. Also don’t get arrested and this won’t be a problem.~  Throw them in your gym bag and you can prevent bacteria or mold from growing. It also gets rid of nasty odors.

~  Put some of these in your toolbox — they will keep your tools free of rust.

~  You can preserve your old photos and books using them.

~ For photographers: Put some pockets in camera bag 

~ Forget about rice, put a wet phone or other electronic devices in silica.

~ They can help keep your makeup bag fresh. Also put them in with your jewelry so it won't tarnish as quickly.

~ If you ever have to pack moist clothes, especially when you are on holiday, just put some of these packets into the luggage.

~  You’ll never have to wait for your windshield to clear up in the mornings again. Just put few silica sachets under your windshield. They will absorb the moisture, leaving your windshield clear.

~ Keep Dry Goods Dry -  it can help keep foods like dried herbs, bread crumbs, crackers, and anything else that should be kept as crispy as possible from getting soggy. So, you can put some silica gel bags in the food wardrobe

~ Keeps the razor blades-sharp edges from rusting and dulling very well.

**Silica gel is non-toxic, still they are not edible! Also make sure you keep it away from children and animals!**It’s also going to help build skills in communicating things clearly, precisely and in a way anybody can understand. You’ll also be amazed how many times writing something out instructionally can lead you to think “wait, why do we do it like that?!” - identifying opportunities for improvement.

Edit - wow, lots of comments - both positive and negative. For some extra help / elucidation:

-	I found this very helpful when I was starting my career. The biggest part not being the sharing of knowledge, but the act of setting it out “on paper” to better see where things need to change, where I didn’t know all I could know, and where others may struggle in the future.
-	I am indeed now a director. Our company is quite small, but we have had engineers come and go and move on to amazing things, both internally and externally. It’s those who communicated and shared knowledge who moved the furthest; I can honestly say my proudest achievement is knowing some of my employees are now in amazing roles in other firms. As a manager, it’s a sign that you gave them the right challenge, the opportunity to grow, and the confidence to see they can do more. I’m never sad to see someone go elsewhere if it’s because they’ve found a better opportunity - it means you were a crucial part of them making a success for themselves.
-	Most importantly, where I’m from, there are employment laws in place to ensure if someone is fired because they’ve been forced to “work themselves out of a job” then they can sue for constructive dismissal. I know some managers look for ways around this, but generally here it’s not a common motif. As such, I do agree that if you’re in a country like India, China, USA, where some of these protections and freedoms aren’t so readily available, it is better to tread with caution in terms of sharing information. In others, like Germany, UK, most of Scandinavia, the culture is very different, and going above and beyond to communicate and help others can be well received.

But yes, as with anything - this has been an experience I’ve personally found valuable and looking from the other side can see why, but always think about how it applies to your situation. I guess as a second tip - if you’re working for a company where you feel the management are always trying to find ways to screw you over, maybe it’s time to find a new company to work for...I read this in the book "Moody Bitches" by Julie Holland, if that's relevant. 

Edit: I absolutely support people expressing emotion in healthy ways, and I encourage all people to cry when they need to, in whatever context. That's up to an individual person to decide. I just wanted to clarify that this advice is directed at people who have made the decision to hold off on crying until another time, for whatever personal reason, not to discourage people from crying.Obligatory reactive LPT from someone who just planned a trip to Joshua Tree during the wrong moon cycle.Edit: this goes for really any drug. Tell your doctor. They won't dob you in, they just need to know to help you best.Inspired by this thread https://www.reddit.com/r/AskUK/comments/o6w2d7/my_microphone_was_accidentally_on_and_i_called_my/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmfI am sick and tired of the horror stories I hear of men and women trapped in crappy relationships and friendships, too afraid to speak out and defend themselves because the other person is severely depressed and “too fragile” for criticism. But then that same person will be treating the people around them like absolute shit on a daily basis, then playing the victim when confronted.

People who do this and outright refuse help, do not deserve your time and effort because they have chosen to be a martyr. All they will do is drag you down like an energy vampire and you do not need that kind of negativity in your life.Edit: I posted at lunch and just got home from school to find this. This is the most polarized comment section I have ever seen. I'm so sorryOur 2 senior cats died a few months apart during the quarantine.  The 1st had cancer.  And we extended his life by 1 year through chemo and monthly vet visits.  This included an endoscopy, and being poked and prodded by needles every few weeks.  He was skinny, vomited often, and had no energy.  But we thought it was okay because his loving personality was still there.  He died gasping, not being able to breathe.  **Immediate** regrets.

Our 2nd cat had kidney failure.  Daily IV fluids at home, pills twice per day.  Became super skinny.  She developed pancreatitis which is apparently (to humans) so painful that people are hospitalised as the only treatment.  We did not know until it became very obvious.  Ran her to the vet.  Figured she'd be back in a week and we can keep giving her IV's to extend her life at home.

She died gasping at the vet.  We made it just in time to say goodbye (vet called, drove there at 4am, held her as she passed).

It took 2 lessons, but now I know that **extending a pet's life by extraordinary means is selfish on our part, when they have a mid to late stage terminal illness**.  We just want more time with them.  But we may be causing them pain without realizing it.  

If I could go back in time, I would have called the vet to our home so our cats could pass peacefully here, with no pain, and no fear.  Their lives would have been slightly shorter by a few months.  But if I have to suffer pain and invasive medical procedures for the last year of my life...  I would rather not live that year.In the business world we should all be having conversations, however in my experience this is very rarely the case, mostly it is arguments. So how do you change this? The first step is to point out the above. Ultimately this entire situation is caused by the ego, a universal variable most managers never take into account. Try to separate yourself from your idea and present it in a way that is purely beneficial to the company, if you do this enough times your ego will eventually be rewarded.

Edit: Agrument...I know...believe me when I say it is irritating me more than it could possibly irritate you :)THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE.

TL/DR:  Don’t AskIt gives the median income by region for many jobs. How much education you need (college, training, certs). How many jobs in the US there are, as well as projected growth. I've used it to negotiate for raises. It is seriously an amazing tool. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/I know this might not be the greatest life tip of all but this is something I realized over the last couple of days. By simply being there, these friends are motivated to get back in shape and make an effort. Going first and imposing a strong rhythm will make them feel terrible about their stamina or global physical aptitudes and have a deterrent effect that might stop them from coming again. Stay behind, walk at their pace, pause when they do and humor them if they feel tired. Acknowledge the difficulty of the effort (don’t overdo it). I feel like this can go a long way in keeping them motivated to work out and improve their overall stamina and physical shape.

Edit : thanks to all for the support, awards, personal stories and debates !The difference those 3 small changes make in terms of moisture and texture is amazing. Turn that $2 box mix into a $100 professional bakery dupe and no one but you has to know.

Edit: since this has blown up beyond anything I could have expected, I feel the need to address a couple of things. There are about 1000 of you screaming "just make it from scratch!" and y'all are missing the point. Whether you love it or hate it, box cake mix is a thing, and they're extremely popular. Millions of people use them all the time. They use them because they're easy, inexpensive, and accessible. There are 8 billion people on this planet and not everyone knows how to bake. Not everyone wants to learn, or can even afford to. And that's ok. But for a lot of people, box cake mix is a great jumping off point. All I did was mention a couple of easy things to improve on that that people might not know *because maybe no one had told them before now.* Some of y'all are getting awful snobby about cheap cake and it's not a good look. 

Second, a bunch of people have suggested other things to jazz up cake mix, from instant pudding and applesauce to coffee and even soda. And you know what? That's fantastic! If you have something that makes baking easier or makes a cake that you think is delicious, then do it! You bake that cake! Baking should be enjoyable, and if it's delicious then why does it matter how you get there? Everyone has to start somewhere so play around with it, experiment, learn what you like, and what works for you. Have fun with it. It's just cake.And having people quit.

😗

👉👈

🦵 🦵It may cost up to 4x the cost... so, a dollar, but they usually have 2-4 different flavor packages, and are generally a superior product.

EDIT: thank you everyone for the flair and awards. And for the haters, please understand that people don’t know about things they have never experienced, and growing up black in rural Georgia,  I never went to an Asian supermarket, I didn’t even know such markets existed until I was a young man. As an adult, it never occurred to me to go to one in the first place. Maybe don’t shame people for not knowing things about cross cultural experiences. Go try something new!I ended up in ER 3 weeks ago with AFib -- for 6 hours. I had my phone, but no power cord. My husband was in our car in the parking lot. The ER had no power cords. Not only was I alone in a very scary situation, but I watched with despair as my battery drained towards zero. Luckily, the battery lasted until they admitted me, then the floor nurses helped me by charging it at the nurse’s station.
UPDATE: Wow!!! THANK YOU EVERYONE! I did not expect this to blow up. I’m glad I can help others avoid a situation that makes a scary situation worse.
CLARIFICATION: I did not know I was going to be in ER. I went to Urgent Care to get a short treatment/antibiotic. I was shocked, and unprepared, when they told me I had heart failure and they me immediately to the ER. Upon getting out of the car at the ER, I grabbed the USB power cord we keep in the center console. There was no waiting room (due to Covid?) - just a glassed in reception area. They took one look at the EKG from Urgent Care, and took me to an ER treatment room and started working on me. At that point I was tethered to the bed with IVs, so even a short 110v power cord would have been a problem. I asked the nurses, repeatedly, for help charging my phone. They told me they had no power cords, and no USB outlets.
GOOD NEWS: I'm fine now. During the 3 days in the hospital, they were able to normalize my heart rhythms, and put me on the appropriate meds.For more information, check out ReverseTransfer.org(https://reversetransfer.org/)Ask for permission before recording the lectures.
Edit 1: These worked for me in engineering graduate school and my professors were amazing. Don't beat me up for the "any class" please. These are not universally valid.Edit: I figured this would get a bit if traction. It looks like I hit a nerve because there's a lot of updooting and commenting going on. A few bullets after reviewing many of the comments:

- Folks still have a sense of humor in a climate where it can be easily lost. Keep it up!
- Lots of concerns that this LPT is "preaching to the choir." I share those concerns.
- The goals of increasing the level of amity and honesty in the public sphere seem largely unattainable in light of how "they" consistently pervert and corrupt information.

I get it. This is too big an issue for us to address on our own. We are, however, not alone. So far it looks like at least 40k people kind of agree and nearly 1,000 care enough to comment. We are not alone. 

It gets tiring. I get frustrated when the same people do the same stupid shit. Lots of people (most?) will not change their behavior. However my hope when I respond by providing alternate sources is not necessarily that I will open op's mind to the glorious world of honesty. My hope is more that people watching the exchange will rethink their opinions. Lots of people follow conversations. Hopefully some of them will question the original post/comment. Shoot, they may even start researching on their own. 

I also feel some satisfaction when I see that my challenge to a post killed the thread. Minds may not have been changed, but at least I plugged one leak.If someone asks later or you are in conversation with individuals - that's the time to give your reason.Wow what a response. And just to clarify...I'm not saying people don't consider their commute. I'm just saying too many people don't think about the effect it has on their day. Everyone is different and what works for you might not work for someone else. Thanks for all the love, and the hate, on this one.Hey, everyone. HR worker here, and I hope everyone can benefit from this.

By definition, Human Resources is there to protect the company from lawsuits, not to help the employees. 

As much as we HR people want to help you and protect the worker, it'll cost us our jobs if we put you over the company. So the best tip I can give you is this:

Don't ask HR for help. Make them.

Get evidence. Document interactions. Get things in writing. The more you have as proof of whatever your complaint is, the more HR will have to help you. If you show them you have proof that will support a lawsuit, they will do everything they can to make sure it doesn't need to happen, and the easier it is for us to justify it to our bosses. 

Help us help you.

Edit: Please stop calling me a heartless, soulless monster who will fire people to keep my job. I *lost* my last job because I stood up for my colleagues. All I'm trying to say is that, in this economy, your HR rep can't always afford to stake their job for you, and you shouldn't go into an HR meeting expecting them to.**Edit - A correction to the title: it’s a** ***wholesale*** **price of $100 or more and they have to either replace it with a like or better product OR buy it back from you.**

**Edit 2** \- wow this blew up. Edited my point about this being ethical as others have correctly commented that just because something is legal does not mean it's ethical. Also, If you are a lawyer or similar and find a factual error with any of this, please let me know and I'll update the post with your advice. Particularly curious as to how best to enforce and how much they'd have to refund if they no longer make parts in the case of something like a cell phone or other electronics.

Descriptive article here: [https://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-lazarus-20151211-column.html](https://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-lazarus-20151211-column.html)

Section of the law itself:

>(b) Every manufacturer making an express warranty with respect to an electronic or appliance product described in subdivision (h), (i), (j), or (k) of Section 9801 of the Business and Professions Code, with a wholesale price to the retailer of one hundred dollars ($100) or more, shall make available to service and repair facilities sufficient service literature and functional parts to effect the repair of a product for at least seven years after the date a product model or type was manufactured, regardless of whether the seven-year period exceeds the warranty period for the product [https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes\_displayText.xhtml?lawCode=CIV&division=3.&title=1.7.&part=4.&chapter=1.&article=3](https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displayText.xhtml?lawCode=CIV&division=3.&title=1.7.&part=4.&chapter=1.&article=3).

For example, it's highly unlikely that cell phone manufacturers will make original batteries available for purchase 7 years after the last phone of that model was manufactured. Given all their talk about how "NoN OrIgInAl BaTtErIeS WiLl SeT yOuR hOuSe On FiRe AnD kIlL bAbY sEaLs", let's turn the tables on 'em. Many high-end smartphones cost several hundred dollars or more: you could get a nice return for a couple of hours of work. (**Edit 3**: [not sure if this applies to cell phones](https://www.reddit.com/r/LifeProTips/comments/p9nz0l/lpt_if_you_live_in_california_manufacturers_of/h9zy0j5?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3), thanks u/PM_Me_Your_Deviance for pointing this out) This could apply to all sorts of things, including robot vacuums, laptops, TVs, etc.

This is both legal (it's literally the law) and ethical (we should be repairing products if they are otherwise still useful, not tossing them due to the manufacturer's planned obsolescence).

I'm posted this because the battery in my Samsung vacuum is failing. They used to sell the user-replaceable part separately for \~$90, now the only way to get it is to send it in for a $199 service + shipping. Fuck Samsung.4th of July 2009, I was stuck in the elevator at my apartment complex for over an hour with ~~5~~ (Edit: it was actually 7) other people and a tiny dog.  The apartment manager, through the intercom, assured us that maintenance were on their way.  Finally, we called 911 after one person started having a panic attack.  The fire department arrived and set us free within 10 minutes and they told us we should have called them right away.

The fire department has the means to enter a building and the tools to open the elevator.  Often times there is no maintenance team on site.  If they are, they usually do not have the tools to open an elevator and have to call in support off-site which may take a long time - especially on holidays or weekends.

TLDR: The Fire Department will get there WAY faster than the people on the other side of the elevator intercom.One of the hardest parts can be waiting for your feed to catch up. Even with an ad blocker, some social media will offer painful reminders of what you just lost.  After all, it is a huge industry. A few quick searches in all engines for your favorite animal in cute outfits with a "where to buy" so the algorithm is sure to pay attention- and before you know it, you've got your own traveling source of aww. **Note: this works even if you're not grieving and just want a less horrible ad experience online.***

Edit: spelling of Aww :)

Edit 2: HOLY LORD. I went outside to garden and came in to this. 15k! Front page! I was so afraid to post publicly about this, and the fact that my first outreach touched so many people in any way is genuinely healing me right now. Thank you so much, Reddit. With that, I'm pretty sure mods deleted/locked the post because I mentioned another dog-related sub in my text.  I had read the rules before posting and didn't know it was wrong.  I'm sorry and it's been removed.  

...

Hopefully this can get back up, but it seems hilariously appropriate for me to make a technical error on my first viral post when so many of you have reminded me of the technical solution of ad blockers for my original issue.  To clarify: I do have one installed on my pc, but I am not very tech-savvy and ads still pop up here and there (especially on mobile which I use predominantly.)  I suppose I could have done a better job of troubleshooting the problem technically... but when I had this idea and tried it, I genuinely found happiness seeing ads for puppies in raincoats instead of non-stop babies.  I still appreciate the advice, and will keep learning how to be better at both Reddit and the internet in general :)

But mostly... if this does get re-posted and anyone reads this... *thank you.* I feel like something beautiful just came from the saddest few days of my life. I know it's just internet karma, and I know it's not "real."  But it *is* made up of *real people*. And you very real strangers made this girl feel a whole lot better today.These muscles and joints are your foundation. Everyone likes to focus on their glamour muscles like shoulders, arms, and abs. While strengthening your abs and core is important, your future self will thank you for strengthening your foundation. 

I’m about to be graduate from medical school and I can’t even begin to describe how important it is to have a stable spine, hips, and knees. People in their 30’s, 40’s, 50’s, and up all complain of having constant back pain. Most of this isn’t caused by things are degenerative disorders (while that can most certainly be the case) but mostly due to a sedentary lifestyles leading weak muscles which further causes joint instability and increased disc and cartilage stress in those joints. 

I’ve seen so many elderly people come in with backs that look like question marks and people in wheelchairs due to severe osteoarthritis in their knees and hips. The best way to prevent this down the road is to strengthen the muscles around joints to give them stability and strengthen the bones themselves through weight lifting.  

The key is to just stay active and try to incorporate exercises or stretches that strengthen your back, hip, and knees. You don’t have to go out and try to deadlift or squat 350lbs. Rome wasn’t built in a day and neither will your muscles and joints. Sedentary? Start with a walk and gradually build from there. Kind of active? Hit the gym and train these muscles. Start slow and light and get used to the movement. Then slowly increase weights. FOCUS ON FORM NOT AMOUNT OF WEIGHT.  Don’t have a workout partner to check your form? Ask one of those jacked dudes at the gym. They have been some of the nicest people I’ve met and are always helpful. (I’m scrawny as hell so it was intimidating the first time not going to lie) Just get moving.

If you’re not sure what exercises to do, try to find physical therapist run websites that recommend exercises for certain muscle groups. The goal goal isn’t to  like Hercules. It’s to invest in your future quality of life. 

TLDR: Exercise, stretch, and strengthen your back, knees, and hips. Start slow and don’t be afraid to ask for help. Your future self will thank you for it. Remember the goal isn’t to look like Arnold in his prime. The goal is to be healthy and active and live a quality life.I'll add that if you are a family member, or very close friend you can obviously just ASK. But if you're not, it can be hard for the grieving person to know what, exactly, you're willing to do, so let them know the sorts of things you can do.

This lets the suffering person understand the ways you're willing to help, and gives them some prompts on what they need.