**UPDATED**

Tl;dr (SPOILERS) landlord gives us 7 days to vacate our leisure business from the building, he thinks we cant empty the business during lockdown, and proceeds to advertise OUR equipment for sale to our competition. We sell everything in 7 days and destroy the rest. Enjoy no rent and the loss of your potential buyers.

I work for a leisure company, think soft play, indoor soccer, laser tag (can't be specific) Prior to lockdown, Managers and the big bosses were negotiating the renewal of the lease on one of our parks. Things were going mostly smoothly, however, the landlords were difficult to contact.

Then 2020’s shit hit the fan.

All of our sites were closed, and everything was thrown into a mess. Negotiations began to slip down the priority list; nobody thought the landlord would push an eviction for an expired lease during this period. Especially with it still getting rent, despite the sites closure, and the closure of every business and restaurant in the immediate area. We were wrong.

A few days ago we received a letter saying we had 7 days to leave the premises and take everything with us. We are reminded that anything left in the building after 7 days will become the landlord's property! (that line is very important).

Now a lot of construction goes into installing our equipment into a new building, which makes emptying one even harder. Add a lockdown, with no staff and most businesses shut, it meant that saving much of our assets would prove to be extremely difficult.

To lose a profitable site and all of its assets is definitely a blow to our company. But here is where it gets worse;

A few days into our 7-day eviction, we find out that the landlord has been advertising our park to our competitors. But he isn’t offering just the building, he is offering ALL OF OUR STUFF PRE INSTALLED. “Ready to go, just needs re-branding.” The landlord has evicted us from the property in an attempt to increase rent and make a solid profit from our equipment installed because he thinks we won't be able to empty the park.

We were furious.

And here is where the malicious compliance came in, we were told we had 7 days to move everything we owned out of the property. so that's what we did. Local businesses from all around offered up free space to store our things, a few people came back out of lockdown and they all spent the rest of the week removing, selling or destroying everything that was related to us. We didn't even leave light fittings.

In every other sight vacation we have seen, we always end up leaving thousands of $$ worth of disco lights in the ceilings because they’re too hard to get. We leave most the construction in, as well as things like the bars and kitchens that all stay intact (recognisable as what they once were) but not this building.

We ripped up the flooring we installed, tore down the walls that were not part of the original structure (Wooden walls to divide up the space) ripped apart our manager's offices and removed all artwork, and lockers.

The landlord now has every new deal he has been making dead in the water, a large renovation bill to install new flooring etc. (or a company willing to do it themselves like we were).

Lockdown has been extended another 4 weeks, so he has at least another 4 weeks without rent (we were paying) and won't have any potential buyers.

Silver lining: The assets we got out of the site (fridges, tv’s, equipment, food, tables) have all been sold, and the lack of rent and additional income has helped the business and paid staff wages.

UPDATE

Hi Everyone! I'm so sorry for how long an update has taken, I was waiting for things to unfold.

Here is what happened next:

We handed in the keys and it was probably the quickest handover we’ve ever had. The landlord Cleary didn’t want to make any kind of conversation and there was definitely an elephant in the room, but he definitely said NOTHING about the lack of our equipment.

Complications did arise when we went to get back various deposits, But he had no case to withhold the deposits from us as the building was in excellent shape. (we had conducted much of the maintenance work ourselves, so the building was in a significantly better condition than we found it, (we also cleaned up 99% of the rubbish and dirt from our demolition crusade so he couldn't bill us for cleaning) )

A very minor bit of pressing from our legal team meant that we received everything owed back in full!

The building is still Vacant and as of yet we don't know of any potential buyers.

At this moment in time our company is still standing despite the pandemic closures and lack of business, staff are all still employed and doing well!

A huge thanks again for everyone who took the time to read this and to those who were dedicated enough to remind me for updates :D Big shoutout as-well to the amazing people who gave awards, I really really appreciate it and I’ve been making sure to pass on the good karma :)I originally posted this as a comment on another thread, but realized it needed its own limelight. 

I worked at a company that gave out exorbitant amounts of vacation. Anyone who worked there for 25+ years received 8 weeks of vacation and 2 weeks of personal time. This was a family owned company, but rather large. We ran 3 shifts totaling 250+ people. 

Enter Jimmy. Jimmy was a grissled old man, he started at the company when he was just 20, now he was 63 and gave absolutely zero shits. Jimmy also knew how to make a specific part for our product, him and one other higher up in the office. 

One day the plant owner comes out and announces he's selling to a corporation. He's older and ready to retire, he promises that there will be very little change and wishes us all well. 

The new company comes in and immediately goes after many of the great benefits we had. The first thing they do is cut everyone's max vacation down to 4 weeks, and do completely away with personal time. Anyone who's maxed out had until December 31st of that year to use it up, and they wouldn't pay it out. They then go into the office and clean house, firing anyone who's close to retirement. Including Jimmy's back up. 

But they also do away with one very important rule. You no longer have to get vacation approved, you can just call in and take it.

Jimmy is pissed, and they know it. They realize he's the only one in the building that can do his job now. So they hire a new kid for him to train, most likely to permanently replace Jimmy. So Jimmy does what anyone would do. He calls in the first training day for the new hire, and lets us know he's going to use all of his PTO at once, and promptly takes 10 weeks off. 

We had a back stock of parts he had made, so it wasn't too unnerving. But for 10 weeks, Jimmy went and applied to other jobs, found one, and started. 

Fast forward 10 weeks, Its the day Jimmy is supposed to return. He doesn't. For two days they try calling him, and even go to his house. He's nowhere to be found. Finally on day three he calls and resigns, and they lose their shit. The parts he makes are specialized and patented by the original founder, you can't just hire someone off the street to make them. What eventually happened was they had to contract the original owner to come in a teach some new hires how to make them, and when he found out what all they had done it pissed him off. The last I heard he charged them a 7 figure contract to teach them how to produce the parts, and they had to pony up, or close down.

Moral of the story, don't fuck with people's vacation time.

Edit: Jimmy made and electronic control module that was sealed and stayed fixed in a poured unit made of a two part epoxy.

Edit #2: Jimmy didn't exactly "Miss out" on a seven figure contract and had zero chance to take one. He left, said fuck em and moved on. When they contacted the previous owner and explained the situation it was basically a "you need my help? It'll cost 1mil." Type of conversation.

Final update: Thank you everyone for all of the attention this received! I had no idea this would blow up like this. I have immediate family working with the company still, so if I hear of anymore rumblings I'll fill you all in. Also, I worked here for four years. I have a few other Jimmy stories I may post at other times on the appropriate reddits. Thank you all again!I posted this but it got removed and I think it was maybe because I didn't make the malicious compliance clear enough , so I'm going to try again and make it extra clear.

When  I was in my early twenties, I worked at a supermarket. I should note  that I was a pretty reliable employee. I was never late, in fact, I  often got in early, and I rarely called in sick. At the time this  happened, I had not called in sick for 9 months, and even then, the  manager had sent me home.

I had  been up all night, swinging between burning hot and freezing cold so I  was obviously feverish, and I had been throwing up 'at both ends' shall  we say. At one point at  about 2 am I was on the toilet, with my head in the sink, utterly miserable. I must have passed out  because the next thing I knew I was lifting my head off the sink and it  was 7 am. I was due to start work at 12 that day but that obviously  wasn't going to happen.

So I  called up the manager. Let's call the manager Steve. Steve was known for  being a real a-hole. He never believed anyone who called in sick  except his best buds (usually other managers, never lowly staff), but often called in sick himself (a lot of the time we knew it was because he was hungover and not actually sick). The conversation went as  follows:

Me: Hey Steve, sorry, I can't come in. I'm sick.

Steve: With what?

Me: I don't know. I think it might be the flu. I've been up all night being sick, and I have a fever.

Steve: Don't be stupid. If you had the flu you'd be completely knocked out. I need you in. Come in or you're fired.

Me: I can't. I just told you I can't stop vomiting. I passed out.

Steve: (growling angrily) Either come in or bring a doctors note, or you're fired!

In  the UK, you are legally allowed to self-certify for 5 days. This means  you can tell your employer you are sick and you do not need a doctors  note. If you're sick for more than 5 days, you then need a note. It is  also illegal to demand a doctors note during the self-certify period.

I  knew this, but I was terrified. This was during the recession. I  couldn't afford to lose my job. So I got myself dressed. Almost passed  out trying to do so. Then trudged to the doctors some 25 minutes walk  away.

I end up sitting in the  doctor's office for a little over an hour, which for walk-in was pretty  good. I get in to see the doctor and she is furious at me for coming in.  You're not supposed to come to the doctors when you have a cold or flue, and of  course I knew I should be able to self certify. She told me as such,  saying I shouldn't be here and should have stayed at home.

I  then explained what had happened with Steve and how he had threatened  to fire me over this and I couldn't afford to lose my job - I was  struggling as it was. My doctor  turned her anger towards my manager. She asked if I got sick pay from the company, and I said yes.

"He wants a sick note does he," the doctor says. "Okay. I'll give him a sick note.

Now, my manager just wanted a note confirming I was sick, but instead my doctor wrote something along the lines of this:

'\[My Name\]  has come to the surgery because \[manager name\] has insisted she come in,  in spite of the fact that this is illegal and all employees are allowed  to self certify.  Due to being forced to make this unnecessary and  highly dangerous trip when the patient is ill, has a fever of 39°C, and  almost passed out in the waiting room, I am signing \[my name\] off for  two full weeks to recover. Had \[my name\] been allowed to self certify as  is the law, they might only have needed a few days, but due to  straining themselves, they now require two full weeks. They are not to  be permitted to work until \[date 2 weeks later\]'

The doctor said she would have signed me off longer but this was the longest she could do without requiring further evidence. So basically, instead of just being off for a few days, I was now signed off for a full two weeks, and I'd be paid for it.

I went to my place of work, at which point one of the duty managers  saw me and asked me what the heck I was doing here, go home, I was  obviously very unwell. I explained what happened. They agreed to help me  downstairs to Steve's office and went with me inside.

I handed Steve the note. He looked worried and tried to say 'I wasn't being serious about firing you.'

Well gee, when you angrily growled it down the phone it sure sounded like it.

The  duty manager then declared that they were going to drive me home. It  was clear Steve wanted to argue but had the sense to know he shouldn't.

The  duty manager then drove me home, made sure I was okay, then went back  to work where they informed our union rep of what had happened.

Steve  had a disciplinary hearing where he was given a severe reprimand and a  warning. Steve tried to argue he never said I'd be fired and I was lying  and just decided to go to the doctors, but the duty manager said they  heard him admit to it when he said to me that he really didn't mean it.

I  felt better after a few days, and enjoyed my two weeks off, fully paid,  and enjoyed the nice weather we had. Meanwhile, Steve was forced to  work overtime because we were short-staffed. So thanks to the doctor,  instead of being off for a few days, I ended up getting a nice two week  paid vacation, and Steve was given a final warning, all because he insisted I get a doctors note.

TL;DR: Manager demands I get a doctor's note or I'm fired, so the doctor signs me off sick for two weeks instead of 2 days to teach him a lesson.

Edit: To clarify the whole 'you're not supposed to come in when you are ill'. I should have been more specific - the rule is you're not supposed to come in when you have a cold or flu. The reason is there's nothing a doctor can really do except recommend you take over the counter cold and flu meds. So it is recommended that you do not come in if you have a cold or flu and instead take meds at home or pick some up at the pharmacy instead of risking infecting those waiting in the surgery. Even then, it's not a hard core rule, more a common courtesy asked of people. If you really want to, you absolutely can. This is an everyday thing.

I was bored and frustrated, so I decided to volunteer at 3:30 a.m. to call this same manager to ask if they needed extra help. He got super-pissed and tried to write me up for it. I showed the GM the time stamps of the calls I had recieved.

I dont get calls anymore.As part of the plan to return to office post covid, my company has done a lot of re-designating of who can permanently work from home, who can hybrid, etc. I really wanted to work from home full time. I hate the office with a burning passion - it's distracting, it's a long commute, there's no benefit to being there, so on and so forth. I'd just rather be at home.

Well when we thought May was going to be go back to office time they started giving out the new designations. I got designated as in office full time. It made no sense to me. I work on a team of 8 people and each of us is in a different office somewhere in the country. I've literally never been to an in person meeting or needed to do in person work in 3 years at this company. Every single other person on my team got designated to work from home. So I brought it up with my boss and asked to work from home. When I started at this company and lived elsewhere I got to work from home for 4 months before I moved and the past 14 months during covid have been at home, so 18/36 months at the company have been WFH. What I was told is that I go idle too often in chat to trust to work from home. 

Basically we have a company wide IM system that shows you as available, idle, or in a meeting. If you don't touch your keyboard for 5 minutes you show as idle. So they've decided to use this as a measure for who is working and who isn't. The thing is, like many people in many types of jobs, I don't have shit to do for a full 8 hours every single day. The amount of work I have to do on a typical day takes 3-5 hours of actual attention. There simply isn't something to do ALL the time. My performance numbers actually went up working from home, by all objective KPI numbers I'm a better worker at home. In fact, in the KPIs that I don't flat out lead the team in, I come in second. There isn't work to do that I'm neglecting or procrastinating, when something comes up I simply do it until it's done or until I can't do anymore due to waiting on someone else then stop. And I've done that method long enough that my work queue stays empty because I worked to get my queue down to the point where when something comes up I can immediately address it and be done with it. But because I have other ways to spend my time in down time instead of messing around online at my cube pretending to be working meaning I show idle more often, I'm a worse worker apparently. I was told if it weren't for that they would let me work at home.

So I wrote a 6 line powershell script that virtually inputs the period key every 4 minutes that starts running every day at 8am and stops at 5pm. So now I literally never go idle. I do the same amount of work and still read books, watch tv, and play video games on the side. But I have a shiny green check next to my name all day.

Because of covid complications they eventually said no going back until after labor day. I just had a meeting with my boss and he said over this time they've noticed I go idle a lot less than I used to so they're changing my designation to work from home, all because of a little icon in some software. This concludes my TED talk on why low to middle level managers are the dumbest, most useless do-nothing positions in all of corporate America

EDIT: I do not need to be told to buy a mouse jiggler for the 30th time. I'm aware of what they are. This cost me no money and achieves the same thing. Why would I pay to achieve an effect I've already achieved for free?

EDIT 2: A lot of people are understandably asking for the script:

    $dummyshell = New-Object -com "Wscript.shell"
    $dummyshell.sendkeys(".")

That's the backbone of the whole thing. There's different ways to implement it with for loops or scheduled tasks or whatever, that parts up to you, but that's all the powershell needs at it's core to accomplish this. A lot of people have pointed out that sending Insert or F13 instead of period would be better so change that up if you want.

To all the people commenting that I'm a shitty employee and obviously trying to insult me over it: I wish I could make you feel just how little I care. To all the people implying a work day isn't valid if you aren't at 100% capacity from 8 - 5, keep it up, you truly are an ideal employee...*to them*. Enjoy the taste of leather, bootlickers

Edit 3: Some of y’all would be pissed as fuck if I explained the concept of firefighters to youGather round as I tell you the story of the time I got fired at the worst place I have ever worked.

From day one, it was a nightmare. There was 0 onboarding or training. I was simply given the log-in info for a couple of different websites and told to get to work. This company planned large conferences and I was in charge of speaker coordination. I was the only person in this role. The information solely resided with me.

Not a big deal, I say to myself. I'm good at thinking on my feet. I'll just ask questions when I need clarification on something. 

That turned out to be impossible. My manager's first language wasn't English. I'm all for learning new languages. I think it's a great skill to have and it takes a lot of work and being able to speak multiple languages is impressive. The problem was that her English was so poor that it was often very hard to understand what she was trying to say. 

I once asked if she had time to hop on a call and explain something to me and she responded with "No cranne. Self skills is a must. I am bird without head". It took me a few days to figure out that she was trying to say that things were hectic, she was running around like a chicken with it's head cut off, and she needed me to be self sufficent.

Regardless, I did my best in the position. Small mistakes happened here and there but overall all the speakers were very happy and felt well supported. I struggled on the communication with my manager, but I thought the company was happy with my work.

Until 4 months in when I was randomly pulled into a meeting with my manager, HR, and legal. 

Effective immediately I was fired. I asked why I was being fired and why this was the first I had heard of any problems. Why wasn't there a write up or a verbal warning?

My manager said it was because the ten minutes (I ran the analytics) it takes me to respond to an email was too slow. 

That was a bullshit reason and we all knew it. If you don't like me personally, fine but don't try and make this seem
 like I was a bad employee. To be honest, I was furious. 

We do the exit interview with HR and then she asks me to send over any documents I had (we worked on personal computers remotely) and describe where I was at in regards to our next event and our speakers. NDA's are really common in this field, I've signed one at every job I've ever worked. But this employer's NDA had a clause in it that worked to my advantage.

I said:

"As per my NDA, I am not to discuss intimate details or share documents relating to this position with any employer- past or future. Since this firing was effective immediately, you are now a former employer and I am bound by my NDA"

HR hemmed and hawed a little bit telling me that of course I could speak to them about it, this was about their event.

I pulled out my copy of the NDA (always save contracts) and pointed out the exact clause and said that it clearly stated that if I violated this NDA I would be sued, so no, I couldn't talk to them about the position.

HR turned to Legal and Legal pointed out that I was technically correct. They were a former employer and I was bound by my NDA

They fired me 17 days before the event. They didn't have time to start over from scratch. I still keep in contact with some of my coworkers and apparently the event was a shit show and manager nearly lost her job because of it. Over half the speakers pulled out once communication broke down. 

All because I ~tAKe ToO lONg tO ResPoND tO EMaILS~This was a long time ago but I remember it clearly. We moved in to a community with tight space in between our house and our neighbors, and we didn't like them being able to see into our kitchen. We put up a bunch of plants, costing thousands but my parents thought it would be worth it. A week later my parents awoke to the plants completely chopped down. My father was furious, and marched down to our neighbors house. He told my father the plants were on his property line, therefor he had total right to take them down. He warned that if anything were to go on his property again, he would report us to the authorities immediately.

Later that day my father called the company that put in the plants, and with the warranty we could have them replanted next week for no charge. We made sure there was no way it was on our neighbors property. However a few days later we caught him chopping them down at 2am. We called the police upon obstruction of property, and after a chat with my neighbor he decided to call a professional and mark his property line. My father agreed.

A few days later i got home to find orange tape in my neighbors yard. Apparently, his fence was 11 feet over our property line! We watched as he took down his fence, completely furious. Within the next month we were enjoying our new space and privacy in our backyard, and my neighbor ended up losing 1/4th of his backyard. My neighbor ended up having to pay almost 10k for the destruction of our property, and we got to plant our plants again.

Tl;dr My neighbor chopped down our plants because he claimed we were on his property, after calling a professional he lost 11 feet of his backyard and had to pay for destruction of property, and we got to keep our plants.Happened this morning. Even though I made a complete and full stop at a 4 way stop, I get pulled over by a police vehicle, lights flashing, the works. I turn my dash cam around to face me and whomever goes in front of the driver side window. 

I roll it down and ask "what seems to be the problem officer?" Officer looks at me the way one would look at a sticky piece of gum stuck to the bottom of one's shoe. "You didn't make a complete stop." he says. I adjust one of my hearing aids (lost part of my hearing due to being a touring session musician previously) and before I could speak, he firmly orders "Sir, take off your earphones when I'm talking to you!"

I take both hearing aids off and look at him. I can read lips a little but we're both masked so I can't understand what he's saying. I communicate in sign language simultaneously while speaking verbally "I'm deaf and I didn't understand what you just said. Can you communicate to me in ASL (American Sign Language) please. He points at my hearing aids that look like Apple Air Pods, motioning me to put them on. I respond "Yes officer, without those I can only communicate in ASL. Please instruct me in ASL and I will be compliant in every possible way".

He looks at the dashcam that's neatly pointed squarely at us and mumbles "For fuck's sake". He then motions for me to to go, giving me 2 thumbs up. Needless to say, I rolled up the window and drove away as fast as legally allowed.

Couldn't wipe the smile off my face all day, Lol.

Addendum: Whoa! 13K likes in a span of less than 2.5 hours. Thanks all! Don't worry, I'll update with a YouTube link as soon as I and a more gadget savvy nephew extract the footage. I will not be driving the car to preserve the video and to not risk getting it recorded over.

Cheers!"The new law is required as a result of legislation filed by State Rep. Brandon Reed, a Republican minister from Hodgenville. It said in part that beginning in the 2019-2020 school year, local boards shall require each public elementary and secondary school to display the national motto of the United States, “In God We Trust,” in a prominent location in the school."

"Fayette Superintendent Manny Caulk said Wednesday afternoon that in complying with the new law, “**all schools in our district have been provided a framed version of an enlarged copy of a $1 dollar bill to display in a prominent location**.”"

https://www.kentucky.com/news/local/education/article233993192.html[The long-awaited update.](https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/rj25hi/cancer_cameras_and_compliance_part_2_electric/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) (The mods have removed this update at the time I'm writing it, so hopefully the link will be working by the time you get to it).

Clickbaity article titles aside, it’s a long one. It happened two days ago and I’m still giddy. Enjoy!

All the below names are pseudonyms.

There are two important background things to know for the story:

1.) I was diagnosed with a rare ovarian cancer at the beginning of this year (I had surgery and some chemo and am mostly recovered now). I still have to go in for frequent testing and occasional monitoring. I am a private person to the extent that I have dated people for years without telling my parents, so you best believe random coworkers and bosses are unaware of my medical history. 

2.) I attend a university that has an ambassador program. Basically if you have a high enough GPA you are able to interview for the program and if you get in they pay for your tuition during the time you are an ambassador. In exchange you work 5 hours a week and work graduation/other events. I am one of these ambassadors. This is my story. *Law and Order sound effect*

—

My supervisor for the ambassador program, Ms. M, has spent the majority of our time together belittling me. As I sit here about to type about her, I find myself already exasperated thinking about reliving some of the details, so I will be short and sweet for both your sake and mine: she follows every rule to the letter and leaves no room for collaboration or discussion. 

As an example, we use Microsoft teams for communication, and she has us clock in and out in a group of 20 people by saying “I’m here” and “I’m leaving.” So every day you have to scroll through dozens of messages to find anything of import and listen to notification sounds every time someone so much as takes a lunch break. I suggested using the time clock function on teams and even offered to set it up for us, and was told that I was “deliberately undermining her position.” 

Another quick example is her vehemence when I told her I didn’t have any social media (to advertise the college). She was certain I was lying and went so far as to ask the other ambassadors to try and “find” me. 

They didn’t. There’s nothing to find. Crazy concept.

I’ve challenged her at a couple of junctures, but ultimately realized I was fighting a losing battle and I’d be better off keeping my head down. (*laughs in dramatic irony*)

Fast forward to four days ago (Friday): there’s a mandatory virtual event in three days (Monday) where the dean of the college would talk to the ambassadors, as well as live stream the event to the college’s website and YouTube page.

Ms. M sent out a message that I will copy and paste here (because the formatting is so dramatic that it makes me chuckle). “Students *MUST* have their cameras **ON** and phones *OFF*. **Repeat!!** Phones **OFF.** Cameras *ON*.” (Like c’mon lady, bold, caps, *or* italics. Your email almost gave me a stroke)

I follow up the same day: “Ms. M, unfortunately I will be at a doctor’s appointment at this time and will be unable to turn my camera on during the event.”

No response. 

I send another email to follow up. No response.

The day of the event rolls around. I direct message her through Microsoft teams ten minutes before. I see that she’s seen the message with a read receipt. Nothing.

Okay, video chat starts and several students join the session with their cameras on. Then the dean. He gets halfway through introducing himself and Ms. M interrupts him as he takes a brief pause and says “excuse me, could we please have ALL of the students turn their cameras on.”

I say nothing but put a quick message I already had typed in anticipation in the group chat “Ms. M I have a private situation that bars me from turning on my camera, I have contacted you individually.” 

Not but a few seconds after I send it, I get called out by name, and I respond audibly, “Ms. M I cannot turn on my camera at this time.” and she responds “expectations were clear and you were told *multiple* times about this; every other student here managed to do it and I expect the same out of you.”

Now, one of the cool things about having cancer is you become very familiar with the hospital staff, and if you’re lucky, they’re fun to talk to. During COVID my nurses were my tethers to sanity because no one could visit me while I had inpatient infusions. So I told one of my nurses, Amy, about this situation beforehand. She joked that if I was told to turn my camera on, I should really play up my illness. In any other situation I would’ve been entirely opposed, but sweet revenge was in sight (when I replay it in my head I imagine that anime fist-clenching thing when the protagonist resolves to get revenge). I set my laptop back a bit further from myself on my legs so you could see the entirety of me in my hospital regalia. 

Teams will display the person currently talking as the largest image in chat. Everyone had their audio off except me, the dean, and Ms. M, so when I turned my camera on I was displayed as the EKG loudly thrummed away (on max volume, thanks to Amy).

Silence. 

Me: “I asked Ms. M through email and teams if I could opt out of having my camera on, but she insisted.”

I waited a beat to see if anyone would say anything and then continued with my special vocal blend of melodramatic gratitude and illness-laden shakiness: “Virtual engagement is so important for this new era of learning. I can see why having the camera on is important, though I was hoping I might be granted an exception.”

Dean: “Ms. R, you are more than welcome to turn your camera off, I am so sorry for the misunderstanding.”

Me: “thank you so much for making a special exception for me. It’s been a difficult week but I feel grateful to be here.”

Then, two people leave the call. One was Ms. M and the other was Anthony, who is Ms. M’s boss!  I didn’t know he’d be there! Haven’t heard from either of them yet but I’m awaiting a follow up with anticipation.

I’m typing this from the hospital and feeling gratitude for a lot of things (‘tis the season, after all). I am here. I am alive. And above all, **this stupid disease won’t stop me from putting a bully in their goddamned place.**

TL;DR I am recovering from cancer and had to go in to be monitored for a separate but related condition. A supervisor for a school program insisted I turn on my camera for a virtual event that was live-streamed and when I turned my camera on, could see I was very much hospitalized. Hilarity ensues *cue sitcom music*


**Update** (this will not contain the juicy follow-up, just some clarifications):

So do you guys want an update? No matter how hard I try, I just can’t tell… 

A couple of clarifications:

-I don’t, at this time, want to sue her. I want her to be better.

-I am not in the “thick” of cancer right now. I’m definitely better than the beginning of this year, though I appreciate the warm wishes. 

-I was going to ask the university to take down the video on the university website and YouTube, but when I went to check it had already been removed. I already saved a copy of it per the advice of a colleague.

Reading through these comments has been the highlight of my week. I’ve been reading them in the way you’d expect an anthropologist because of the myriad of reactions. Almost all of them have been loving and supportive. About 6% of them are just downright weird. 

Some of my favorites:

1.) a colorful variety of people threatening to assault or kill me.

2.) people telling me how they’ve either a.) had cancer or b.) been to college.. and it was NOTHING LIKE THAT and I am DEAD WRONG. Tsk tsk, to me. 

3.) the guy who asked me for nudes. I can’t imagine what went through his head.. did he get to the second line and see the word “ovarian” and think “you know who sometimes has ovaries? Women. Good enough for me.”

I also didn’t expect so many people to compliment my writing. I’ve been procrastinating finishing up a DnD one-off campaign, and this has really boosted my motivation.I'm a paramedic. A few months ago, we're coming back from a routine patient transfer when at an intersection about four blocks from the base I notice a woman sitting on the side of the road with her arms wrapped around herself and her head down.

I nudge my partner who's driving, and we flip on the lights and I see her head come up real fast, and she looks terrified. I get out and she relaxes when she sees the ambulance. After I approach, I notice bruising on her wrists and other similar signs of domestic abuse. 

She seems hesitant to get up off the curb.and into the ambulance, so I decided that I would at least pull the cot out of the back and give her something a little more comfortable than concrete to sit on. 

Now a few important details. All the cots in my service are Stryker powered cots. You've almost certainly seen these before. They're bright yellow with black handles and side panels. These cots have a motor and battery built in to allow us to raise and lower the cot at the touch of a button instead of throwing out our backs having to physically lift the cot up after loading someone. They're usually paired with an automatic loading system built into the ambulance that lifts the cot up to the right height to be pushed inside and also secures the cot when loaded. There's a little red tab at the end of the track, just inside the doors, that you press down to free the cot and allow it to slide out. When you press this tab, it simply releases the cot and the loading carriage it's connected to and it's up to you to keep it under control until it reaches the unload position and locks into place again. This can be problematic because these cots weigh about 125 pounds, about 55kg. 

As soon as I hit the release tab for the cot, I hear lights and sirens behind me. It's a city police car. Which is weird because we had not yet requested police, and we were outside the city, in the sheriff's department jurisdiction. We merely informed dispatch that we were stopping to check on a woman at such and such intersection. The woman says something along the lines of "oh god he's here" and moves faster than me seeing free food being distributed at base. She dashes past me and pretty much hurls herself into the ambulance, sitting on the bench seat. The cop is approaching and he's pissed. I put two and two together and slam the ambulance doors shut. Let's call this officer Police Officer Steve, or POS for short.

POS: Is that bi-Is she in there?!
Me: Who?
POS: You know damn well who I am talking about.
Me: You mean my patient? I'm afraid I haven't gotten a name yet. 
POS: Open those doors, I need to talk to her.
Me: You're not using my rig as an interview room. You can talk to her at the hospital.

We go back and forth like this for a few minutes, my partner at some point came back to see what the hold up was, but overhead my stonewalling and went back to the cab to call our chief. I continue my routine of deny and delay until a pair of deputies (likely specifically requested for this by the chief) arrive. Oh good, now I have witnesses. 

See, we had stopped on an upwards incline. I had hit the release tab on the cot and it wanted to slide back. I had to close the doors so swiftly, I didn't bother pushing the cot back against the stops and locking it in place.

Emboldened by the presence of two deputies, he gets in my face. "Get out of my way or I'm gonna have to charged with obstruction!". Okay. I step out of his way, and he opens the double doors. Between the cot, the monitor, and the jump bag, I'd say there was probably close to 160 pounds contained by those doors. All of which comes barreling out and hits POS square in the chest. He goes backwards and falls on his ass. One of the deputies laughs aloud. The other walks up and kneels down beside the guy. He says "Your shift captain is going be here in five, I wouldn't be here then if I were you." POS gathers himself up and scowls at me, then stomps off.

There is a limited amount that I can say about the aftermath as the trial is not settled yet, but we all know how well charges stick to cops. The woman is now living elsewhere, the cop is still a cop, and I have been getting pulled over at least twice a week ever since then. But the video footage of him getting bodychecked by that cot remains one of the best things I have seen.

EDIT: For clarification, yes the woman was/is married to POS. And yes, he is allegedly responsible for the abuse.TLDR at the end.

This happened several years ago when my ex and I were going through a heated divorce/custody battle. While we were married, we had a couple of conversations about how rich people hide their assets to avoid paying taxes. I've never had enough assets to do this, but she somehow got the idea that I was and told her attorney that I was laundering money and hiding income. It was more likely the heat of the moment as divorce/custody battles often come down to. I couldn't even afford my own attorney so I represented myself.

Her lawyer wasn't a total ass, but he clearly was out to get me, and he talked down to me like I didn't deserve to breathe the same air. One day, I get a letter in the mail from him requesting an updated income declarations form and 3 years of financials. It had a long ass list of things to include.

I own a communications tech company that was in super startup phase back then. Money was already tight. I was trying to get this business off the ground with no financing, I was finishing my MBA with scholarships and loans, so paying for copies and postage or driving this 30 miles to his office meant eating peanut butter and saltines for a week. So I called him to explain my situation. He all but called me a liar and didn't believe I couldn't afford it.

I was put off by that, and I said this was taking time away from business I needed to handle. To which he replied (and I'll never forget this), "Well, according to your income declarations, you're not that busy. What do you do all day?" He then said if he didn't get these documents, he would consider my previous filings as fraudulent tell the judge, contact the DA, and also alert the state tax agency and IRS. Probably an empty threat, but I'm no lawyer.

Efax is one of the services my company provides, and at this time it was relatively unknown. So I asked him if he has a fax machine. He said he had a fax/scanner/copier device, then said what law office doesn't have a fax machine? And I suddenly got an idea. Okay, I said to him, I'll put together and fax whatever I can.

Okay, motherfucker. You want 3 years of financials? You got it.

I scanned-to-PDF every receipt I could find. McDonald's receipt from 5 years ago? Fuck it, won't hurt to include it. CVS receipt? It's 3 miles long, perfect. They get the $1 off toothpaste coupons too. 

I downloaded every bank statement, credit card statement, purchase orders from vendors, and every invoice I sent to clients. I printed to PDF the entire 3 year accounting journal, monthly/quarterly/annual balance sheets, cash flow statements, P & L's. Not only did I PDF 3 years of tax filings, but every single letter I received from the IRS and state tax agency, including the inserts advising me of my rights. It took awhile, but I was a few days ahead of the deadline!

I made a cover page black background with white lettering. Wherever I could, I included separator pages in all caps in the biggest, boldest font that would fit on the page in landscape: 20XX RECEIPTS, 20XX TAXES, etc. I merged everything into a single 150+ page compressed PDF and sent the document using my Efax system. Every hour or so, I received a status email saying the fax failed. Huh, that's weird. Well, they're getting this document. So I changed the system configuration to unlimited retries after failures to keep redialing until it went through. Weird, I was still getting status email failures. I'll delete the failure emails and keep the success one after it eventually goes through, I thought. Problem solved.

Two days later, a lady from his office called and asked me to stop sending the fax. Their fax/scanner/printer/copier had been printing non-stop. It kept getting paper jams, kept running out of ink and they had to keep shutting it off and back on to print.

I explained that her boss told me to send this by the deadline or else he would call the DA and IRS. Since I didn't want a call from the DA or the IRS, I would keep sending until I get a success confirmation. I suggested they just not print until my fax completes, but she didn't like that.

She asked me to email the documents, and I told a little white lie that my email wouldn't allow an attachment that big. Unless her boss in writing agreed to cancel the request or agree to reimburse me for my costs to print and ship, I said I would continue to fax until they confirm they have received every page. 

She put me on hold, and the attorney gets on the line. He said forget sending the financials. I said that I would need this in writing, so I will keep sending the fax until he sent that to me. He asked me to stop faxing and he would send it in writing, and I said send it in writing first and then I'll stop.

Long moment of silence... *click*.

About 20 minutes later, I received an email from his assistant with an attached, signed letter in PDF that I no longer needed to provide financials. The letter then threatened to pursue sanctions in court or sue me for interfering with their business. Every time I saw him after that, the lawyer never brought up sanctions, lawsuits, criminal referrals, or financials again.

TLDR; ex accuses me of hiding income and money laundering, her divorce lawyer demands 3 years of financials, I spam fax them with my company's Efax service.

Edit: All these awards and the Reddit front page? Y'all are too too kind. Thank you!English is not my first language and I am in mobile, so please be patient with me. They told me in r/amitheasshole you guys would like this

November last year I(30f) gave birth to our first baby. It's the first in my family and the 6th in my husband family(32m). It's important to say that all the six kids are boys and MIL is in some sick baby girl rabies.

Ever since we made the announcement MIL convinced herself that I was pregnant with a girl. I told her that once we knew the gender she would be the first one to know. We told her it was a boy, she still was convinced it was a girl. She told they whole side of the family it was a girl. I corrected but she told them I was just annoyed bc I wanted a boy first (I wanted a healthy baby, I didn't have a damn about the sex). She also told them we are naming the girl after her mom, which we will never do bc hubby hates his Grandma. 

When the baby shower gifts started to come I noticed a lot of things that wasn't in the register. Embroidered things with grandma's name. And it didn't matter we told them the gender and the name, and make clear we are not lying about the gender. Everyone believed her 

Well, the baby was born. And imagine the surprise... It was a boy, just LIKE WE HAVE BEEN TELLING EVERYONE. The problem (for them) was that now the baby have plenty of "girly" clothes, pink onesies etc, and we are dressing our baby with them. Specially for his family video calls and for pictures for them. 

After Saturday call, MIL called us to scream to us bc we are making the elders uncomfortable for not sticking to a masculine color scheme for the baby clothes. And we have to stop being this childish, she just through my belly shape was more like girl them for a boy. 

We told her we will not change the baby's clothes, and to just await until the dresses fit. He will look adorable.I worked for Company for 14 years. I loved working there for 12 of those years. There were 2 main parts to the job. The first part was the "sales" side of things. This was away from the office, in the customer's location. This involved quite a bit of driving (and on a couple of occasions flying abroad) to work face to face with the customers to deliver a high quality product. We weren't the cheapest, but we were the superior product. And I was the best employee when it came to delivering the product. I consistently got rave reviews from customers for my personal style when it came to delivering the product and executing the customer's vision. I got a huge amount of repeat business and I got a lot of new business through word of mouth with customers recommending the company based on their experiences with me.

The second part was the office side. This was my weaker side. I hated cold calling "potential customers" with numbers I found in the phone book. When it came to answering the phone and speaking to potential customers who initiated contact with us I was fine! But I wasn't great at making the calls. This was my only real not-great part of my job. 

So, in the office I wasn't asked to make any calls. Instead I prepared product. Designed new product. Trained new staff members (ended up being one of the biggest parts of my job). I was also the problem solver, helping out whenever and wherever. Filling in for sick employees whenever I could. 

I liked the owner and I liked the manager. I liked all the staff who were around me. All in all it was a great job that I was really good at and took pride in.

The company had been doing so well that the owner had slowly expanded over the 12 years since I started working for Company. I had joined about 3 months after he started, so I'd been a part of this expansion. I worked out of my nearest office, but often travelled to other areas to train their staff. I was "loaned out" as it were to other companies to help train their staff. At one point I was a guest lecturer at a University teaching medical students how to deliver complicated explanations to people who don't have the base knowledge that you yourself do. 

After 12 years I was on a decent salary. Not massive, but I was happy. Then the owner decided to sell off part of the company. He was selling the area where my local office was. He told me he would love for me to remain as his employee, but I would need to work from a different office. This was either require me to move, or to quadruple (at a minimum) my daily commute. The other option was to remain working from my current office but with a new boss. I chose the second option.

Before the new owner bought the company she worked alongside the staff for a couple of weeks to see how we operated. This was before any of us knew she was about to buy the company. As far as we knew she was just another employee, and she was shadowing us to learn. She came with me on assignments in the field and saw my abilities. 

When the sale was announced and we were informed that she was the new owner, everyone was very surprised. She made some sweeping staffing changes. The manager left to start her own business, since the new owner was also going to be the manager. A lot of staff were let go. The secretary, myself and a couple of newer hires were kept on. The new hires were on the lowest wages (not salaries). Anyone who had got to a decent level was let go. Since almost everyone was on a zero hours contract, she was able to do this. 

Whilst technically it was a "new company" for the customers it was the same old business. The company still had the same trading name. The only real difference was that there was a new owner and the registered business name was now different. As far as the customers were concerned nothing had changed.

My job for the first few months after the sale was to train up the remaining staff to replace the more experienced staff members who had been let go. I recommended a couple of new hires who I had experience working with in the past. I was open and honest with the owner, and let her know that one of them was a close friend and one of them was my girlfriend. Both were more than qualified for the work and both were happy to join. My friend had recently come back to the country after a year of travelling, whilst my girlfriend could only work during school holidays (worked in a school). The owner gave them both interviews then hired them, since we needed the staff.

Over the next 2 years business started to fall. The reason was simple: The new owner decided to try and maximise profits by increasing prices whilst decreasing the quality of the product. For new customers this wasn't noticeable. They just thought we were expensive and the product wasn't the best. But for old customers who had been with us for 10+ years, they immediately noticed. They were being charged more and were receiving less/worse quality. So the owner doubled down and increased prices again. 95% of our old customers left us. New customers almost never became repeat customers. Complaints sky rocketed. 

Whilst all this was going on our staff turnover rate was ridiculous. People left after a few months when they realised that the minimum wage they were being paid wasn't worth it. Under the old owner the average hourly wage for new employees was around 2.5x the minimum wage. This made people care about their jobs and want to keep them. My girlfriend quit. My friend remained, but was looking for something new.

Then I got a phone call. The owner needed me to come to the office. This was unexpected. I had just finished working on location with a customer. My next customer was in 2 and a half hours. It was a half hour drive away. The office was about an hour and 10 minutes away from both locations. If I drove back to the office I would have about 5 minutes in the office before leaving. My mileage was paid above my regular salary, so I was saving the company money by doing this. Also, parking was a nightmare around the second location, so I intended to get there as early as possible to find parking, then read a book. The manager didn't care. She *needed* me to return to the office. So I did. I arrived back to be handed a letter by the owner. It was informing me of a disciplinary meeting to take place in a couple of days time. I could bring a "witness" along if I so desired.

This knocked me for 6. I was the best employee. I read through her list of complaints about my performance and started working on my defence.

At the meeting I declined to have a witness. Instead I decided to record the audio of the entire meeting on my phone without informing her. Where I live this is legal and I didn't need consent. The boss' witness was her friend who she had met at Yoga and hired for an office role, firing the secretary who had been there long before the takeover.

Every point she raised I could counter. They ranged from the weak: 

"You were unavailable to work for a week in August" 

"I booked a week's holiday so I could attend my cousin's wedding on the other side of the country and turn it into a holiday."

To the pathetic: 

"You were late for work on the 12th of May."

"Is that the day my car broke down and I called the office to let you know?"

"I don't know."

"I do. Here's the receipt from the garage dated May 12th."

To the downright lies. This one I can't write as a quote. Basically, she accused me of gross misconduct for breaking health and safety laws in the way I was delivering a product for a customer. I hadn't broken health and safety laws. I knew exactly what I was doing since, as I've mentioned already, I had been doing this for 14 years at this point. She had witnessed me do this on multiple occasions and had never mentioned it before. Because it wasn't an issue. She even had me train staff in this specific delivery method. Because it wasn't an issue.

She finished her list by telling me that she doesn't want to lose me, but she can't justify keeping such a poor employee at my current salary. I had 2 choices: I could either sign a zero hours contract and work for minimum wage, or she could fire me with 2 weeks notice.

I countered that she would have to give me 12 weeks notice, since my contract guaranteed me 1 week's notice for every year of employment, up to a maximum of 12. She argued that I had only been her employee for 2 years, since before then I worked for the previous owner. I informed her that with how the business takeover had run, it counts as continuous employment. I quoted the exact law and code that backed me up. She asked for a 30 minute break in the meeting to "let me think about her offer". She went to call her lawyer.

When she came back she informed me that since she was firing me for gross misconduct, she didn't have to give me any notice at all. If I wanted to remain and move to the zero hours contract, I could do that today. But if I didn't then she would have to fire me. But because she was nice she would give me the 2 weeks notice. I asked for a couple of hours to go home and think about this. She allowed this.

I knew the reason she wanted me to remain for at least the 2 weeks was because one of our few remaining bigger customers were set to have a product delivery from me in that time. They would only work with me. The owner had tried sending other staff in my place an several occasions, and each time there had been problems. It wasn't the staff's fault. It was just a very difficult delivery for a very specific customer which needed to be perfect. As a result this customer would only deal with me.

I called the office and spoke to the owner. I declined the offer of a zero hours contract and said I would be leaving. She then said she was giving me my 2 weeks notice. I declined her offer of 2 weeks notice. I informed her that if I was being fired for gross misconduct then surely I cannot be relied upon to safely deliver the product. Therefore it would be best for everyone involved if I didn't return to work. She panicked and said that she needed me for those 2 weeks. I feigned ignorance and let her know that I was just thinking about what's best for the company. After all, you can't have unsafe staff delivering your product to your customers. However, if she wanted to rethink the "gross misconduct" accusation then I would work my 12 weeks notice. They were her options. 0 weeks or 12. She chose 12.

For those 12 weeks I worked the same way I had for 14 years. I didn't coast. I didn't slack. I didn't badmouth the company on my way out. I continued to train new staff. I continued to deliver the product in my own, personal, exceptional way. I also got in touch with an lawyer who was a specialist in employment law.

For those 12 weeks the Owner barely spoke to me. She resented the fact that I knew my legal rights and didn't just believe her lies. She hated the fact that I could defend myself. She was petty. She accidentally dropped my mug in the kitchen, breaking it. Most petty of all, she paid for every member of staff in the office to have a spa day... except me. I was asked to work my day off to answer the phones whilst everyone else was being pampered. Nobody knew I hadn't been invited until they arrived at the spa and I wasn't there. Here's the thing; I'm a big fat bearded guy. I have no interest in a spa day. If she had offered it to me I would have thanked her and declined the kind offer. But by pointedly excluding me she was making herself look terrible. For the last 2 weeks I was training up my friend to basically take over from me. 

At the end of the 12 weeks my final day came around. The owner had nothing planned. Not so much as a card after 14 years (2 for her). The office assistant manager who had become a friend had got me some presents, but had to give them to me once the boss was gone, for fear of reprisals. 

The day after my final day 2 things happened. The first was my friend who I had been training up to replace me quit. He was on a zero hours contract so required no notice. He was unhappy with her treatment of me, and was unhappy that she expected him to do my (previously salaried) job for minimum wage. He hadn't informed me of his plans to leave, and I only learned of it when he knocked on my door in the middle of the day when he should have been at work to let me know.

The second was the owner received a letter informing her that I was bringing legal proceedings against her for ~~constructive dismissal~~ unfair dismissal. I had arranged this with my lawyer to be delivered the day after my final day. According to the office assistant, she went pale and started crying, before leaving the office to call her lawyer.

She refuted my claims for ~~constructive~~ unfair dismissal. Said it was gross misconduct. Tried to come up with some more reasons for firing me. But the truth was that the company was making less money because of her business practices, and I was the highest (and only) salary. I had evidence that I was a great employee. I had evidence that she asked me to move to a zero hours contract. She initially tried to deny this, since the "gross misconduct" fabrication makes no sense if she wanted me to stay. But once my lawyer provided hers with a transcript of the entire meeting along with a copy of the recording, she knew she was fucked. Still, she let the case drag on for over a year. I think she hoped that the legal fees would lead to me dropping the case. Little did she know my lawyer was working on a no-win no-fee basis, whilst hers wasn't. She ended up settling out of court.

The aftermath: 

The office assistant who had become a friend quit a couple of months after I left. She hated how I was treated and didn't feel feel safe working for such an untrustworthy boss. 

Several former customers contacted me personally to enquire why I was no longer with the company. Apparently the owner was telling them that I just quit. I informed them that I had been fired for cost cutting reasons. They moved their business elsewhere. Several offered me jobs. One went so far as to offer me a part time job and to pay for me to attend college to earn a degree required for them to hire me full time. This was a lovely offer, but they were one of the customers who were a bit too far away to commute, and I wasn't ready to move. In the end I found a new job in a different industry where a lot of my skills transferred over. Currently earning more than I was, working less hours and for better owners.

The business is floundering. COVID left the new owner desperate for cash. She cancelled orders but refused to refund customers money, citing an "act of god" clause in the contracts. The business' Facebook and Google reviews have tanked. Most staff left. The business is still afloat, but barely.

TLDR - Owner fired me as a cost cutting measure. I sued and they ended up settling out of court, whilst the person they planned to replace me with quit.I was sent here on a recommendation from another sub with a story you guys might like. First time poster, on mobile, etc. TLDR at the bottom.

 My father died on Father’s Day 2012. He was divorced and living alone, and I am an only child. So that means that I had to wrap up all of his affairs. This story centers around us trying to get his utilities canceled.

I called in to see what we had to do to get them to cancel. The lady I spoke with on the phone said to send in his certified death certificate. I sent in the certified copy of his death certificate the next day. The next month got another bill. I called again and a new woman answered. She said that because I wasn’t on the account that she had to speak with the account holder. I informed her that the account holder was dead but she wouldn’t budge. I had to make an appointment with a supervisor so she could speak to him herself in person. 

I showed up at the board of public utilities with another death certificate and HIS ASHES IN THE CLEAR BAG that they returned his remains in. I plopped them down on the center of her desk and said when she talked to him to tell him that I loved him for me. The woman went pale, flew out her chair, and called the cops. 

When they showed up she claimed that I had assaulted her. And yes my dads remains were still sitting in the middle of her desk with the death certificate. The cops questioned me as to why I would do that. I told them the story. The supervisor’s boss was called in and they all stepped away from the desk for a private talk. While they were talking the cops came over to talk to me. They said that I shouldn’t take human remains out in public, but there was no laws that were broken. I said that I agreed with them that it was extreme, but she insisted to speak with him in person. By then they were done talking between themselves. The supervisor’s boss kissed up to me and got it taken care of.

But the story isn’t over yet! I had to call back a few days later to get utilities back to the house in my name. When the person on the phone saw the address and my name, I was immediately put on hold. The supervisors boss that finally helped me got on the phone. She sucked up to me and waived all of the fees that come with setting up utilities. Just as the call was ending, she informed me that she was again so sorry for the employees lack of compassion. She said that the employee was terminated and again she is so very sorry. 

TLDR: Ignorant employee asked to speak to dead dad. Had a meeting in person, brought his ashes, got her fired.

Edit: I can’t believe this blew up! I’m so grateful for all of the love and support in this post. And for those who doubt the validity of the story, I hope when you are in my shoes and doing the same that you have an easier time than I did.My Father worked for a Forbes 500 company since the 70s.  Moved up the ranks as a software engineer and management, has patents for the company that saved it millions of dollars.  He's almost to pension age and suddenly HR starts making his life miserable.  He noticed this trend was happening to some of his coworkers when they were getting close to age 60 as well.

HR Lady calls him into the office and says that he was not punching in and out at the correct time.    My Father, an engineer, is very very detail oriented.  He knew that these were false accusations and asked HR to prove it.  They came back a week later and couldn't prove it.  And he said,  "Of course you can't.  I have been driving the corporate carpool bus from \[A major city 40 miles away from the company\] for the last 15 years.  I always have 16 witnesses on my clock in time and I haven't been late in 15 years."

HR Lady came back a week later and they said that they were going to fire him for letting people into the building without badging.  He asked to see when and where he was letting someone into the building without badging.  They showed that he held the door for his best friend who had also been working there since the 70s who had his foot cut off after having type 2 diabetes. He was in a wheelchair.

Prior to this my dad took the chief of security out for lunch and told him about how this company wanted him to leave before he got his pension so he got some footage of his own.  My dad said, "That is very interesting.  You are going to fire me for holding the door for my best friend of 35 years after his foot was amputated and he was in a wheelchair?  Fine then I hope you fire the CEO and yourself as well!!!"  He then proceeded to show footage of the HR lady holding the door for his friend and the CEO holding the door for his friend.

My Father ended up staying there until he got his pension.

Edit:  I don't know his finances and he probably wouldn't have lost the whole pension but there was a definite financial difference from being fired prior to reaching age 60 and making it to age 60.

Edit 2:  So this blew up so much that my brother who didn't know I was on Reddit texted me and said "You are reddit famous.  That's a story about Dad!  I knew this was you."  Also some of you are wondering why a Software Engineer would have to clock in and out, well he didn't.    I meant to use the word badge in and out of the building, they went that far to talk with security to see his badge timestamps.  There are more things that led to this getting bad and I didn't want to write pages and pages but it definitely escalated to this point.  Lastly for those of you that have been saying that my dad must have worked there as a child, this whole thing happened roughly 9 years ago.  My father is 68 right now.  If you want to know what company it was: this sentence is the most general hint I can give you but it may drive people from that company to be mad at me.  


Final Update:  Dad quit that job a while ago and made his own company in his retirement.  He has used his own money to patent a new invention that desalinates seawater and provides clean solar energy.  He has patents for this in America, India, and China and is looking for some capital to provide clean water and power to 3rd world countries.  If interested in helping him build his first power plant please send me a message.  
My coworker, and absolute hero, maliciously complied at security on one of our subcontractor jobs. The customer was a manufacturer for high end electronic components. Security was tight as a small 4" x 6" box could contain $250,000 worth of microchips. Our team was installing equipment in their facility for one week. A security checkpoint had to be passed every trip in or out of the building.  

Mr. Security guard, Chad maybe,  decided my coworker,  Steve probably,  was more suspicious than the other 4 techs. So every trip in or out, not only was Steve made to dump his entire contents of his backpack out on the table and go through it, Chad required Steve to show him the last 5 pictures taken on his phone "to prove he wasn't stealing secrets."

This is all fine, except Chad let's everyone else through without any sort of inspection.  Steve is trying to stay positive,  but obviously this is eating away at him. Steve tries to be overly positive and also a bit snarky with comments like "thank you Paul Blart, for keeping America safe," which busts up the rest of our crew. Then, Steve has the idea that will free him the rest of the week.

Wednesday comes along, Steve is overly scrutinized on our way in as usual.  As we head to security at lunch, Steve says he has to go to the bathroom. He comes back out a few minutes later, absolutely giddy.

Chad Blart, mall cop, stops us on our way out and asks Steve to see his camera roll. Steve gladly hands the phone over. Chad is greeted by some very peculiarly angled shots of Steve's butthole.

"What the F@%$?" Chad throws the phone down on the table.

"Oh, sorry. I thought I had a hemorrhoid and wanted to see how bad it was. Is everything ok with my pictures? Is the facility safe?"

Chad never checked Steve's materials again.
Good on you Steve.So I was working at Subway a few years ago and a man came in with his wife and two children. I had all four sandwiches started when the man asked me for the code to the bathroom. The policy was you had to make a purchase to get the bathroom code, but by the way he was doing the potty dance, it was pretty apparent this guy needed to go. Obviously, either he or his wife will pay for the four sandwiches I've already started.

The next day, my boss sits me down and lectures me about how the code is on the receipt for a reason. She watched the tape and see me give the man the code and tells me, "I don't care who it's for. Whether it's your friend, family, whatever, you name it, you do NOT give it the code under any circumstances."

Later on that night, I was working by myself when some guy in a trench coat and greasy long hair came in the side door and said, "Hey man, somebody got seriously f**** up outside." A long line of customers waited for me while I subtly grabbed the bread knife (sharp af) and went around to check. It wasn't the best part of town, so you never know with people.

Anyways, as trenchcoat man stated, someone was seriously f**** up outside. His face was all bloody and he was just a mess. I called 911 and went back to making sandwiches. 

Sometime later, a few cop cars and an ambulance showed up. They were doing their business outside and then one of the officers comes in and asks for the bathroom code. Like six hours earlier, my boss told me not to give it "under any circumstances" without a purchase. 

I laughed a little and told him what I told all the other customers, "I'm sorry, you have to make a purchase first. You can get a cookie which is $0.?? and then it'll be on the receipt." He didn't realize the laugh was really at myself and how awkward of a situation he unknowingly put me in, nor did I have a chance to explain it before the laugh and the rejection of the bathroom code caused the cop to become straight up furious. 

He gives me three warnings to give him the code. Each time I tell him I'm not going to give it to him and the customers are on my side telling him I'm just doing my job. After his third warning, he shook his head and muttered "I can't believe you're interfering with an ongoing investigation," and he uses the walkie on his shoulder to get some information. 

About five minutes later, one of the cops handed me a phone. I answered and my manager said, "Are you f****ing serious???" Long story short, the cop got the bathroom code and a free bag of chips.This happened about 4 years ago, when I got a summer job at my university. The job was working for professors that I had worked with before, and they asked me last-minute to teach a summer workshop to 9th and 10th graders.

So with less than 2 weeks before the camp starts I have a bunch of paperwork to do first, including "clearances" that say I can work with kids. One of these is an official FBI check for which they need my fingerprints. Well, I needed to do the physical fingerprinting right away in order to get the result in time - luckily I was able to book a fingerprinting appointment for that Friday (booked 24 hours in advance, as required) which would be just barely enough time to get the result.

That Friday I catch the subway to campus and it's atrociously slow (I'll admit I should have planned for this - the subway here is always behind). Anyway, I end up slightly late getting to campus so I literally run to the police station, and enter the front room at EXACLTY 5 minutes after my appointment time. I know this because, as I stepped through the door, I felt my phone buzz with what turned out to be a "Your appointment has been cancelled" email.

I speak to the security/cop behind bulletproof glass inside and I learn the appt was cancelled after he checks my confirmation number. Apparently the they are automatically cancelled if you're not checked in within 5 minutes. Obviously this is outrageous, but I'm usually a patient guy: I ask if I can book a new appointment. That's no good since it would have to be Monday or later.

So I grab a coffee from across the street and return to sit inside the police station, to try and solve this with some Googling while I slip into a more and more frantic state of frustration. I can't find anywhere in the city that can fingerprint me before Monday.

But here's what really pushed me over the edge. While I'm sitting there, at this point 30 minutes past my appointment time, someone else comes in for fingerprints. She shows up 5 minutes early. They take her in immediately, and she's out BEFORE her appointment was even scheduled to begin. The entire thing took her about 2 minutes. I point out to the cop behind the glass (as politely as I can) that CLEARLY someone could see me RIGHT NOW because her appointment is already over. Why can't I have the current slot? But, the cop insists that since my appointment was cancelled, my registration info was "no longer in the system" and I can't be seen today.

That's when the idea comes to me and I confirm with him that showing up early is not a problem, because they would have my appt and registration info in the system. You see where I'm going with this.

So I quietly sit back down and take out my phone. About 10 minutes later, I calmly approach him again and say "Hello, I have a new appointment to be fingerprinted. I'm about 72 hours early."

I have never seen such an exasperated sigh in my life. But he checked my new confirmation number and everything was in order. Within 10 minutes, I was walking back out after getting fingerprinted.

&#x200B;

TL:DR Appointment was automatically cancelled because I was 5 minutes late. I can't go in now because my registration info is not "in the system". But I can make an appointment for Monday, and show up 72 hours early.**TL;DR At Bottom**

So this story is about a property I own, but rent out.  This may sound strange, but I don't think I could afford to live there these days - it's become somewhat exclusive.

I guess this could also go in pro revenge.

I've used dollars here, because it's what most people reading this will relate to.  This doesn't take place in the US, and I've given an approximate dollar value for local currency.  To answer the most commonly asked question, this is in South Africa.

This is going to be VERY LONG.

**BACKGROUND**

A million years ago my property was part of a large farm.  I bought it about 30 years ago, long after the farm was broken up, but before there was any development near it.  The piece of land I got was near the back entrance that joined into a dirt road that ran past. The more expensive plots were near the tarred road in the front.

I originally bought a large chunk of the land intending to do some farming, but that never happened. About 20 years ago some of the owners got organised (We'll call them the Organised Owners - OO) and had the area designated as a municipal suburb. The municipality agreed to put in tarred roads, water and electricity if a certain percentage of the properties were developed.  A construction company (linked to the OO) went around contacting the owners who had land but no buildings offering to build houses for us at a very (very) reasonable price - contingent on them getting a certain minimum amount of people signing up. While this was happening, one of the OO approached me and offered to buy half of my property.  I agreed, and the money I got for the sale (which was about 4 x what I'd paid for the entire chunk of land 10 years prior) combined with a small loan from the bank gave me what I needed to pay for a house to be built, and it was a fairly large and nice house too.

I stayed in the house for a few years, and my mom moved in with me.  I had decided to subdivide the property again and build her a house next to mine, but unfortunately an un-diagnosed tumor took her before the house could even be started (well, it was diagnosed, but too late to do anything).

Soon after she died, we moved out of the house and started renting it out.  About a few weeks before we moved out the OO I'd sold the land to started talking about starting an HOA.  I wasn't interested, and left soon after.  About two years later, the neighbour OO contacted me. There were two roads entering the area these days - the original tarred road that was near where the farmhouse had been and was entered from a fairly busy main road, and my "dirt road back entrance" which was now a tarred entrance from a wide but not very busy municipal road.  The HOA was trying to get the old farm road blocked off to inprove security and decrease through-traffic, and wanted the road next to my property to be the main (and only) entrance to the HOA community.  And they were pressuring me to join.

I said no, and I was adamant, and eventually they accepted that, but told me they wanted to have a sign near the road welcoming people to the neighbourhood, and the only practical place to put it was on the edge of my property.  They also wanted to build a little guard hut and have a security guard permanently monitoring who went in and came out, and they wanted to build his shed on my property. We came to an agreement whereby they would mow the lawn and pay the equivalent of about $35 per month in exchange for the land they needed.  I was very happy with this arrangement, since the property was fairly large, and it didn't really cost them anything since they already had a full time gardening service servicing the HOA.

This all happened a over a decade ago. They eventually got the other main road blocked off, and the HOA is paying for rent-a-cop to be permanently stationed close to my property, as well as mowing my lawn and paying me enough money for takeaways for the family each month.  I'm occasionally contacted by members of the HOA to get me to sign up, but I'm really not interested.  My property has been rented to the same tenant for all these years and everything there is going well for me.

Until about 3 years ago, when someone scared the crap out of my tenants young daughter by making strange noises and shooting a gun close to her bedroom window three or four times over about a month.  This scared my tenant and I guessed it scared the HOA because they AND my tenant contacted me with a proposal - I join the HOA and they give me exclusions from the HOA rules, including exclusions from paying the monthly fees, and in addition they will build a wall around the ENTIRE HOA neighbourhood, including electric fencing and security cameras.  They told me they had wanted to do this for a while but were unwilling to build the wall on property that was not in the HOA.

I couldn't see the downside, and so agreed.

**THE DISHONEST DEALINGS**

It took a little over a year to build the wall and get everything completed, which is quite fast. And then a month to the day after everything was done, my tenant got an HOA warning about his dogs barking.  He told the HOA that while the property was in the HOA, it was exempt from the rules.  The HOA told him that they had cancelled the exemptions, and that he had 30 days to comply.  He contacted me, and I opened some mail I'd gotten from the HOA (I'd ignored it since I was supposed to be exempt from the rules and fees).

Man, did I get a surprise.  They had retroactively cancelled the exemptions, and were claiming:

1. That I pay late fees going back over a year
2. That the easement agreement had been cancelled, and that they were retroactively canceling it a year back because the HOA contract allowed them to use "small unused portions" of HOA members land for the common good for free
3. That I refund them the money they had paid for the easement over that period,
4. That I owed them money for the garden service mowing the large lawn, and
5. That I would be fined for each infraction my tenant failed to remedy.

This started an expensive process involving lawyers and the court system, that ended with a judge  telling me that what the HOA had done was mostly legal - they had the right to revoke the exemptions, but that they had to give me 30 days notice.

As I was walking to my car the neighbour OO (the one who bought half my land so many years ago) told me that I was stupid to have refused to join when the HOA started, as I could have been a founder member (whatever that means), and that next time I should be sure to understand the documents I sign before signing them.

**THE MALICIOUS COMPLIANCE**

Neighbour OO was right, I should have read the contract (better).  Also, I was interested in what it meant to be a "Founding Member" (spoiler: Nothing), and so when I got home I grabbed the HOA contract I'd signed, as well as all the other documentation they had provided me with, and started reading.  I was determined to break every rule I could find a loophole to break.

I didn't get past the first page.

While the street address of the property is used to identify it for all *practical* purposes, in the city records it has a unique property number that has to be used on *legal* records.  When my mom moved in, I'd subdivided the remaining property but hadn't yet started building on it.  And when I gave the HOA the easement all those years ago it had been on the property I'd sliced off for my mom.  And when the HOA set up the contract, they had simply used the property number from the easement.

The next afternoon the neighbour OO delivered (and had me sign for) two documents - one telling me that my exemptions would expire in a 30 days, and one letting me know that the easement would no longer be required after 30 days.  I think he was being a bit malicious here, because I lived about an hour away from the property, and he drove out himself.

**THE REVENGE**

EXACTLY 30 days TO THE HOUR after the HOA had given me the 30 days notice, I knocked on the neighbour OO's door (did I mention he was the president of the HOA?) and had him sign for two documents.  The first was that I planned to build a house on my HOA property (which confused him) and the second was notice that they had 30 days to remove from the property the guard shed, the parts of the electric boom that were on my property, as well as the sign.  He tried to engage me but I ignored him, climbed into my car and drove off.

Early the next morning I got a call from the HOA lawyer who explained to me that their junk would be staying on my property since it was in an "unused" part of my land.  I explained that I was building a house there, and that the land would not be unused anymore.  I could hear the smirk as he told me that building a second house to be spiteful would not be accepted by the courts. I sure hope he could hear the smirk in my voice when I told him that the property in question did not have a house, and was, in fact, barely large enough for a house to be built and would not be large enough for any extraneous buildings.  I then told him to go look up the property in question and call me back. (I had sliced off just enough to be legal, which was just enough to build a small house).

It took them just under 5 days to get back to me. Their lawyer told me that the terms of the easement meant that I could not cancel without their permission, so I emailed him a photo of the document they sent to me cancelling the easement. That afternoon Neighbour OO invited me to lunch (his treat) to discuss the problem.  I said "No thanks".  He extended the offer again two days later, and again I said "No thanks".  Others of the original OO contacted me to try to talk.  Some sounded aggressive, some sounded sympathetic.  I said "No thanks" to each of them.

Eventually the lawyer phoned and asked if we could come to some sort of arrangement.  I asked what he had in mind, and he told me that he was prepared to discuss exclusions in exchange for access to my property.  So I said "No thanks, and please don't call me again".

About 9 days before their 30 days was up I got a call from a different lawyer.  He said he wanted to "negotiate a surrender" (his words, not mine).  I agreed to meet him at his office the next day.  I'd already had documents drawn up, and the meeting was as simple as me giving him the documents and him reading them over.  My new easement offer:

1. Included everything offered by the old easement offer,
2. I changed the line "mow the lawn" to "get the property to HOA standards and keep it there" since it was now in the HOA.
3. Would cost them about $500 per month instead of \~$35,
   1. This amount would increased with inflation (the previous contract didn't include that bit).
4. When cancelled, for whatever reason, the HOA would have to pay me a cancellation fee of around $7500.
5. The contract automatically terminated 30 days after
   1. any disciplinary action was taken against the me, my tenant, or the property ("the property"),
   2. any complaints were levied by the HOA against the property,
   3. any legal action was taken against the property by anyone in the HOA,
6. That \[lawyer who had offerred to negotiate surrender\] would be allowed to mediate any disputes between us, at HOAs expense, and that
7. The HOA would pay all my legal fees if any legal action was taken against me.

I'd deliberately left some insane things in there so that I could appear to "concede" some points or be negotiated down when the HOA got indignant about the points I actually cared about.

The lawyer didn't look happy. He said that my proposal sounded unfair, but that he'd have the HOA president look at them.  I reminded him that in 8 days I'd be setting a group of men armed with sledgehammers and anger management issues lose on whatever of theirs was still on my property.

That evening I got an irate call from the HOA president.  He told me he was never going to sign the new contract.  I said "OK".  He then told me I was charging too much per month, and that it should be at the same rate as the previous contract. I pointed out that when I signed the previous contract the area was under development, and there was at least one other road leading in and out, but that now there was only mine.  And besides, mine was now developed with everything they needed.  He told me that I was forcing them to sign a document they didn't want to sign.  I told him that he was free to not sign it. He whined about everything he could think of.  And then eventually told me I'd be hearing from his lawyer.

The next morning Surrender Lawyer called to ask if I'd be willing to come to their offices to sign the contract.  I agreed. When I got there that afternoon I learned that Surrender Lawyer was not a lawyer, but a Paralegal.  He handed me the contract and asked me to sign it.  He laughed when I told him I'd have to read through it first to make sure nothing was changed, and mumbled something that sounded like "I'm sure you would".

I read the contract.  Nothing had been changed. NOT A SINGLE THING. And the HOA president had signed it, with the Surrender Paralegal signing as witness.  I looked at him and said "Why did he sign this?  It was stupid to sign it!" and the paralegal looked at me and said "I started telling him that signing it would be a bad decision, but he told me I wasn't being paid to think or give legal advice, and to shut up.  So I shut up."  I said "Do you understand what he's signed here?" He looks at me and nods.  He said "I asked him if I should have one of the lawyers look at it before giving it to you, and he told me that we had already billed enough for this, and that he'd sign it and sue me after their easement was safe.

This happened about a year and a half ago.  It took 6 months for the HOA to find out how screwed they were.  They wanted to sue me, but their lawyers explained to them that there was no way to win. Even if the court sided with them, all they would get is the easement contract voided, and they did not think that the court would side with them.  The lawyers were adamant about one thing - the HOA could not live with the "HOA pays my legal fees if legal action was taken against me" since it didn't limit the people taking legal action against me to the HOA - as worded, the HOA would be fordced to pay for my legal fees if ANYONE took legal action against me.  They argued that the courts would probably not enforce that, since the context of the agreement was to do with the HOA, and I told them I was prepared to find out since the HOA would definitely be the ones taking action against me if they challenged it.  I eventually signed an addendum to the contract that said that the neighbour OO (HOA President) would personally pay all my legal fees *unless he held no position at all in the HOA*, and that the HOA would pay all legal fees if the HOA took legal action against me.  He resigned from the HOA at the end of that meeting. I politely told him in front of everyone that he should not sign documents unless he understands what he's signing.  He didn't look pleased.

It came out during the mediation (you cannot imagine how happy the lawyers were that their paralegal was mediating) that without the ability to control access to the HOA neighborhood through the security boom (partially) on my property (the HOA had become a "gated community" a number of years back) the HOA would be in breach of their own articles and would be dissolved. I also learned (should have been obvious to me) that all the security cameras were wired, and all terminate in the guardhouse / guard shed.  So basically, it was my way or the end of the HOA.

That first mediation was really quite funny. My paralegal looked more than a little glum as we assembled and he called everyone to order.  I suspected that he had been told to work against me, so I took the initiative.  I reminded everyone there that I had agreed to let Paralegal mediate, but that I had agreed to no arbitration at all.  If I didn't feel like the proceedings were fair I'd leave and they could go ahead and sue. Paralegal brightened up and things actually went quite well.

I'm writing this after getting home from the latest mediation.  I built a "paddling pool" for the neighborhood dogs.  As in I made it myself.  I dug a hole, packed it with stone, and added a concrete finish.  It was my first attempt, and if I say so myself, it looked ... well, terrible. The HOA called for a mediation meeting (what they do now instead of taking official action.  I've declined their mediation requests in the past) in which they told me, as nicely as they could, that the paddling pool was an eyesore right at he entrance of the HOA.  I asked them to create a list of what needed to be fixed and how it needed to be fixed to give to me at the next meeting.  The list was extensive.  It basically required the pool to be rebuilt from scratch,  I asked them if there was any way to reduce costs on the work they needed to get it up to HOA standards, and they assured me there was not.  I thanked them, pulled out a copy of the agreement where they had agreed to "get the property to HOA standards" (which I'd highlighted) and handed it to them with the list.  I told them the HOA usually preferred if these things were dealt with within 30 days.  They started arguing until the mediator reminded them that they could not force me to comply without causing the easement to end.  I should mention that their lawyers usually no longer attend these things. They said they would get it done.

I also learned a lot about neighbour OO today:

1. I found out that Neighbour OO sold his property about 3 months back, and is apparently leaving the country for Australia.
2. I found out that the HOA had successfully sued him for a crapload of money they had lost to his mismanagement as part of his vendetta against me.
3. I also learned that he had a vendetta against me. I have no idea what I did to upset him.

I'm not sure if I will screw with the HOA any more.  I already think I'm so close to breaking them the only thing stopping them from canceling the contract is the massive financial loss if they do.  I guess a lot depends on how they treat me and my tenants going forward.

Also, I do like the monthly payments, though, so I'm motivated to play nice.

Neighbour OO was right, though, in the end.  You really shouldn't sign documents unless you understand what you are signing.

**TL;DR**

HOA President gets me to join the HOA under false pretenses that get upheld in court, then finds out that that he signed up (literally) the wrong property and has to resign after getting the HOA into an incredibly expensive situation that it cannot get out of.

**Thank You Every One**

When I posted this here it was because I felt like I could fly and wanted to share. Now the adrenaline is gone and I feel like I've been kicked by a donkey. I thought some people would like the story, but also thought it was too long for most.  It seems I may have been very wrong.  There are so many people commenting and sending messages that I cannot keep up. Thank you all so very much!

**Picture**

Stupid picture drawn using a potato.  I guess you will soon know I'm not a graphic designer: https://upload.vaa.red/2pJM58#5f6eb17da1a2bc865f8c5839b711600d

Please let me know if the picture helps or not.Many years ago, I worked at a car dealership. The attached service garage was small and I was the only licensed mechanic. 

I would occasionally have issues with male customers— they would second guess my diagnoses, watch me while I worked on their cars from the bay door, double check my work in the parking lot, etc. 

I didn’t deal with customers directly and would often get my apprentice to pull cars in and out of the shop for me. 

This morning in particular, we were busy. The lot jockey and apprentice were occupied helping wash cars for delivery and driving to a customer’s house. 

The service advisor left a work order and keys at the parts counter, and I went out the front through service to get the car. It was in for a service campaign, which was an update done with a scan tool. It takes about 10 minutes. 

The customer was planning on waiting and was sitting in service. When he saw me with his keys in my hand, he immediately stood up, alarmed. I was hustling so I walked right by him and out the door. I missed the following conversation, according to the service advisor (also female):

Customer: “Who is that chick? Is she going to be working on my car? I don’t want her working on my car.”

Advisor: “The other tech is out at the moment, so it’s going to be quite a wait until someone else can look at your car.”

C: “That’s fine. I’ll wait for a guy. I don’t want that chick touching my car.”

A, politely: “Understood.”

The advisor comes to let me know, and I pull the car out and put the work order and keys back on the counter, nonplussed. 

Half an hour passes. The apprentice is still away, and I am happily working on something else, bringing other cars in and out. 

The customer is now watching each and every person who comes through the door. 

The high school co-op student comes in to get something signed. The customer’s keys are still sitting on the desk. It’s been about an hour now. 

C: “Hey— why hasn’t my car gone in yet? Can’t you get this guy to do it?”

A: “No, sorry. He’s just a co-op student so he is not allowed to drive the cars due to liability and insurance concerns.”

C: “Just get someone else to bring the car in and he can do the work. This was supposed to take 10 minutes.”

A: “Sorry, sir. He’s just a high school student doing his co-op; he’s not approved to perform warranty work. Only licensed techs and apprentices can do the recall.”

The car jockey returns. The advisor hands the car jockey a different set of keys, and he brings yet another car into the shop for me. The customer is becoming incensed. 

C: “I’ve been sitting here for over an hour and I’ve watched 5 cars go in before mine. My appointment was for 8am, this is getting ridiculous,” blah blah blah.

At this point he says that he literally doesn’t care who does the recall, but that it has to be a guy. 

The service advisor starts listing off the names of the men who work in the dealership, then saying why they can’t perform the recall. 

“Well there’s Harmon, but he’s just the car jockey. He doesn’t know how to work on cars. Then there’s Jeet, but he’s about 17. I wouldn’t want him doing the recall, personally. I guess we could ask Mike— but Mike is the parts guy— he doesn’t know how to use the scan tool. The detailers are men, but they know NOTHING about cars… ”

The customer is fuming at this point, and demands to talk to the service manager. 

The manager comes out of his office, and guides the customer into the garage. He’s pretty old school… lights up a cigarette standing at the end of my bay, and points at me. 

“That’s my best technician. Those guys take orders from her. You can either wait for her to finish what she’s working on, and then you can ask if she’s still willing to do your work, or you can take your car somewhere else.”

The guy was pretty shook up at this point and he took his car and left, two hours after he’d first arrived. I don’t think we ever saw him again, which was not much of a loss, all things considered. 

That manager in particular ALWAYS stuck up for me and took my side. The service advisor has this very dead-pan sense of humour. She knew full well it would easily be an hour before the apprentice would return from his errand, and that no one else could do the recall. This was not the first sexist we had encountered. 

Thanks for reading!


Edit: hi again— Thank you for the comments of support, and shared experiences, and for the updoots and awards. 

That manager was called out of retirement to run the department more efficiently and to hire new people. Super soft spoken. We did have trouble finding good techs around that time. I was there for 4 and a half years. 

Also this was in 2012 or so, so things have changed a bit since then, I think. He did regularly smoke in the shop, as did the sales guys and detailers, mainly in the winter. 

Thanks again!Old story, but in 2007 I was involved in a traffic accident on the I-95-I-695 ramp in Baltimore.  Traffic went from the speed limit (55mph) to a dead stop around the curve of the exit in a space of 500 feet, AND it had just started raining.  I and my Honda Accord managed to stop literal inches from the person in front of me's bumper.  I had enough time to have half a sigh of relief before I was rear ended so hard that the can of tea in my waist-level console cupholder wound up splattered all over the the windshield.

I get out of the car and the person who hit me is literally crying blood.  She's driving a Saturn that is at least a decade old and the ancient airbag broke her nose and blacked both of her eyes.  She's also crying for real, because this is her only transportation.  I go "Fuck," grab an umbrella out of my now weirdly shaped backseat, and hold it over her while she sobs, explains her brakes had been locking up lately and she was literally on her way to the mechanic's, and tries to text her boyfriend to pick her up.  She's crying so hard that she drops her phone twice.

And then a cop shows up.

Baltimore cops are bastards, so he writes this girl a ticket about "failure to control speed to avoid an accident" and "reckless endangerment" and half a dozen other bullshit things to where the ticket would literally cost more than a new car and she might get her license revoked and/or jail time.  She's hysterical.  I talk to her, reassure her it's not her fault, and manage to swap insurance info.

Fast forward two months.  I had mild whiplash, but I'm healed up and mostly good regarding the accident.  Have a new car and everything.  I get a notice in the mail that I am requested to be a witness for this poor girl's trial for her ticket - don't have to show, but it'd be nice.  

Fuck if I'm gonna let that cop roast her - I was asked, to I'm taking a day off work to show up.

I turn up in court dressed in my civil servant best (was working for the state government at the time, so however staid you imagine, multiply it by three), and even toss on some makeup to impress the judge.  I wait three hours for her hearing, because hell if I'm gonna accidentally be late.  The cop goes first, making up a bunch of bullshit about how recklessly she was driving to have hit me in an accident he was probably ten miles away from witnessing from his response time.

Then the judge calls me, and I stand up.  Cop looks this weird combo of surprisedpikachu.jpg and pissed - like he didn't expect me to show.  Poor girl was already crying and starts crying more.

So I get to the stand, get sworn in, and tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

So I day that we were going exactly the speed limit - I know, because I checked my speedometer in surprise that there wasn't more traffic.  That she was following a proper distance behind me, because I'd checked my rear view mirror and she was a ways off.  That it had just started raining after a dry week, so the road was greasy as fuck and I knew that because I'd almost slid into the car in front of me, only saved by my car's ABS.  That her wheels had locked because I'd heard the screech and seen the skidmarks, and that she definitely wasn't at fault because she was on her way to get her car's old-ass ABS fixed.  And I mention that the cop didn't show up until twenty minutes later.

I know this sounds like an "and everyone clapped!" moment, but the judge did thank me for doing my civic duty and turning up.  And I got a quick hug from the poor girl after the judge dismissed her charges.

Anyway, Baltimore cops are bastards and if you can turn up in court to fight a traffic ticket (even someone else's), you should do so.My job was to design and write software prototypes for individual high-value customers.  If they liked it well enough, then a real software engineering team would build the real product.  Occasionally, I would run the prototype for a few months while the customer evaluated if they wanted to buy the real project.

Now these prototypes are not a lot of code, but they do run with a lot of data.  Even compressed, it can be a terabyte or more.  Having done this work for years, I've accumulated a small disk farm of past projects, which can be very useful when a customer asks for something just like we did last year, but with a small change or two.  The company resisted buying hard drives for this, but it saves me so much time, I ended up buying one or two a year myself until I accumulated about 10 of them.  Figure over $1000 worth of external drives.

Then unexpectedly management changes, new management thinks they can replace old software guy with a cheaper new software grad and I am laid off, with two weeks to "train" my replacement.  (Yes, it's blatant age discrimination, but impossible to fight, so I just went for a graceful transition to my next job.)

Except, I have $1000 of personal disk drives with old customer data on them.  Company insists that no ex-employees may take any company data off premises and all files must be deleted.  I don't want to just leave the drives at the company, but they insist I must delete all data before taking them home.  So I offer:

1.  They can buy them from me
2.  I will eventually use them for something else, but I can leave the data on them in case someone needs it

Not good enough.  New manager insists I must delete all data and all backups before I remove the drives.  Okay.  That's what I do.

Six months later, I get a series of desperate phone calls.  New software grad has been unable to build any new prototypes.  Old customers are calling to get old prototypes updated, and new software grad has no idea how to do that.  Executive VP is calling to ask what would it take to bring me back to do my old job.

Sorry, I've got a new job now.  And even if I didn't, I cannot just modify the old prototype because *you insisted I delete all old copies of it.*   If I did want to modify it, I'd first have to re-create it from scratch. The code still exists in their source control, but the data is the heart of the prototypes.  And that old series of six month's apart data we collected is gone for good, no matter what.

Sorry, you screwed yourselves exactly like I told you would happen.  Hope whatever you saved by hiring a new grad to replace an actual experienced programmer was worth it.I've been a mechanic my entire working life so far, and this is one of my favorite experiences. 

I had a customer come in complaining about a vibration. I put the vehicle on the lift and checked the front end. I found a nearly broken tie rod and a faulty rack and pinion. So basically the passenger side front wheel was not fully secured to the steering system and would soon break and cause the wheel to be completely disconnected from the steering. 

I told the customer how much the repair would be and told her it was unsafe to drive. She asked me to put it back together so she could leave. I told her that I could not do that because if it broke after I let her leave, I could be held liable. She started yelling and screaming about calling the cops and suing me and how her cousins brother knows a guy who's related to the chief of police and I'll be arrested. 

She calls the police and they come out, I show the officers the vehicle and they understood the safety concern. They told me to just put the car down and let her leave. I did and even made her sign a statement declining crucial safety repairs. 

She left with the most "haha, I told you so" smug grin on her face... Until she left the property, got pulled over and her car impounded. They also gave her a ticket for reckless driving. 

I was so happy seeing her car get towed.

EDIT FOR CLARIFICATION. The cops told her it was against the law to drive it, the state laws back then allowed me to do exactly what I did, I offered to discount the price of the repair and take payments, she still refused. And I don't care how well versed you think you are in the law, you don't know when or where this took place.

And no, I won't tell you what state I am in because I have already had several people message me saying they are going to try and find my shop just to harass and blast me.My friend, who is Vietnamese, gets told "Speak English, you're in America!" all the damn time.

It got quite annoying to him, so he eventually decided to do something about it.

He looked up the Native American tribe whose tribe was originally on the land where he lives, went to the tribe's cultural center, told the elderly grandma working there he was tired of being told to speak English in America, and had her teach him how to say "White person/outsider/non-native" in the language as well as some other curse words and what not.

Apparently this made that Native American granny's week, because she went all out and really taught him quite a lot.

And ever since any time some racist tells him to speak English in America he says "Well why don't you speak [Native American tribe's language], we're in [Native American tribe]'s lands! You damn [Native American word for white person]!"

The shockedpikachu.jpg face he gets in response never gets old.

They completely freeze up for a few seconds, before responding in entertaining ways such as gasping for air or pointing their finger angrily or just turning and walking away lol.

Eventually the word spread among my group of friends and quite a few of them- who as immigrants, or even just people who speak a second language, occasionally also get told this- are always chomping at the bit to get their chance to use this response.

Every time some of them finally does they immediately announce it to everyone they know lol and it really never gets old.

Anyway, I didn't really know where to post this but felt it matched here well enough (hopefully) as it takes the racist's logic and returns it right back to them in a way that really rustles their jimmies.

What ways have any of y'all flipped the script on racists?I rented a car for five weeks while my car was being repaired from a car accident. The rental company had a couple great policies- no cleaning fee no matter how gross the car was, and unlimited miles. Ideal for me- I live in the country and going anywhere is a drive. 

When my car was finally scheduled to be finished (a Monday evening) I called the rental car company on Sunday. Asked about return details. They said return time would be 530pm Monday, but I could just leave it at the shop and leave the keys in the shops drop box. I said sure, and next night I went, got my car, left keys in the box. Got in my car, and check engine light is on. Fuck. Staff says come back tomorrow and we will fix it. I go home thinking that I will be sitting at the shop all Tuesday because no other ride. 

Tuesday morning I wake up at 7am to the rental car company very angry and saying that they can't get into the drop box and shop doesn't open til 9. I tell them I just did what they said to do. They told me that they would be charging me an extra day. At that I'm furious. I leave my house later and arrive at the ship at 850. Rental car guys aren't there. I sit around and shop opens, I grab the rental keys and give them my car. Right on time, rental car guys appear. They demand the keys and I ask if I'm still getting charge for an extra day. One guy is inspecting the car while the other tells me yes, I'm getting charged an extra day. Guy inspecting it comes over and days car looks good, it should be ready to rent out immediately. I had cleaned it the day before because I didn't want to be a dick. Well, I refuse to give him the keys. "Since I'm getting charged an extra day, that means it's my car until 530 today, right?". At that he gets nervous. Says they need the car back. "I will give you the keys now if you don't charge me an extra day. But if I'm charged an extra day, I'm using it." He refuses to bend so I leave. 

At this point I'm petty and angry. So I go straight home. I own a farm and it has been raining like mad lately. I get to work. By the time 10am rolls around, the car is COVERED in mud. Like, this black car looks painted brown. I didn't trash the inside, because I'm not that petty. I hop in the car and drive to the rental place. I'm pretty covered in mud at this point, I had put trash bags on the front seat to limit it. I walk into the rental place looking like I fell into a mud pit. The guy who refused to cancel the charge looks horrified. I tell them "this car is great for mudding! I'm gonna go mudding for the rest of the day. Just swinging by to ask where to put the keys at 530" I'm all smiles and dripping sweetness. I watch the life leave him, his shoulders slump, and he says if I return the car now they will cancel the charge because they need to rent out the car. I give em the keys and take an uber to the shop, where my car is ready. 

No cleaning fee and no extra day charge. Ha!


Edit: 
Alright, might as well address the few things yall are bitching about lol. 

The uber- I called the uber after I walked out of the rental car place. It took half an hour to arrive. I had brought extra trash bags, so I stripped down a bit (shorts and undershirt) and put on 2 trash bags that I cut holes in. Put my clothes in a bag. Let the mud on my exposed body parts flake off. Did I look absolutely ridiculous? Yes. Did I get mud in some poor strangers car? No. 

I didn't want to actually ruin the day for some kid getting minimum wage. That's why I only mudded the outside. That's a pretty easy clean. I didn't wanna wreck anyone's day- even the asshole that charged me. My goal was to make the car messy and shocking enough to get them to not charge me because they were desperate to get it back. "If the outside is that bad, what did he do to the inside?" 

The car was 91 fucking dollars a day (first 3 weeks 39 a day and then went up for last 2 weeks to 91) and my insurance did not cover it. I was not willing to let 91 bucks slide. 

The keys were left at the auto shop, in the auto shops key box. That key box was not open at 7am when rental car company went to get the car. When I went around 9am to drop my car off, the auto shop opened the box for me and gave me the rental car keys. Rental car people appeared a few minutes later.  

Sorry if spelling and grammar ain't great. It isn't a thesis.Kids are awesome at malicious compliance - but it is a 2-way street ;)

My kids can be picky eaters at times.  My wife made some damn good chicken soup, but the kids were complaining that there were veggies in their chicken soup, they hate veggies, veggies make them sick, and they wanted my wife to pick them out of the soup.  We tried to tell them that good chicken soup needs veggies to taste good, but they were being stubborn.  I'm sure other parents can understand.

I told the kids "if you really hate the taste of veggies, I'll make soup tomorrow, and you guys can make sure I only put stuff in you like."  They liked that idea, at the time.

The next day, I get the pot filled with water, all the typical soup ingredients out, and gathered the kids.  I asked for their approval on every item.  Chicken - yes, salt - yes, black pepper - no (gross, too spicy), celery - no (I can't even stand the smell), onions - NO!!!  It went on with that, with them rejecting parsley, bay leaves, and other veggies.  The total contents of the pot ended up being:

--- Chicken, water, salt, noodles

After the soup was done cooking, I served it up and they excitedly started to eat.  A few funny faces later, and one of them said "it tastes weird, this isn't very good".  I said "but I only put in everything you guys approved.  I think, from now on, I should make the soup, right?"

They looked at each other and said "can we have mom's soup instead?"  Since that day, they haven't complained about finding veggies mixed in the food.  Sure, they almost always eat around a carrot or green pea, but they understand that it adds flavor.I worked as a server for a small brand new family-owned restaurant. The place was one step below white tablecloth and had a bar on one side with the restaurant on the other. The owners were awesome and provided industry professionals to train us on how best to treat a customer and maximize our tips. As an example of how effective this training was, on opening day I dropped an entire tray of drinks down a woman's back yet this family returned several more times and would only let me serve them. Owner brought them a parka the first time they returned. 

One technique we were taught was to establish who was paying from social cues and make sure they are happy. If a couple comes in and you believe the man is paying, make the woman feel like a queen. When it's time to pay,  she'll likely encourage a higher tip. Incredibly effective.

As I finish taking an order I notice a family of four being sat in my section and stop by immediately to introduce myself. My assessment is this: husband and wife (very nicely dressed), their beautiful early-20s daughter (my age), and what I gather is her boyfriend wearing a suit and tie. Dad is very clearly paying, but aspiring businessman here interrupts mom when she's ordering her drink to inform me he'll be ordering for the table. If looks could kill, the father would have taken out this young man and probably 10 people in the bar area. Oh, buddy, your night is NOT going to go the way you thought.

Every time I returned to the table I would face him, only look at and talk to him, turning my back to the father. Daughter asked for something, I don't remember what, and without ever acknowledging her, I asked him, "May she have that?" He barely stammered out a "yes". When I brought the bill, I set it right in front of him. They hung around for a while and I continued to check in and refill drinks while the bill remained untouched. I think dad was making him sweat. Eventually, dad grabs the bill and puts his card in. I brought back the receipt and thanked the young man for coming in and walked away.

I was returning from another table when they were getting up from the table and the young guy moved to the door at a speed that made lightning look slow. The other 3 were all smiles and the dad looks across the dining room and mouthed, "Thank you." I gave him a smile and a nod and continued on my way. The tip amount is a number I don't remember, but I know it was good. *Really good.*

It must have been a small wedding because I never received an invite.

Edit: I am trying to keep up on replies, but I'm a bit overwhelmed at the moment. Thank you everybody for the kind words and awards. They have been fun to read.

From the comments and a few PMs I would like to make a few comments:

1. "You were rude." Yes, absolutely. This situation could have blown up in spectacular fashion. I took a chance, not thinking of the potential downsides, and came out just fine.

2. "In my culture, this is expected." I am aware of that, and had the young man been respectful, I would have gone along with it. It was not my intention to disrespect cultural norms, rather, to put a smug buffoon in the spotlight.

3. "How is this malicious compliance?" Judging by the replies, upvotes, and the post still being up, I'm guessing at least 3 people think it is.

Edit 2: The replies and respectful criticisms of my actions have been very nice to read and reply to. I am trying to keep up with replies but they are coming in faster than I can get to them. Due to a comment I made on an unrelated post, someone has created a new account to message me outright hate, so I am going to step away for a bit. Thank you again for your reception and I will return to replies after I decompress a bit.I don't need every single person in the company knowing my personal business, so I never filled that spot in, and was repremanded for it and refused the time off. I was told I had to give a reason. Enter Malicious Compliance:

I started getting very specific about completely false reasons. 

Random Tuesday Dentist appointment? Yep. "Gambling Addiction Counseling." 

That Friday I can't work, because I'm just sick of this place and I need a mental health day? For sure. "Testicular Cancer Screening."

Today I was asked to stop filling in the "Reason" box.I work in a hot sauce store in a busy outlet mall. We're a well-liked locally owned business and have many loyal return customers, but at this particular location we also get a lot of tourists who are curious about our challenge items, or "Hot Ones" products. 

We have a large variety of samples available every day. Literally like 100 hot sauces, 50+ bbq/wing sauces just out on the table and we can pull another 50+ bottles or so from the fridge if one's open. 

Every so often we get people who come into the store and ask to try the hottest sauce. They love jalapenos in their burritos and have eaten habaneros straight and they're ready to enter the ring, swallow some sauce and gain the admiration of a couple friends and bystanders at the cost of a stomach ache. We usually try to guide them to the 10th hottest sauce in the store, burn them with it, and move on to something mild or medium suited to their taste.

Today while I was selling items to people who were actually paying for things, a 10-or-so year old boy enters the store. I always get wary when children enter the store alone because it is full of glass bottles. They usually dart straight for the shelves and pick something up, but this child came barreling towards me like a bullet. 

While I make change for the couple buying some sauce, he calls out to me, "Excuse me!", in a horrendous whiny pitch. I ignore the rude interruption and continue my conversation with my customers. He parrots it again twelve times or so back to back as I thank these people and get them out of the store. Finally, I turn to him, "How can I help you?". Where the fuck are this kid's parents.

"Hi can I try the hottest sauce in the store." Not this shit again. I am not dealing with this, not with a 10 year old kid. I explain to him that the hottest sauce on the table is Hellboy: Right Hand of Doom. It's spiked with a 6.66 Million scoville extract, and honestly if you're not experienced with this kind of stuff more than just a tiny bit can really mess up a good part of your day. Take my word for it.

I explain to him he has to be 19 years old to try it and sign a waiver (which is bullshit, but I'm off in 30 minutes so fuck this kid), and instead guide him to a tasty fermented habanero that he coughs his eyes out on before explaining to me that he could handle the Right Hand of Doom because his dad eats spicy peppers with him all the time. "Okay." I say. He leaves, thank God.

15 Minutes later I'm interrupted by another customer. This time a gigantic woman, in a blue blouse, she's set next to my sample table like a giant blueberry blocking up 20% of my floor space. "Excuse me!" Apple doesn't fall far. The customers I'm with are polite and excuse me to speak to her. "You didn't let my son try the sauce!" 

I explain to her that it has extract in it several hundreds times hotter than anything he has ever eaten and that it can cause him severe discomfort and that I will not let him try it in my store. I explain that she is free to purchase the sauce and have him try it at home if she so wishes. She explains to me that she married a Mexican man and that I wouldn't believe the things we ate in "New Mexico City" where he grew up. When I asked what they had eaten there she told me "Things hotter than anything we have in the store". 

At this point her daughter interrupts our conversation, I shit you not, "Excuse me!"

"What?" I'm getting annoyed. I was annoyed from the second I saw the kid and now he's back 20mins later with three of him. "Why do you sell Valentina it's not even a hot sauce?" Jesus Christ. Aren't you from Mexico? It says fucking Salsa Piquante on the God damned bottle. It's 5:50, I'm off at 6. I've had enough.

"How about this, you can try the sauce and if it's as mild as you think, I'll let him try it." She agreed and grabbed her sample stick. I reached for the Right Hand of Doom, and unscrewed the cap. It's nuclear aroma sending memories of aches to my stomach. As she goes to dip the stick into the sauce, I warn her to "only take a small amount". She grins at me and dips the stick all the way into the sauce. Trap card, bitch. She slaps it into her mouth.

Immediately she looks uneasy before she throws herself into pure agony. She is coughing, swinging her head back and forth, trying desperately to speak, but she cannot muster any words. She dropped her sample stick in all the chaos. After a solid few minutes of coughing and dry heaving, she manages a single word, "water." I explain to her that water won't help her now. My relief walks through the door just in time to witness the finish.

She tells me that the only reason she is coughing is because "it went down the wrong pipe." She then immediately vomits into our garbage can. She apologizes for "spitting up" like she didn't just rocket launch half a litre of chum into my trashcan and then leaves without saying anything else.

I tossed out the trash with a smile on my face and clocked out.Yesterday I decided to take my kids to an international chain restaurant.  In this restaurant, the kids' meal comes with ice cream.  But, you have to serve yourself.

That was a problem because there weren't any bowls beside the ice cream machine.

So I thought, "I know what to do.  I'll simply ask an employee for some bowls."  And that's just what I did.

So he turns to look at the vast array of bowls behind him, some sauce-sized, some entree salad-sized, and many in between.  And we realize that neither of us knows what size the kids' ice cream is intended to be.

So he thought, "I know what to do.  I'll simply ask a manager."  And he says, "hey boss, what do we put the kids' ice cream in?"

Without turning around, the boss says "a fucking bowl, what do you think?"

"Ya, but what size of bowl?"

The boss, with his inimitable charm, tact, and grace, says "JUST FUCKING GIVE HIM A BOWL."

The employee looked back at the bowls, and then I saw him get a big grin over his face.

"I apologize about that, sir.  I think it's probably these ones," he says, as he hands me two of the largest bowls they have in the restaurant, practically giggling with glee.

My children were similarly delighted.

The manager walked by when we were half way through and made a noise like a startled opossum, but said no actual words.

Definitely going back there.A few years ago I was on a flight from LA to Singapore (takes 16+ hours).  I'm a tall dude - around 6'3" (~190cm) - so I don't fit very well in economy class seats.  On most planes my knees are often very close or right up against the seat in front of me.  This makes it impossible for the person in front of me to recline their seat, which usually isn't a problem once the person in front of me sees how cramped I am in those tiny seats.  

However for this particular flight, the man in front of me was not having it.  He tried to recline his seat, but couldn't because my legs were there.  He turns around and sees what's happening and asks me something along the lines of, "Do you mind letting me put my seat back?"  

I respond with, "I wish I could but I physically can't.  I'll do my best to give you as much space as I can, but it won't be much."  At this point he starts to get angry and just starts pushing as hard as he can back on his seat.  Needless to say, this was not particularly pleasant for me.  I ask him to please stop, and he says, "I'll stop when I can put my seat back."

I decide I'll just wait him out; he'll eventually get tired.  After about 10-15 minutes of this, he calls a flight attendant over and proceeds to demand a new seat.  The flight attendant tells him there are no available seats and he will have to deal with it.  He demands to speak to the pilot.  

So the flight attendant goes up front to talk to the cockpit.  Keep in mind that throughout this he is still pressing with all his might against my knees, with only short breaks to yell at the flight attendant.  After a couple of minutes, the co-pilot (he wanted to speak to the pilot and wan't happy about this) comes back and tries to explain to the man that he can't change seats because there are no other coach seats free.  The man continues to demand a seat that is able to recline, give me an upgrade, this is unacceptable, making a scene etc.  

The co-pilot finally gives in and says while looking at the man, "Sir, would you like to sit up in business class?"  

The man stands up and mutters something similar to, "Fucking finally."  To which the co-pilot responds, "Sir, sit down.  I wasn't talking to you."  He turns to me and repeats, "How would you like a seat in business class?"

I have, to this day, never seen someone as furious as the man as I walked past him to my new business class seat (with free drinks).Between eight and ten years ago I received an email welcoming me to Netflix. That was a bit concerning since I hadn't signed up so I contacted the company. They told me someone must have accidentally used my email when they created an account. Our last names were the same and our first initial. I said Oh no problem, you must have additional contact information for them besides my email, could you please remove my email from the account and let them know so they can fix?

Well, immediately that was a big problem for Netflix and well, no they couldn't remove the email because it was the only one they had for the account and how did they even know that it was mine? I said give me your email address and start talking, I will email you the words as they come out of your mouth. That wasn't good enough for proof somehow. More likely I was in the other person's Gmail account asking to not have Netflix?

What they finally ended up doing was changing the account password so that when the customer went to log back in they wouldn't be able to and would need to do a password reset by calling Netflix and then they would confirm the email address. I kept getting Netflix emails so that didn't work -  I called again, same again - didn't work. I changed the password several times myself because I could use the forgot password function and get an email to reset it, that didn't work. I don't know how they kept getting the new password without updating an email address and I didn't really care at this point.

For the last eight to ten years I have had Netflix on everything thing I own. I have signed in on hotel televisions, used it on my phone, my XBOXs; My kid uses it. I only ever signed in under "Family" and told him to do the same. The entire history in "Family" is us. The other logins, "Fred", "Softee", and "Lylla" accumulated history. I would occasionally look because, curious. Never did a single new show appear in the "Family" watch history that wasn't because of me.

Well, I woke up this morning to an email from Netflix telling me that this email address was no longer associated with that account and if I had any questions etc. 

Thank you Softee! It has been an amazing run and I am not sure why you gave me free Netflix for the last decade but I think you are amazing!

&#x200B;

Tldr: I asked Netflix to remove my email address from an account that was not mine that I did not pay for, they would not because they needed to have an email associated with an account. It stayed that way for ten years and I used the account for free.I've been living in Japan for a little over two years with my husband. He was born here and we decided to move to his hometown. It's a small city, but there's enough to do without getting bored. I'd describe us as an AMWF couple (Asian man, white female for those who don't know). It's not so common in western countries, and it can feel like we are some rare shiny Pokemon as AMWF in rural Japan-lots of staring, occasional secret picture, or even small chats if an old lady is brave enough to approach us. It can feel uncomfortable eating at a restaurant because kids will turn around in their seat and stare at us the whole time with an open fish mouth. Coincidentally, there's a small U.S. military base located in this city. The closer you are downtown, the more American families you see. I'm constantly mistaken for being military by Americans and Japanese which is understandable. Besides myself, I only know 5 other interracial marriages here. It's always locals who ask about my 'American husband' when I'm out alone, which I respond in Japanese "Watashi no otto wa nihonjin desu. Koko ni sunde imasu" (My husband is Japanese and I live here) or something along those lines. Americans never ask about my marriage as they assume my spouse is American. When we are together in public, we do abnormal couples behavior such as holding hands (no, couples rarely hold hands in public, let alone say 'I love you').

We don't go downtown too often since it's all pay to park and it's a nightmare to find a place. It was a beautiful warm day for the first time in months, but we decided to battle for a spot and walk around the shops. The crowd was heavy since the weather was great and winter was ending. The season for new American families to move here just finished, so I'm sure this was many peoples' first time to leisurely walk and shop outside.

We find a parking spot and made our way to the outside shops. Of course, we are holding hands and casually talking and laughing.

"WOW." I hear this from an American woman about 10 feet behind us. You should know that a Japanese stereotype against Americans is that we are rudely and obnoxiously loud. And this 'wow' was loud enough for me to turn my head around at the noise. She was with 2 other moms who had like, 3 kids each. They were staring at me, but perhaps we just accidentally had eye contact at the right time.

"Seriously, another little homewrecker is doing this in PUBLIC?" Chill woman, you're so loud even I can hear you. We find a table nearby at the Starbucks outside. We are enjoying our drinks when the same group of women approached us with their strollers in tow. They definitely had some sort of purpose with something to say to us. Let's call her Onna (woman in Japanese).

Onna: "Excuse me, but you need to keep whatever you're doing in your messed up home. Doing that in public in front of families to see is disgusting and immoral. My kids don't need to see such a bad display of marriage."

I'm SO confused, as was my husband who can speak English. Who knew drinking coffee outside was a crime against humanity and marriage?

Me: "I\`m sorry? What...did we do?"

Onna: "You know exactly what you're doing." \*She points to my wedding ring\*

Me: "No, I don't...."

Onna: "Good lord, does your husband know about this? Is he on a ship right now? That's soooo like a dependapotamus!" Her friends laugh. In case you don't speak military, a dependapotamus is slang for a military wife who stays at home all day, doesn't clean, uses their spouse as an ATM, and looks like Jabba the Hut. It dawns on me; she thinks I'm a military spouse and I'm cheating on my American husband! I started laughing because she's suggesting I'm cheating on my husband, with my husband!

Me: "This IS my spouse. I'm actually not part of the military community and have a Japanese visa." Onna looks at my significant other up and down. The two women behind her apologize, but the Onna didn't believe it.

Onna: "No one would voluntarily WANT to live in this little town. Nice lie, but you're not representing the military community. You make all of us wives look like whores! Who is your husband and what's his rank? Also I need to your dependent ID. MY husband is a high rank so he'll make sure your husband is aware of your infidelity." She pulls out her phone to probably type my response. I'm offended since this is actually a nice place to live and very open to foreigners.

Me: "Look, my husband's name is Rei (not his real name; I don't want to reveal personal info) and he's sitting right here. I'm not going to show you my military ID since I don't have one, and you're not the police. As proof, you can obviously see our wedding bands match and here's a picture." I show her my phone screen which is of us in traditional Japanese clothes on our wedding day. Her eyes became huge at the picture. Her two friends and their spawn have already started walking away.

Onna: "Why are you in a relationship with HIM? You should be in a normal relationship and start having a family with American kids." She says some other statements which I'd consider racist against the Asian race. It's so ironic because we are in JAPAN, and she's fussing about me being married to a Japanese man. My husband has been quiet throughout the whole exchange and says to me we should go. I agree and stood up.

Me: "STOP. The things you are saying are extremely offensive. I was part of the military community myself some years ago and what you're doing is against spousal conduct."

She smirked. "Go ahead and tell people what I did, then. My high ranking husband is an E-7, and everything will be swept under the rug no matter what happens. You can't touch me."

**So that's what I did.**

Note, this is a small military community. Someone does something minor and it's talked about between wives like chickens. Later that day, I run into my friend who works on the base and she's well known in the community for being one of the main event coordinators. I don't miss this chance to comply with Onna's demand, and explain to my friend about the exchange and how it made my husband extremely uncomfortable with her remarks. She asked me if this person looked like so and so, which I said yes. My friend rolls her eyes.

Friend: "She just arrived a couple months ago and is already causing problems with rumors and drama. Looks like we have a racist, too. I'll make sure what she said is passed on."

It's been half a year later and I didn't hear anything about Onna again since I distanced myself from making military friends here. I've only been in my new city for a little over 2 years and experienced more drama from military families than I have my whole high school career. That is, until now. Last week, I ran into my friend who's getting ready to leave back to the United States. We had a little discussion about her moving and my family planning, and dropped a bombshell.

Friend: "Do you remember Onna, who accused you of cheating on your non-existent military spouse and called your husband a racist name?"

Me: "Of course! I haven't heard anything from her since."

Friend: "Well, I mentioned we were already having problems with her not long after she got here. I told my boss that there's a person who was bothering and threatening civilians and asking for IDs which isn't allowed for someone with her status. My boss was extremely interested after I mentioned her name because Onna was scheduled for an interview in my department! I suggested we look at her social media accounts from her past behavior, because we don't tolerate racism. It was easy to find her Twitter and Facebook, particularly Facebook since we have many mutual friends. Her SNS was SHOCKING. While she set her Facebook to private, her Twitter was littered with malicious Tweets and reTweets. This included racism slang for many nationalities, colorful language, and using her husband's military rank to bully others. She made it very clear that she 'wants to see her current city burn to the ground' and 'why would anyone want to learn Japanese since it's sounds terrible'. We printed some of the more extreme things she posted and we still invited her to the interview.

**"Oh, and did I mention my boss is JAPANESE?!!"**

"So she comes into the interview which I was part of. I asked three good things about her which is she says 'dependent, gets things done, and friendly.' My boss just looked at her for a second before he pulled out her Tweets and asked her to explain how she can friendly serve the local community if she hates it so much. Onna was FLOORED and said someone hacked into her account, despite there being at least 3 years of slanderous Tweets. We thanked her for coming and said we can't accept an employee with this conduct. As far as I know, she's still not working because some spouses found her Twitter not long after the interview and was shared in all departments. No one will touch her application now."

Me: "So all of this was discovered because I told you about her accusations?"

Friend: "Yes! Oh, and she's kind of an outcast socially right now because she cheated on her husband a couple months ago."

There you have it folks. Because one person couldn't mind their own business, they lost a potential job and had their social media exposed. Super ironic since she became the dependapotamus and adulterer-the same thing she was accusing ME of.

Edit since some posts say it’s fake because my writing sucks: this is how I tell my stories online.Background: I work in a fast paced healthcare environment where every minute counts and I have both male and female co-workers on my shift. 

We have lockers with opaque doors where we're allowed to store our things. When I'm in the office area I leave mine unlocked for easy access and I've started keeping a box of tampons in my locker. I've told my female co-workers if they're in a hurry and need a tampon they're welcome to just open my locker (when it's unlocked and I'm in the office) and take one, no problem. 

I got called into my boss's office the other day because a male coworker of mine complained that me keeping tampons in my locker was "disgusting" and he hated that he could see the box whenever my locker was opened. My boss (a male) told me that some men were really sensitive to "this type of thing" and that I should try hiding them in a different type of box so I wouldn't offend my coworkers. I asked what the point was because my coworkers would see someone reaching into a "crackers/pop tarts, etc" box and taking out a tampon instead of food anyway. My boss got all huffy and told me that it was for the best and I needed to do it. 

Well, fine. 

I made a cover for my tampon box that said "Mother Earth's Bloody Nutrients Bars: with extra gooey, nutritious filling!" with a photo of a bloody bathtub and placed it on the box. 

That was two days ago, and I saw the male co-worker open my locker (trying to be sneaky) and he paled when he read the box, got all angry, and I received an email from my boss that my cover "wasn't funny" and that I need to take it down. 

... So I emailed our HR person a copy of the email as well as a summary of what happened and photos of the lockers, the box, and the cover. I also suggested that the male coworker sit somewhere where he didn't have a direct line of sight to my locker if it really offended him so much. She thought it was freaking hilarious and said I "followed my supervisor's instructions" and so I was fine. 

Nothing else has been done yet, and I'm mostly angry that my time was spent on something as stupid as this and not on patient work.

EDIT: Thank you so much for the support and the awards!! I've documented everything and am encouraging my coworkers (male and female) to do the same. HR is now in the loop and they have told me they have had multiple people come forward saying similar things that they're doing some investigating. So hopefully things change.

EDIT 2: Here is the link to the box! I spent maybe 3 minutes on it so it does not look good, fair warning. 😂 [The Box of Tampons](https://imgur.com/gallery/sRLXnDT)I work for an office and we have an 8 week busy season with mandatory overtime (12-14hrs/day).  During this time, the company agrees to reimburse us for dinner, up to $13/meal.  We just have to submit a claim with our receipts at the end of the busy season.

&nbsp;

Food options around my work aren't great so I usually brought my dinner from home.  But sometimes I was too tired to cook after a long day so out of the 8 weeks, I purchased maybe 10 meals.  3 of those meals I spent $13.50, going $0.50 over the limit.  This resulted in a whopping $1.50 overage which my manager said it was no big deal and that I could include on my expense claim.  He signed off on it and everything.

&nbsp;

A few days after I submitted my report Head Office emailed me saying they rejected my expense claim and that I could resubmit after I removed the $1.50 overage.  I wrote back saying my manager was fine with the $1.50 overage and even signed off on it, and they responded by telling me that they do not allow overages under any circumstances, that the $1.50 must be removed or they wouldn't approve any of my meal expenses.  They ended their email with the advice that I should "actually read the company policy next time".

&nbsp;


Fine, they were right and I was wrong.  So I decided I'd read the policy very thoroughly before redoing my expense claim.

&nbsp;


Yes, the policy clearly stated a $13/maximum on purchased meals.  Oh, and what's this?  The policy also allows a $10 per diem for meals you bring from home.

&nbsp;


I very happily removed the $1.50 overage and added an additional $300 for the 30 meals I brought from home.

&nbsp;

I should read the company policy more often!


&nbsp;

EDIT:  Thank you for the gold benevolent redditor!  It's my first time.

&nbsp;

Some of you are asking if I got paid the $300 and the answer is yes.  Many are suggesting the person was sincerely trying to help me out, but I'm not 100% sure because they were so snippy in their email.  Also, when we were emailed the meal policy at the beginning of busy season there was no mention of the per diem and no one else in my department knew about it.  Either way, I made sure to thank them just in case they were being sincere and I was just too jaded to see it!When I was 13 or 14, I decided I wanted a PS3. My dad refused to buy me one but my uncle made me an offer I couldn’t refuse. He said that if I worked at his sweets shop for the two months of summer break, he would buy me a PS3 and some games in lieu of payment. For teenage me with no commitments, this seemed fantastic!

My uncle sold a kind of specialty snack known as a mini-samosa in his shop. They are like samosas, but smaller, about 3.5 to 4cm in size (about 1/2286 of a football field for my American friends). They were sold by weight, in sealed packs of 250gms and 500gms as these were the most common amounts people bought. Making those packages turned out to be my job. You see, sometime between now and when uncle started his business, he realized that 250gms was roughly the weight of 28 mini-samosas and thus 56 were 500gms. So instead of weighing each packet, I was told to just pack by counting individual items, which was easier and saved time.

We also sold them individually for people who wanted larger, smaller or unusual amounts.

This was also around the time when our government started airing customer awareness PSAs (“*Jaago Grahak, Jaago”* for my fellow Indians). Basically, just telling customers to beware of fraudulent business-people. This is relevant.

So, one particularly hot afternoon, it was just me and my uncle at the shop. In India, frequent powercuts were very common during summers and thus there were no fans or AC running. Both tempers and temperatures were running high at the shop that day.

It was then that the villain of our story, Mr. Karan made his entry. He was a local resident and a regular. He seemed angry from the onset when he barged into the shop. He took a look at the fans and saw that they weren’t running, then angrily picked up a 500gm pack of samosas and asked, “How many samosas are in this thing?”

“That’s 500gms.”, I said.

“I said how many, NOT how much!”, Mr. Karan literally screamed, “Again, HOW MANY in this?”

“56”, I replied immediately since, you know, I packed them.

“How can you be so sure? You didn’t even count! You’re trying to cheat me!”, Mr. Karan was now in full scale Karen mode. “I demand you pack me 500gms of those individual ones and don’t you dare cheat me again!”

I looked over at my uncle, wet with sweat, fanning himself with yesterday’s newspaper. He slowly nodded.

I beamed a huge smile, “Sure sir! Whatever you want!”

So I took a bag, picked up some samosas and started putting them on the balance. I kept counting samosas as I put them in until they were a little over 500gms. Then I removed the last samosa and the weight fell below 500. Now, keeping eye contact with Mr. Karan, I crushed the samosa and started putting its powdery remains in the bag until it was exactly 500gms.

But wait, there’s more! Mr. Karan apparently didn’t seem to mind powdered samosa but instead asked smugly, “So how many samosas now?”

“48”, I claimed triumphantly!

You see, sometime in the past, my uncle’s old chef retired and the new chef made samosas with a little bit more filling in them. They looked the same size on the outside and only weighed a couple grams more each and since he made them in bulk and also sold to other shops in the area, the price wasn’t too much of an issue. So my uncle let it slide. But those couple grams added up on mass orders and that is what Mr. Karan found out the hard way.

He looked sheepishly at the pre-packed samosas and then at his own package and asked if he could buy the former instead.

“No, my nephew made a package specially for you, at your own request. So that is what you have to buy.”, my uncle finally spoke.

Mr. Karan silently took his pack, paid and left.

He was a lot more respectful during his subsequent visits.

I was reminded of this story yesterday when my PS3 finally died. As evident, English is not my first language; in fact, it’s not even my third. So please excuse any mistakes.

&#x200B;

Edit: Here's a printable [Mini samosa recipe](https://www.yummytummyaarthi.com/wprm_print/129156) for anyone who wants to make them. Edit to the edit: since many of you want to know, [here's a recipe for Sev.](https://www.indianhealthyrecipes.com/sev-recipe-omapodi-karapusa/)

Edit 2: Thank you for all the nice comments and awards! I'm upvoting each one and replying to all I can.

I wish you all a very Happy Diwali! May your happiness levels be as high as my electricity bill this month!

Edit 3: I just can't thank you guys enough for all the positive responses, really made my week! I now understand what "RIP Inbox" means.This was back in the 80's, my first job, working as maintenance man at a local hotel.  I'd been working there part time since I was 16 and when I turned 18, I got a notice to attend jury duty.   I picked a week and I let my boss know. The owner of the hotel found out (he was always a completely unreasonable jerk to all the employees) and sees me in the hallway and tells me that I need to do "whatever it takes" to get out of jury duty because he needs me at the hotel that week for a large dog-show, ..clogged drains..etc and **If I'm not at work, I'm fired.**

When I get to jury duty, day 1, I get selected to a week-long trial, and the judge asks jurors if there's any reason we cannot serve on the jury.  They go around... When they get to me, I'm nervous, never been in court before and too scared to lie.  I tell the judge that the owner of the business I work at will fire me if I'm not back today and said I needed to do everything I can to get out of jury duty or I'm fired, other than that I'm fine serving.  The judge looks pissed.

The judge has me approach the bench, asks for the name of the owner, location, etc.  Then he hands the court officer a paper and says something to the officer.  (the judge still looks pissed)  I'm told to return to the jury box.  About an hour later (still selecting a jury), the officer returns with the owner, visibly shaken, in handcuffs and walked to the front of the judges bench.  The owner is standing in front of the judge.  The judge asks him questions which he apologetically tries to worm out of.  Then the judge (looking even more pissed)  instructs him that I will be here for jury duty, I will serve as long as I need to, and he should NOT do anything to retaliate against me -- and that the judge is filing charges and will be instructing the clerk to check with me regularly and if, for any reason, I am fired or face any disciplinary action at work - he will hold the owner in contempt, violation of a court order, etc (a bunch of legal stuff) and he will spend time behind bars thinking about how important jury duty is.   Then the judge makes him apologize to me, in court!

I made it onto the jury and I served the week.  I reported back to work the following week.  I expected some blowback, but I never got fired, none of my shifts were changed and I got paid for my time in jury - I didn't ask why I got paid.   The clerk did check back a few times and I was told to call the judges clerk direct phone number if anything happened.  It was awesome, I was pretty much bullet-proof and worked until I saved enough to go back to school.A bar in my town used to host live bands all the time, until one of the neighbors complained about the noise. It turns out the zoning rules didn't allow them to have live music and they almost got shut down. The bar owner read over said zoning rules and notices that the wording forbade them to have live music *indoors*... but they could have it *outdoors*. So they moved the stage to the patio section, where it would be even **louder** for the neighbors, and still be legal. 

They still have live music sometimes, but not nearly as often as they used to. Don't want to push their luck, I guess.I’ve never met anyone that said “Oh good, an HOA.”

We *all* have trash cans, but the sight of them offends the delicate eyes of some, so I complied with the new rule of ‘no seeing bins from the street’. 

I find a notice of my bins being out, which is surprising because I’m the only one who touches the cans and I know I’m 100% compliant.

I call in and ask why I got the notice. The full description says “Bins in driveway with lids off.” I asked if this happen to be a Tuesday, and sure enough it was. Wednesday is pickup, and I was doing my weekly cleaning. I was fucking *using* them, I calmly explained through gritted teeth. 

“Oh okay I’ll remove the notice.” Great, but how do
I prevent this from happening again? “Oh, uh....I guess notify us.” Alright, I said, I’ll notify you every time I’m using my trash cans. “Oh that won’t be necessary....” Clearly it is.

That was five Tuesdays ago. Today, I once again called promptly at ten o’clock and let Alan know I was about to use my trash cans. “You know what, Mr. Endoman? I’m just going to put a hold on any trash can notices for you.” Hey that would be swell, Alan. 

That would be swell.I hated gym class, not because of the physical activity (I was in hockey and football). But the fact there wasnt enough time to shower before the bell. So you stink to high heaven for the rest of the day.

So I would walk the track w/ all the girls. Pissed off my coaches something awful. So they flunk me in my junior year and won't let me double up my senior year so I would have to stay back.

I had already picked out my college and was accept (tech school). Just had to finish my senior year. So I figured I could work out something w/ the guidance counselor and the coach. Nope, neither would budge.

Ok I walk away thinking I'm screwed and have to basically take one class my 2nd senior year. Then it dawns on me, can I just start going to college now? Are there other alternatives?

So I call my college admissions and college guidance counselor. Explain my situation and what other options are available? Since this is a non-traditional college (No SATs) you can start w/o a diploma. The caveat is you must have one (or equivalent) to get your diploma. The state I'm from they don't distinguish between to the two so it won't be an issue later on.

So I called another meeting hoping the HS admin would change their minds. No joy, they stuck to their guns. Thinking they had me cornered I stood up and said "Well I'm just going to have to drop out then. I cant see missing a year of college to just do gym class."

The coach thinks he's all cute and is "You can't go to college w/o a diploma". I relay what the tech school admin/guidance told me of their policy on this.

Faces dropped. It set into the guidance counselor that a drop out looks bad on her and the school (small school) when the state audits. She starts back pedaling and I wasnt hearing any of it. Later on that night the principle and vice principle call to talk.

I wasnt interested, I was all excited about starting classes in the fall.

TL;DR:

My HS tried to hold me back a year for 1 gym credit. I was already enrolled in a non-tradition tech college. Tech college would let me start classes as long as I got my GED prior to graduation. So I quit HS (looks bad on the school admin) and got my degree a year earlier.I'm on phone so please ignore the formatting issues. 

I do a computer science degree at university. We had a group work project which is set out in two stages. Part A, involved making an application, and writing a report about it (50/50 split) . Part B, we got feedback from part A and had to improve upon it. In total it was 100% of a module. 

It is also important to note that there is a group contribution report (gcr). Where each student puts in how much they think each student has done. 

I was in a randomly selected group with 4 others, we each picked a parts of the work that we wanted to do. 

I was apparently the groups most confident coder so assigned myself about half of the code. And finish up my work in about the first 3 weeks and work on other projects I have for other modules. 

Then soon after I finished my work,the others ask me if I can do their parts of the code too,I initially protest as I have my other coursework due but eventually I say fine, but so long as it is noted in the gcr they all agree. I sweat it out over the next 3 weeks or so alongside my other coursework. 

I contacted my module organiser explaining that I had done half the work and they suggested if people weren't pulling thier weight to leave the group (taking my code with me) and do the report. That would mean I would need to work flat out to produce the report and probably would mess it up. I didn't want that. The deadline was in about a week. And I honestly I CBA. 

Then I got asked to do some report too, because they didn't understand how the code worked. By this point I felt pretty used by them. Didn't really mind so long as I got the marks. 

All in all I worked out that I had done the workload of 3 people. There was talk amongst the others of all writing that we each contributed 20% of the workload to "make us look better as a team". I flatly refused. They exploded calling me with every name under the sun, swearing at me, telling me to "fuck off". 

I sent off my GCR with 60 for me and 10 each for the rest. And thought that was that. 

My module organiser then emailed me asking if I had any proof of this as they all put me at 0% and themselves at 25%.

I'd worked my ass off on this project putting in 150+ hours on the code and another 50+ on the diagrams and report. All while attending lectures 20 hours a week. Over 7 weeks which if you do that maths averages at an extra 4 hours a day. Ontop of all my other assignments and commitments etc. There was no way I was letting it slide. 

I emailed him back linking him to the github I used to share the code with the team (github is a source control that shows who made changes to the code) and showed him that all the commits (version of the code) were done by me proving that I did all of it. And thankfully we did the whole report on Google drive so I could also see the history on that document and send him screenshots of all the alterations made by me proving that I wrote ~20% of the report also. 

He added it all up and made a special exception for my group. Saying he would give me most credit for the work. 

I think I ended up with a 65 and they all get 11 for the whole coursework part A. They would need 69% to even pass the module. 

So turned out I fucked up a bit on the code only getting about 50% of the marks with like a massive issue in it (dumb me, for anyone interested I didn't make a MVC structure correctly) but my report sections were near perfect. Spelling mistakes (a common thing I do) and formatting etc. There were a few glaring mistakes from the report that they had written but other than that not bad.

When they found out their marks they started calling me up and emailing me and messaging me almost for about 3 hours, I was happily out at the time and didn't have my phone with me so didn't respond. My module organiser sent an email explaining that they had lied and he had proof about it so corrected the marks according.

When I got back to my phone I screenshot all the messages they had send and recorded all the voicemails including the ones they had sent previously. Including multiple occasions where everyone in the group told me to "fuck off". 

And f off I did. I sent all these voicemails and screenshots to my module organiser requesting that I leave my group, and understand that it is more work for me but I'd rather not deal with that. He agreed and also escalated the messages to someone higher up.

At this point I quit the group, and decided to work on part B by myself. TAKING ALL OF MY CODE WITH ME. Removing thier access to all of it. I of course asked my module organiser first and they said it was fine as it was my work and if I was no longer in thier group the others couldn't submit it. 

I fixed the error in the code in about 2 weeks. Then did the whole report from scratch almost and added a load about the fix taking me about 7 weeks.

I then get messages from the group to please come back, we really need you kinda stuff on the end few days of the assignment. They even offered to pay me. I screenshot it and send it to the module organiser, just to let him know what is happening and then just ignore them. 

I ended up submitting 2 weeks early for the deadline and got 100% on the whole section 2. Which is basically unheard at university, especially by your self for group work. 

Later that day I get an email from a plaugurisum and collusion officer. Not someone you ever want to get an email from. Basically says I'm summoned to a hearing as an external body looked at both my group (me, myself and I) and my old groups coursework and thought it was very similar. I get the whole project that my group handed in and my own back as evidence so I can look and prepare my answer to their questions.

I email my module organiser ask if he supports me in this because basically they can punish all of you or 1 group (never nobody). He says yes he supports me in this. Perfect. 

I prepare for this meeting by going though the hundreds of commits I have made while they had access to find the one that is most similar to it. I find a PERFECT match, 0 differences, not even a single character. Through the thousands of lines of code. 

So I turn up to this meeting there is the VP of computing there (guy who could basically do whatever the hell he wants to us). My old group when asked to present their answer as to why this has happened go on about how they did all of it by themselves blah blah blah. You get the point, this goes on for about 10 mins. Then I am asked to present my argument. I ask if I can share my screen. VP: "yeah... Okay..." puzzled. So I share it. Show all the screenshots I took as some of the people in the meeting weren't aware that we knew eachother, including them basically begging for me to come back offering money to. And as if this wasn't enough to convince them, I then showed me downloading a fresh version of what they submitted, and a fresh version of one of my commits on the github, and running it through a trusted comparison software. I narrated this to explain what I was doing just to be clear. Took a while but came up as I knew it would 0 differences. Everyone was stunned. One of the group members uttered "but...". I just laughed. And was quickly asked to hang up as I was no longer involved. 

Turned out they had cloned one of my commits and still had a copy on their laptop when I blocked their access not been able to fix it atall so just submitted it and hoped for the best.

One of my friends who is friends with one from my old group asked what grade they got and they said that they failed the whole module as they got a 0 for the second section giving them just 5.5% overall for the module (you need 40 to pass) and would have to retake it over the summer costing them and everyone in my old group their placement year jobs, after all who wants someone who failed a module so badly and who was intellectually dishonest working for them. This ment that they all lost out on being paid ~20k each for the years work. Which goes a long way for a uni student. While I happily get mine.

TL:DR

Old group tried to screw me over and told me to "fuck off" and I did taking all of my work with me causing them to fail the class. 

Edit: thanks for the awards. sorry its so long

Edit2: to everyone asking, it was on pro revenge it got removed quickly from there so I thought I'd put it here instead.

Edit3: I can't spell "their"

Edit4: tried to shorten it a bit.

Edit 5: thank you to everyone for all your comments, I am sorry that I cannot respond to them all, I will try my best, really didn't expect this to blow up.So this happened earlier today and was too perfect to not share with you guys. I work in construction as the foreman for a new house build. The location is kinda strange, the house is 250 feet up a hill via a foot path only. All of our materials have to come up this foot path by hand, it’s a pain in the ass to manually carry, quite literally, an ENTIRE HOUSE up this hill. One of our saving graces is having the two parking spots on the street at the bottom of this hill marked with official No Parking signs. Unfortunately there is an elementary school about half a block away and the parents of children seem to regularly (at least twice a day) think it’s ok to park in our spots. Now I consider myself a reasonable person, so if someone is parked in the spots and we don’t have a delivery or a need to park a truck I will let it go. If we need the spots and there’s someone parked there, however, I will ask them to move nicely and most of the time they do so immediately. Until today. 

I get a phone call from the lumber delivery truck that is en route to our location, he says he’ll be there in about two or three minutes. I let him know I will meet him at the street and make sure he has space to park. He’s carrying all of the material to frame the roof of our house, which is a lot of really big lumber and will take easily an hour to bring up the hill, so naturally I didn’t want him parked in the middle of the street with his hazards on for an hour, when we have a perfectly good parking spot for him. As I begin my trip down the hill, I notice there is a school parent sitting in her car idling, assuming she’s just waiting to pick up her child, I walk up to her car and politely let her know that she is parked in a no parking zone and we really need her to clear it to park a delivery truck. She scoffs at me and rudely states back, “I’ll just be a few minutes, and your truck isn’t here, take a chill pill dude.” Before I can respond, a giant lumber truck comes around the corner and I wave to him, and then gesture towards him to the woman in the car who has now put her window back up to ignore me. I put on my best customer service smile and wave at her through the window, she put it down halfway and angrily shouts “WHAT!” By now the truck has pulled up alongside her car and I politely ask her again, with a stronger tone of voice to move her vehicle, reminding her that she is illegally parked in a tow away zone. Then she gives me this wonderful idea, she says, “Can’t you guys just unload around me? Jesus, it’s not that hard.” I give her another smile and walk away, a brilliant plan forming in my head. I instruct the delivery driver to park as closely to her as possible and block her in with the porta potty that is at one end of our reserved spots and the parked car that is parked just adjacent to our spots on the other end. He smiles because he immediately gets what I’m trying to do, and proceeds to expertly block this lady and her car into a little two parking spot jail. We unstrap the lumber and my guys begin humping material up the hill, meanwhile I call the police parking enforcement to let them know the situation. At this point in time I wasn’t trying to get her in trouble, I just wanted a record of why we were blocking part of the street so we don’t get in trouble with the city. The very friendly traffic officer lets me know that she can be there in about 30 minutes and deal with the situation for me, wonderful! As we continue to unload lumber the child of the parent shows up, and wouldn’t you know it Mom is just now realizing that the lumber truck is parked so close she can’t get out of her driver door to meet her kid. She awkwardly clambers across the inside of her car and stumbles out the passenger door, shooting glaring looks at me and the truck driver in the process. She loads her kid into the back and then begins to realize that she has no way of leaving. She comes storming up to myself and the driver and states, “I’m in a big hurry, you need to move your damn truck right now so I can go.” Before I can respond the driver gets a grin on his face and says, “Ma’am in order to unload the lumber on the truck we had to unstrap it, and per our company policy I’m not allowed to move the truck with any unsecured load on it. Sorry.” This sends her into near aneurysm levels of blood pressure, meanwhile I can barely contain my laughter. “Fuck your policy I have somewhere to be!” She barks back at him. 

At this point, with impeccably convenient timing the parking enforcement officer shows up and parks behind the truck. She doesn’t see the officer arrive and while the officer is still getting out of her vehicle I just casually say, “Can’t you just pull out around it? It’s not that hard.” With the biggest shit eating grin I’ve ever had I watch as she realizes that I just used her line on her. “Fuck you!” She yells, and storms back to her car and angrily clambers back in through the passenger door and into the drivers seat. At this point the officer is walking up to myself and the driver, before she can even introduce herself the Mom in the car slams it into reverse and stomps on the gas, crashing into our porta potty and knocking it over, and then throws the car into drive and tries to mount the curb and drive on the sidewalk. The officer, driver and I are staring in disbelief as she gets halfway over the curb and gets stuck. I can hear her screaming obscenities over the idling truck from inside her car. The officer promptly walks up to the door of the car and orders her out. My favorite part of the entire thing is watching her face go to shock as she realized she just did all of that in front of a police officer. She gets slapped in cuffs as the parking officer calls for a second unit and she is promptly sat on the very curb she tried to drive over. 

She sits on the curb yelling to the now two officers about how we told her she could stay there and that we never asked her to move. The traffic officer responds that she was the one who was originally called when she first refused to move and that she already knows what’s going on. While myself and the driver are giving a report to the second officer, my guys finish moving the remainder of the lumber and the driver finishes his statement and takes off to go back to the yard. By the end of the ordeal she was arrested, charged with Child Endangerment, (her kid was in the back of the car the whole time) Reckless Driving, Destruction of Property, (the porta potty) and Driving on a Suspended License. On top of all that she also got her car towed, the kid went home with his grandma and she went to spend some quality time in a cell. I never expected her to actually heed my advice to “Just pull out around it.” But I think next time she’ll probably think twice about parking in a tow away zone, if she ever gets a license again. 

TLDR: Rude lady parks in construction site reserved parking, asks us to unload around her, so we park blocking her to do so, gets mad when she now has no way out, crashes into our porta potty and tries to mount the sidewalk. Gets stuck, and the arrested by an officer who was on scene, and all with her child in the back seat. 

EDIT: some people have been asking for pictures of the site, here’s a link

 https://imgur.com/gallery/S7JwM

Thanks for gold and all the overwhelming responses! **TL;DR: Civilian dependent wife demanded to be saluted because her husband was an officer, used her clout to get enlisted to salute vehicle stickers.  Enlisted followed orders and saluted vehicle stickers, prioritized them over officers, and even empty vehicles in parking lots.**  

There are a handful of rules to saluting in the American military.  The when, why, and how is drilled into you from boot camp until the day you leave.  Even the order in which the salutes are rendered have meaning.  When it comes to vehicles there are helpful insignia and stickers to indicate if its an officer such as a colored sticker located on the front windshield.  

My base was small enough where it was everyone's job at some point to do sentry duty at the front gate which had housing for military families.  Sentry duty was pretty basic, you'd stop every vehicle, check ID's and then wave them through.  If they were an officer you'd see it coming with those colored stickers and after verifying the identify of the officer, you'd salute and send them on their way.

One day while on duty I approached a vehicle with an officer's sticker and there was only the officer's wife driving in the vehicle.  I returned her ID, wished her a nice day and waved her through.  Pausing with a stern look, "Where's my salute Petty Officer CitizenAlpha".  Now Karen here was wife to a higher ranking officer and has clearly has fallen under the impression people are saluting her somewhere along the way.  

Some of the junior enlisted might've even been saluting her as they're pretty easy to bully and more prone fuck ups.  I politely replied, "Ma'am salutes are only rendered to commissioned officers."  Angrily pointing her chubby little fingers at the front of her windshield towards her husband's officer sticker, "I have a sticker and you need to salute the sticker."  Curtly I continued, "I'm afraid that sticker is not an officer either."  

Frustrated she pulled through and left my post.  My cover guy (the guy keeping me safe with a big gun) and I watched her drive down the street and pull right into the administrative building with the top brass and huffed into the building as quickly as her soft shitty body would take her.  We exchange a look between us with wry smiles knowing exactly where this is probably going.

Later that day we get a new official base-wide mandate.  From here forward all enlisted will salute vehicle stickers of officers regardless of who's in the vehicle.  Rodger that.  This is where the malicious compliance comes in.  It's worth noting that when you salute an officer as enlisted, you do it first, and you hold that salute until you are saluted in return and they lower theirs.  Only then do you lower your salute.  It signals that you're saluting them, and they're replying.  

Additionally when saluting a group of officers, you generally direct your salute and greeting to the highest ranking individual.  Now as far as I know this stupid sticker salute order has no accommodation for how a 2004 Toyota Camry fits into the officers pecking order.  Additionally if the car is unoccupied, its not like that sticker is removed.  

After that order came through we all began saluting stickers.  Personally I'd direct my salute to the sticker.  I would also prioritize sticker salutes over officers.  Let me tell you, walking through parking lots was a blast as I saluted empty cars on my way to where ever.  More and more people saw me doing it, and more and more people started doing it.  

Not long after the order was publicly rescinded, which hilariously had the balancing affect of never rendering a salute to anyone but a clearly known officer cementing Karen never getting her unearned salutes.I am a small-time Landlord, with just 4 tenants. Earlier this year, I had two sisters that didn't respond to my requests to add of the gal's husband to the lease, though he was living with them. Not a BIG deal... but did I mention the pit bull they also brought home, without permission? I DO allow pets, and had previously approved their other dog. I asked nicely in person and by email in the months leading up to the malicious compliance...

&#x200B;

They also did not respond when I asked if they were happy there, and wanted to renew their lease for the following year. I asked again... Then I emailed them notice that I would start showing the unit 2 days later.

&#x200B;

I try to be a nice Landlord... I do. They had a newborn, as well, so I scheduled all of the showings within a 2 hour window on the same night so I could be in their space as little as possible. Also, because they had not responded, and it was now serious "crunch time" for getting another tenant and my spouse worked all the following two weeks during evening showing hours,  I had the delightful inconvenience of bringing my 2 and 6 year old children with me to the showings. Because I'm not a corporation - I'm a small-time family Landlord with kids. 

&#x200B;

Try to imagine how difficult it is to conduct business meetings with 2 kids, right? Then imagine staggering showings every fifteen minutes, with prospective tenants who are also bringing their own kids. Just to further clutter your imagination, this is an 800 square foot 2 bedroom apartment with a cozy entryway. So I arrive with my two kids, to find that my tenants are still at home, along with the husband, the newborn and the other sister's boyfriend. So that's 7 people in a small kitchen already. Then the first prospective tenants start arriving. Husbands, wives, with kids, and some showing up early so there's two sets of them. That's 14 people in a small kitchen...

&#x200B;

And I'm a mom. I have magical powers. So I'm holding my toddler, my daughter is safely under the dining table coloring, and I'm chatting with the prospective tenants and directing traffic while my actual tenants prepare to depart. If you didn't know this already, it's common practice in the US to leave the premises during real estate or apartment showings. This was their first apartment, so I actually emailed them ahead of time to let them know what is generally expected at showings (e.g. a relatively tidy apartment, and that they can leave, for their own convenience).   


They do eventually leave, after the boyfriend tells a prospective tenant that he, in fact, ALSO lives there. And I carry on with an exhausting scheduling of showings. And have my new tenants all picked out and lease signed by the next day. Awesome, right?

&#x200B;

The next night, I get a voicemail from the husband (who is NOT my tenant). I saved it, and just listed to it again, because it still gives me that same delightful shiver of malicious compliance..  In his voicemail, he told me how awful it was that MY children touched HIS infant's things (they didn't, because I keep my kids entertained with magical mommy toys, but prospective tenants also brought children), and how they had to sterilize everything to keep their infant from being sick, and how inconvenient it was to have showings with only 2 days notice, and how very unprofessional I was to bring my children, and *asked if I could just be more professional in the future*.

&#x200B;

You can hear it, can't you? The deep shiver of malicious compliance vibrating through my offended being.

&#x200B;

The next morning, I started issuing *professional* Lease Violation Notices. One for the extra residents of the unit (hubby and boyfriend). One for the extra dog. And a few additional ones for building concerns I noted during the showings.

&#x200B;

They ignored the violation notice, which I sent by certified mail and, thoughtfully, also by email. I decided to be even *more* professional 30 days later, and issue a 5-day notice to vacate. And I called their mom, who is their emergency contact, as an eviction notice IS an emergency. Did I mention that their lease was due to end just a few weeks later?  But it would be unprofessional of me to let these violations slide until then..

&#x200B;

Three days later, they'd magically sent me all the information I'd requested, removed the other dog, licensed the first dog, gotten the required pet insurance...   


They moved out on their lease termination date. And skipped out on their last electric bill, and left the unit in damaged condition. Despite my *professional* security deposit disposition statement and request for payment, they ignored those notices, until I stated I would proceed to small claims court by X date for the total due BEYOND their security deposit. On X date, they replied stating they "didn't think it was fair" that they should have to cover damages to the unit, or "pay any more money" toward their utility bill.

&#x200B;

Yep. Two months later, there we were in the lobby of the court house, sitting across from each other on uncomfortable waiting-room benches. They're laughing among themselves about how they're going to get their full security deposit back. And I'm quietly reviewing my presentation notes to the judge and my sizable stack of evidence, photographs, videos.... this was my first time in court, but I wasn't laughing. I was preparing.

&#x200B;

One hour later, we're back in the lobby and their mom is trying to write me a check for the full amount of the judgement. She doesn't have a pen. Her kids don't have a pen. I, however, have a pen. I cheerfully offer my pen. She writes the check and hands it to me, and... wait.... I hold my out my hand again. Got my pen back too.

&#x200B;

I was so proud of myself for not saying any of the sassy things in my head in that moment. You know why? Because I was being *professional*, as I'd been from the moment he'd left that voicemail.

&#x200B;

As a last note, I do acknowledge that it would have been better if I hadn't brought my children. However, if you have kids, you'll understand that sometimes, they simply have to go where you go. This happened last week. I was swimming laps at an indoor pool near my house. I’m a woman who has had a double mastectomy without reconstruction. My chest is flat. I’m totally comfortable with how I look but prefer for my scars to be covered in public. As far as swimming goes women’s suits have extra material to accommodate typical chests so when I wear them they’re baggy. For backyard swimming I just use a couple safety pins to keep it in place. For lap swimming it balloons open like a parachute full of water and creates so much drag that it’s difficult to swim. Tight competition swim suits don’t have enough coverage for the way the scars wrap around my sides under my arms. To get around this I wear running shorts and a tight fitting full coverage synthetic fabric dark colored tank top. It works great. 

Last week I was approached as I left the pool facility by a worker. He said that they had received a complaint that a woman in the pool was wearing a shirt, which is allowed, but no sports bra underneath. He then said their policy requires women who are not in swim suits to have sports bras under their shirt. He told me that the policy started when they had a problem where a woman would come in to swim and only wear a thin white shirt and no bra in the pool during family swim hours. 

I explained politely that I’ve had a double mastectomy and do not need a bra. I said that swimsuits don’t fit me and my top is very dark and not see through plus even if it was see through all anyone would see are scars. He said he understood and felt bad but the management requires that the dress code be followed. I explained how I was much more covered up than anyone else in the pool and in fact was wearing exactly what he was minus the whistle - he was in shorts and a tank top. There were guys in there with just tight fitting swim bottoms on and women in bikinis. I look Amish next to them. He again said he was sorry but couldn’t make an exception to the rules. I asked for the rules in writing and he gave me a printout which did say what he was telling me. 

This brings us to yesterday. I dug a sports bra out of a bin of old clothes and brought it with me. I wore the same shorts and top otherwise. When I got in the water I put the band of the bra around my head with the straps sticking up like bunny ears. People in the other lanes got a kick out of it once I explained what I was doing. I started warming up with my kickboard thinking the guy would come over and we would sort this nonsense out. 

Well, a lady in business clothes comes over and tells me I need to take the bra off my head. I would like to say here that this was adult lap swim, there were no kids in the pool area. I explained it all to her and said I was following the rule to the letter. I was wearing a bra which is all that is required. We went back and forth with her saying I knew it had to be worn ‘normally’. I said I couldn’t wear it the way others do because I don’t have anything to fill it and it would ride up to my chin while swimming without anything to hold it in place. She said I could use skin safe glue! Yeah, no. I’m not going to glue unnecessary garments to my body and I told her as much. 

I finally said that unless she could state the rule I was breaking that I would like to continue with my workout so I could get home to my kids and let the babysitter go home. She walked away. I swam for an hour with that bra perched on my head (lots of readjusting it and once retrieving it from the bottom of the pool) then showered and went home. 

This morning I checked my email, which is linked to my membership at the aquatic center, to find a message from her. They will not be changing their policies but I have been granted a special exception to the rule provided I wear continue to wear non see through tops. I wish they would have just gotten rid of the silly bra rule but I’ll take this and if I ever see another woman struggling with their swimsuit over a flat chest I’ll let them know they can wear something more comfortable. 

TLDR: I’ve had a double mastectomy and was told I had to wear a sports bra in the pool so I wore it on my head.

Edit: thank you very much for the gold and award!

Another edit: whoa! I just finished getting my kids ready and checked Reddit. Thank you so much for the upvotes and awards. I was hesitant to post this but now I’m so glad I did.

Yet another: I can’t believe how this blew up. I have tears in my eyes reading the wonderful supportive comments. Thank you, truly, you’ve made me feel amazing. I will always keep my elastic tiara in my swim bag just in case.So my brothers and sisters basically ordered me and my wife to buy their children(our nieces and nephews) expensive gifts for Christmas because, according to them, we were "well off".

We're not really, were just financially responsible.

But since they asked for it, and its already on the budget, we decided to be vindictive this year.

So for the most amazing Christmas, our nieces and nephews will each get:

5 tubs of Play Dough - which sticks to everything

5kgs of Multi colored Kinetic Sand - which gets everywhere

5 tubs of gooey slime - see all above

5 packs of easy fill Water Baloons

Age appropriate Nerf gun and safety glass.

This should be a fun Christmas.

&#x200B;

  

Update 1: 

Well, this blew up. Oh man, I should have asked first before I ordered the stuff. You guys have such diabolical ideas! 

I think this could be the start of a new Christmas tradition, depending if my siblings remain naughty or nice.

For those suggesting to Legos, we already gave small boxes of them a few months ago as giveaways for our son's birthday, these should complement them nicely.

For those suggesting a drum set or noise makers, I left them out intentionally. It would be a bad idea since my sisters work nights at the hospital. I don't want them to lose sleep during the day and affect their jobs at night when lives are at stake. Sleep is important, you don't mess with it.

For those saying that these are not at all expensive, exactly! You demand someone expensive gifts; you get cheap and annoying ones instead. But will the children care? No. they’ll think it’s the best Christmas ever.

My wife told me to buy us a couple of those automatic Nerf guns from the money we saved from the gifts, you know, for protection.

Also we will not be including the water balloons as I was reminded that I do not want a repeat of **The Great Impromptu Water Balloon fight of 2018,** which I may or may not write about, but it would fit snugly in r/entitledsiblings

Also, no glitter, its too much.This happened about a year ago now when I was in high school. My calculus class was very chill. About 20 kids who were all friendly with each other, a laid back but enthusiastic teacher, and a light enough workload that we could afford to goof off in class but still learn and do well. 

At some point in the year I got really into cooking. It's my stress reliver. My family couldn't possibly eat the amount of food I was made so I started bringing it into school and "hosting" Friday parties in my calc class, with my teacher's approval of course. Now, I'm Vietnamese and I live in a predominately white town. This is only important because it meant that most kids from town only ate American or European foods, and weren't used to eating other ethnic foods.

Last year around Lunar New Year, I wanted to bring in some Vietnamese foods to celebrate. It is a very important time of year for my family. I ended up making a bunch of Bánh Da Lợn, a steamed layer cake and a traditional Vietnamese dessert. Some of my friends from class found out I was going to bring in a traditional dish and brought in their own traditional dishes from their own cultures, whether they celebrated Lunar New year or not. We had different Indian, Korean, Filipino, and Spanish desserts. It was great and I was really excited that my friends wanted to celebrate with me.

Apparently this was an issue for one girl in my class.

I would say Bánh Da Lợn is an acquired taste, so when not a lot of people ate it I wasn't offended. I knew not everybody would like it. There was a lot of other food anyways. During our lunch period one of my friends (who wasn't in our class but knew I brought food in) overheard a girl from my class complaining about the food while on the lunch line. Apparently she was saying really negative things about how I "forced everyone to eat weird Chinese foods."

Later that day I texted her just saying I heard she didn't like the food and wanted to know why. I don't really care when people don't like the food (I make it for myself and bring it in when I have extra anyways), but her calling it "weird Chinese foods" (when she *knows* I'm Vietnamese) didn't sit right with me.

Welp, she texted back that it was rude of me to bring in weird ethnic foods that nobody would have liked except for me and said I should know better since most of the class was white.

I told her that I bring in food to share because I feel like it and that I don't have an obligation to cater to her tastes. If she has an issue with it, she literally does not have to eat it, and other people can bring in food too so if she wanted to she could bring in something more to her tastes. After that she just told me that I shouldn't bring in ethnic and foreign foods and stick with American foods, "because we're in America." Excuse me??? Like??? How much you wanna bet if I brought in jambalaya, which originated in Louisiana, she would call it a "weird foreign food."

Fine. She only wants to eat American foods? Then she can eat American foods.

The next week I brought in a bunch of Oliebol, a Dutch doughnut, and started passing them out at the beginning of class. When I got to her desk I pulled out a loaf of Wonder Bread and plopped it on her desk, saying "Sorry but these are Dutch, too ethnic. Here you go, all American cuisine."

Later she texted me asking wtf my problem was, so I told her that almost every single food I brought in this year was ethnic and that it pissed me off she only had an issue when it wasn't European. She's entitled to not liking Asian foods but if you're going to complain about it being ethnic, then you better have that same attitude when the ethnic food is white. And especially don't call another person's culture weird. 

She didn't complain about the food again.

&#x200B;

Also, before anyone comments: white bread isn't the only American cuisine out there. Here's a short list of what I've enjoyed making: tater tots, jambalaya, fried chicken, many types of pies, smores, and Philly Cheesesteaks. America is a very diverse place, and that's reflected in its food. Happy eating!

Edit: thank you all for the awards and the love in the comments! i really didn’t expect any of it. don’t worry, i’ll cook for you all some day!I was a medic in Salt Lake for a few years. One rainy day, my partner and I got dispatched to a fairly upscale neighborhood on a call of “chest pain.” Chest pain means flashing lights and sirens.

We quickly arrive in front of a pretty nice house and find a woman standing at the curb with two suitcases packed (already a red flag!) I shut down the siren but kept the lights going for safety.

We ask if she called 911 and she confirms. She steps into the ambulance, sits on the bench, and asks us to get going. I tell her we need to do a full work up before we leave, so we can provide care en route and take her to the right facility. She says she doesn’t really have chest pain, she has a procedure scheduled at the hospital, and she wants me to turn off the flashing lights so her neighbors don’t notice and ask her questions.

Obviously, this is EMS abuse, and I tell her so. Suddenly her chest pain is back! So I say I need to get vitals and start an ECG. She protests again, mentioning the start time for her appointment in less than thirty minutes, and so I ask her point blank: do you need medical attention or do we need the police?

I proceeded to do a full work up, in front of her house, taking my sweet ass time, asking enough questions to make her eyes roll, and leaving the strobe lights on the whole time so the neighbors would see. 

And she was late to her appointment because we admitted her to the hospital through the ER instead of the front doors.Gramps had just moved into a retirement park with a lot that backed up to county land that was a nature preserve. His backyard was basically non-existent, but he didn’t mind as he got to look out over the preserve, however he did marvel at how his next door neighbor’s backyard extended a good 8ft past his, giving neighbor a nice space back there. 

Gramps tried to be friendly with all his new neighbors, exchanging phone numbers and the like, and one day he noticed the next door neighbor was putting down expensive pavers that extended from his back door all the way to the old fence posts that designated the preserve boundary. Gramps watched the neighbor yank the three rickety fence posts out of the ground and move them back an extra two feet into the preserve before pounding them back in, then started to clear the land, intending to gain himself more area for his pavers. Gramps used to work for the national park services as a young lad, so he thought he had better warn his neighbor of the consequences of his actions, so he heads out back for a little chat. Neighbor is immediately defensive and before Gramps says much, neighbor tells him “you’re new here, I’ve been here 10 years” and to “mind your own damn business.” Gramps decides not to press the issue.

Nothing happens that year, but the following year when most of the park emptied out to head north for the summer the county comes by to check on the preserve. Gramps notices them going back and forth behind his neighbor’s house, the workers are pulling out maps and taking photos and making phone calls and soon more guys show up. Turns out neighbor has moved the posts several times over the years, and in reality his backyard is supposed to be even smaller than Gramp’s backyard! To make it worse, neighbor put pavers in the back specifically to park both his golf cart AND a cherry red sports car back there for the summer, so the county will have to move them before they can do anything else. They tape a notice to the front door and leave. 

Gramps goes over to read it, and it states that neighbor was in violation of encroaching onto protected lands, he has 30 days to move his car, tear up the pavers and pay a fine of $11,000 (because of damage to endangered species who inhabit the protected lands, as well as trespassing fees). Failure to do so within 30 days will result in golf cart & car being towed and impounded, pavers will be dug up and carted off at neighbor’s expense and the fine will increased for every additional day past the deadline. 

30 days comes and goes, so a week after that Gramps has quite the show as first the car and cart were towed, pavers were dug up and hauled off, and the old fence posts and ropes were replaced with metal posts embedded into buried cement bases, connected by steel cables. Whole process took several weeks to finish, but the preserve looked a lot more legit when they were done. A few solar cameras were installed so the county could monitor the wildlife (and encroachers) remotely, meanwhile more notices were taped to the front door of neighbor’s house.

By November the snowbirds were flooding back into the park, including neighbor. That was Gramps’ 2nd show of the summer as neighbor reads all the notices, digging down until he reads the first one, then runs out back and starts screaming and cussing up a storm before running back to his car to dig out his cell phone so he can call the county to find out where his car and golf cart were. Gramps stays indoors to avoid the guy as he is frantically trying to unload his car, turn on his water and electricity, get the ac and the toilets going, and all the while trying to get someone at county to pick up the phone and give him some answers. He finally gets a live person and proceeds to scream at them while on speakerphone about his car and cart, so the call keeps getting kicked to other people because who wants to help a screamer? Basically neighbor is told to come to the county office to get this straightened out.

Three days later neighbor catches Gramps outside and asks if he was here when the county “stole his car and destroyed his backyard”. Gramps said he was, and neighbor says “well why didn’t you call me when you saw them putting notices on my door? You had my number up north!” Gramps said he had thought about doing that, but figured neighbor would prefer him to “mind his own damn business”, so he decided against it.Hey, please tell me if this is inappropriate for the sub and I'll post it elsewhere.

I was living with my girlfriend and a roommate, and we split the cost of every bill evenly, even though each bill was in one person's name. Well, that was the idea, but I naively "helped" my girlfriend pay her part of the bills (i.e. paid completely for most of them). The rent was in my name, the electricity in my girlfriends', etc.

Well I eventually got tired of her crap (arguments, smelly gerbils, not doing chores), and we broke up. It was messy. She took ages to move out, making sure to mooch every penny she could before leaving.

When she left, I immediately started a new electricity account in my name. A week later, I got a letter of confirmation in the mail, but I also received the electricity bill for the last three months my ex was living with us. I opened it without thinking. We couldn't even pay it if we wanted to because the bill was in her name. I shot her a text:

Me:  Yo, you got the electricity bill in the mail. It's 120 bucks so come pick up $40 from each of us.

Ex:    Um where's the other $40? We agreed I wouldn't pay bills after I move out. (as if she did before)

Me:  You were still living here for the time period of the bill.

Ex:    This is bullshit, I'm not going to pay a thing. We had an agreement.

Me:   Well... you can come over to get our part, or you can pay it alone.

Ex:    The way I see it, you can either bring the $120 to my place or have fun in the dark lol.

Me:   You got me there!

At this point I realized that she doesn't know I started my own account with the electricity provider. She thought that by refusing to pay, the provider would cut our lights. Good way to mooch another $40 from us, right? But that's not quite what happened.

A few weeks later, I received another letter from elec. company with her name on it. Probably a late payment warning. I sent her a text to tell her, and she responded, "lol why are you so desperate to talk to me. You know what you have to do :)"

Another letter came in for her. This one was probably late fees. I have to guess because I never opened them. I messaged her and she said, "I thought I told you to never talk to me again."  As you wish, ma'am!

More letters arrived, but from a new address. I Googled the new sender's address and found that they were debt collectors. Scary stuff. It's too bad I couldn't say a word to her.

Now about two or three months later, I received a phone call from my ex and I'm greeted by "WHAT THE FUCC THESE PEOPLE ARE CALLING MY PARENTS' HOUSE I'VE GOT ALL THESE LATE FEES BAAHHHH DEBT COLLECTORS." I told her if she wants our part of the bill, she knows what to do :)

Realizing that she had no other choice, she caved and came for the money. My roommate and I didn't give her a cent toward late fees, and I probably looked so fucking smug giving her my money for the last time.

EDIT: Lots of people are saying I shouldn't have given her a cent. As u/shelchang eloquently put it: "Not paying it would be a dick move. Way more satisfaction in letting someone else get screwed while you play by all the rules."I used to own a wing joint. Nothing fancy, but a good selection of wing flavors and beer. 

Inevitably we would have people come in and order the suicide wings (I like super spicy foods, so these were pretty damn hot). Of those people, about 5-10% would always start the joke/sarcastic conversation "These aren't that hot. Can't you do better?!?" Yuk, yuk, yuk. 

One of my best regulars, a dentist who fancied himself a gardner, decided to help us out and planted a ghost pepper bush (at the time the hottest pepper in the world) and he could bring us the bounty of his harvest. And he would intentionally under water the bush so the peppers would be as hot as they could be...

When he would bring us the peppers, I would grind them (seeds and all) into a nice paste which I would combine with our suicide sauce and keep to the side for when our spicy wing coneseurs would show up and complain about the suicide sauce not being hot enough. 

I would only serve them one Death Head wing (seemed a fitting name). I would make them wear gloves to eat it to prevent capsaicin burns on their skin. I would specifically tell them about the heat they were about to get into, trying to dissuade them from eating this culinary monstrosity. 

By the time we got through all this, every single person always now viewed this as an insult to their manhood (never had a woman complain about heat, but would sometimes actually ask if there was another level they could try) and could not be stopped from eating this wing...

So they did...
The fun thing about capsaicin oil is it can often take a few seconds to kick. Usually just enough time for the person to scarf down the wing and start to smuggly tell us how it wasn't that hot...

And then the heat would begin. And once it started it was relentless. 

The wing was free, but the cup of milk after was $20.
I never had a single person ask for a second one.My new manager at work is one of those people that absolutely has to be in control. Even when you're exceeding every scorecard measure, keeping you head down, not putting a toe out of line, she still asks you to come to a meeting room to discuss some minor issue or another. Recently, she pulled me into a meeting to discuss me being late from work. Protocol is to call in, say we'll be late, then submit a schedule adjustment request when we arrived. She accused me of not calling in or submitting a request but was able to prove I did, only instead of leaving it at that, she insisted I now needed to call her and explain why I was late. That's not the process, I told her, and she said she was making a new one. So now I call her at 6am on her day off to let her know if I'm gonna be late.

She also had a meeting with me because my scorecard for a stat was 99/100, with a target of 50 - she had to point out the 1/100 I missed. She also did the same for a handling time issue where I am hitting an average of 600 seconds with a target of 1500 - she needed to tell me about a call I took too long on. Suffice to say, complaints have been raised to her manager.

Following an incident where she was asked to follow up on something for me, and claimed 'if it's not in writing, it didn't happen,' I've been asking for everything in writing and repeat that mantra back to her when she claims to have told me something.

Last week, she asked me to see her after my call. I walked over and she wasn't there, so went back to my desk. She asked me why I didn't stay around, and I reminded her of the time she put, in writing, that I wasn't to spend more than one minute waiting for her if she asked to see me and was to go back to my desk to take calls, not wasting time. She asked me to come over again, and when I did, she wasn't there. This repeated twice more before my shift was over. Each time I documented "Logged out at 14:14:35pm, came to your desk, you were not there, spent 45 seconds waiting, returned to desk and took another call at 14:16:38pm" in chat.

She messages me to ask what time I finish. I tell her it was two minutes prior, and she says we can catch up now. I tell her that my shift if over, and ask if she'll approve an overtime pay for an out of hours meeting. She tells me not to be silly, and it'll just take 10 minutes. I refuse, and say if I don't get paid, we can do it tomorrow when I am being paid.

She's typing, then not, then typing, then not, choosing her words. I know she's angry at being challenged, and she decided to employ one of the tactics she used when she managed a team for a company where this was standard practice: "Okay, well, if you'd like to go home now, I can always make it a formal meeting?" A 'formal meeting' where I work is code for a meeting with HR, documented on your record, for misconduct and repeated issues.

She thinks she's won. "Not a problem. Make a formal meeting, ensure I have 24 hours notice, send a formal invite, and I will bring a support person with me." I log out and leave, but not before grabbing screenshots and saving a copy of the chat logs.

Next day, she's called my bluff and has a meeting scheduled. I send it to my union rep, and she comes in on the day. HR sits down with us and opens with "So we're here today to discuss some concerns. Your team leader asked you to attend an off the cuff catch-up three times, and for some reason you refused?"

I quickly clarify what actually happened. My manager claims otherwise, and I repeat her mantra - if it's not in writing, it didn't happen. Then I supply receipts - her demands to put things in writing, her chat, my timestamps, my call logs, and her message to me afterwards.

My union rep stares at the two of them, with a small smile, and asks "So do you maintain the position that employees should attend meetings unpaid, and that misconduct investigations are a good use of resources if they refuse?"

HR said there may have been a miscommunication, and that I could return to work. I have it put in writing that I am not accused of any misconduct, and have been cleared of any false accusations, with nothing documented on my staff file.

Yesterday, my team was advised that our team leader had decided to pursue opportunities outside of the company and we were getting a new manager.

&#x200B;

***EDIT:*** Small comment to those that say it's a shitty place to work, full disclosure, it's actually not. Job is satisfying on a personal and ethical level (I deal with vulnerable people and help them), pay and perks are great, and the people are great to work with. The metrics are more than reasonable and all my managers over the last several years have been wonderful except a couple, who were wrong for the role - and were swiftly removed or made to improve.This was several years ago when I worked at a \[redacted big name\] coffee shop.

My shift was 5am-1:30pm, and often around 1pm giant groups of kids on school field trips would come through the area (this was a coffee shop located in a major CA city, very close to a bunch of museums). I had been working a lot of overtime because of it, to help my coworkers through the rush.

I got written up by my supervisor for doing too many overtime shifts without approval. I was explicitly informed to not work overtime again, I had lost overtime privileges until corporate deemed I could have them again, and working overtime again prior to that would result in further disciplinary action.

The day after I was written up, right as my shift ended, 3 big buses FULL of kids unloaded and filled the shop. At 1:30pm on the dot my watch alarm went off and I went to go clock out. The store manager who wrote me up the day prior said, "wait where are you going?" I reminded her that I'd lost my overtime privileges, clocked out, retrieved the shift drink I'd made for myself right before the rush, and left.

The next day I was informed my overtime privileges had been re-instated...  


Edits: Woah this took off in a way I didn't expect. This was almost a decade ago, when I was in my early 20's and an eager to please employee, so I didn't demand they take the write up off my record (unfortunately). My coworkers all knew about the write up and were pissed about it too, so none of them were mad when I spite left to prove a point. I worked the super morning shift by choice because I used to be a morning person, because the field trips were super sporadic and there was no way to predict them without knowing the field trip schedules of the entire region, our manager had somehow managed to avoid ever experiencing one since she typically left around noon. Once she saw what they were like and started believing us, they scheduled one of the afternoon shift people to come in an hour early so we had better overlap. In my last job when I started I would log in as soon as I got there and if I had anything to finish up I would do it before I left. I didn't mind as I'm a team player. This resulted in me doing 20- 30 mins a day unpaid but I liked the company and liked a clear desk. Fast forward 2 years and my father in law was terminally ill. We got a call from the hospital telling us we had to get there ASAP as he didn't have long left. I told my manager and left at 3.45 (core hours were 10-4) the next month my pay was docked for half a day. I had already made 2 hrs extra unpaid that week but they told me they couldn't make exceptions and the extra I did was my own decision. Allllrighty then! I came in on the dot and left in the dot. I did this for 5 years, I worked to the letter of my contracted hours. My manager was talking to a new starter and in my earshot she told him she hated 'clockwatchers' who left on the dot as this doesn't show company loyalty. I leaned over and replied loyalty works both ways and being docked half a days pay for attending the death bed of a beloved family member when I'd already done more than my weekly hours was cruel and unfeeling. So I show the company the same level of compassion they showed me. After all rules are rules and exceptions cannot be made. The new starter started on the dot and left on the dot as did the whole staff. I dread to think how many extra hours they lost over the whole department over the next few years.This happened about 3 years ago while going through an airport in the U.S.

I walked through the metal detector, something must have beeped and they needed to pat me down. After a thorough pat down, I put my shoes on and started to walk over to grab my bag. A TSA agent stops me and says "you've been randomly selected please step into the body scanner."

I was polite, but said that I really didn't want to get into the body scanner, and asked if there was another way. The agent said that I could get a pat down. I said well I just got a pat down so... They angrily told me to pick an option!

So, I took two steps backwards, to the woman who had patted me down 30 seconds ago and spread em... again. While she was patting me down I asked her if she found anything new. She stared daggers at me but let me go.I worked for a company that provides a utility truck and one of the analytics they monitor is how long the truck stays in place with the motor on.

The target number was something like 3%, I consistently was stuck in traffic due to my area being changed to the downtown area of my city and naturally -raising my idle percent-.

My supervisor began constantly badgering me over the raise of my idle percent, about 10-12% higher now. After they decided to give me a wRiTtEn VeRbAl WaRnInG I became the MOST efficient truck no idler in our branch and I brought it down to a 0.00 by shutting the truck off at every stop sign, red light, highway stopped in traffic, in drive thrus, and INSTANTLY  off when I got to where I was going. 

Now remember this is a utility truck that is charging my 2 phones, laptop, tablet and my various equipments rechargeable batteries, all this juice sucking and no alternator spinning putting the power back into the truck battery causing it to die. ALOT. 

Now the rules the company had made it forbidden for me to jump the truck myself so I had to call the company and they sent out a tow truck to jump start it for me (I could do it myself anyway and probably would have but they are writing people up out here for petty shit) and everytime I call this tow truck it takes a minimum of 2 hours for it to show up, I began doing this multiple times a day, every day until they figured my truck was broken. It goes to the shop, checks out, they give it back- I kill it again.

They end up giving me an entirely new truck, I start killing it, I repeated this process until they gave me the THIRD truck and the manager calls me to asks what my daily routine is, I go through the basics and add in the whole stop at red light engine off- stop in traffic engine off- etc. and dude goes 

“Why the fuck are you doing this”

“My supervisor wrote me up for my idle time being too high”

“This is completely ridiculous”

He tossed my write up and I’m guessing talked to the supe because I never heard a word about idle time again and I quit caring about it.

There’s my dumb petty story, thanks for reading.

Edit: Made “work” past tense, I don’t work for this shit hole anymore.Back in 2013, I was a senior at a high school I had just transferred to.  I had moved earlier in the year because my parent got divorced, and I made the deliberate choice to leave my old high school and move in with my dad, attending a new high school.  I won't go into much detail about the why, but it was my decision to leave my mom, my old school, and my home town in the Bay Area, and move into a small apartment with my dad.  This comes up later.

Normally, switching schools isn't a huge deal, but it was sort-of an abrupt move; I wasn't able to take any of the AP classes I normally would have taken because they all had mandatory summer projects that I wouldn't have been able to do in a week.  Additionally, a week into the school year, we were told about this stupid senior project they wanted us to do.

In a nutshell, there was some acronym like IMPACT or something, and each letter represented a value of the school.  They wanted us to write about how IMPACT had influenced us in our time at the school.  We were then told that, should we *not* do the senior project, [we wouldn't be able to walk for graduation.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_zrMykBnidM)

I heard this and thought it was stupid for a number of reasons - not the least of which being that I had only just gotten there, so their dumb acronym didn't mean anything to me.  I brought this concern up to the lady telling us about the project, and her response was that I just "figure something out, or don't walk."

Well okay then.

I brought it up with my dad, asked if he gave a hot shit weather or not I walked for a high school graduation.  He did not.  So I just figured that I wouldn't do the project.  End of story, right? 

Wrong.

Ya see, a few months into this senior project, they did a checkup on every senior.  We just lined up in our homeroom to talk to some lady from the principal's office and told her how close we were to being done.  When I walked up, I told her that I wasn't doing it.  

She was confused.  "You're not going to do it?  You have to.  It's non-negotiable."

"No it's not.  I don't have to do it."

"But you won't walk if you don't do it."

"Yeah."

Then we just sorta stared at each other, and she wrote my name down and shooed me away.  I correctly assumed that this would not be the last interaction I had regarding this non-issue.  Several weeks later, my suspicions were confirmed when I was pulled out of class and brought into the main office.

They ushered me into the vice-principal's personal office, where she made a bit of a show of pulling out some papers.  She told me that the meeting was regarding a misunderstanding I may have had regarding the senior project.  She was apparently told that I didn't know what to do for the assignment, and I chose to boycott the whole thing as a result.  I quickly corrected her, and explained that I very clearly understood what they wanted me to do, but that I thought it was stupid and wasn't going to do it.  I also explained that I understood the penalty, and was fine with it.  She, like the first lady, seemed confused by this course of action, and just let me leave, since there wasn't really much of a conversation to be had.

A few more weeks later, I get pulled out of *yet another* class for this same thing.  Again, I'm brought up to the vice-principle for a one-on-one.  When I get there, she looks like the cat that ate the canary.  

She begins, "So, I know you were in here awhile ago, and you said you didn't want to do your senior project..."

"No," I interrupted, "I said I wasn't doing the project."

"Well," she continued, "we had a chat with your mother over the phone earlier this week.  She told us that she *really* wants you to walk on your graduation."

I was quiet for a moment.

"Um...  I live with my dad."

"Right, but your mom said she'd like to attend the ceremony and see you walk."

"I don't think you get it," I stated, "I live with my dad *for a reason.*"

If ever there were an expression the perfectly exemplified the dial-up tone, that's the face she made.  After she collected herself, I was released and headed back to class.  

By this point, I was mostly just not doing the project because it was dumb.  But them calling a family member to strong-arm me was crossing a line.  On top of that, they tried to strong-arm me using a parent with whom I was no-contact.  I decided right then that, no matter what, I wasn't caving in to their bullshit.  Fuck the project, fuck the school, fuck the weird tactics they were trying to use.  Though, in my anger was also confusion.  Why the hell did these people care so damn much about one guy not doing an optional assignment?  Also, I made myself very clear, so was that the end of it?

**Spoiler: It wasn't.**

A few more weeks later, I got pulled into the actual principal's office.  The principal, for reference, was one of those guys that tried to make a show of being overly friendly and goofy, but to the point where it came off as superficial.  When I got to his office, he was his usual extroverted self, greeted me, and sat me down.

"So, I've heard about this whole senior project problem you've had going on.  And I get it.  Trust me, I really do - you're new here, so our motto hasn't had as much of an impression.  So, after talking about it with the folks grading the projects, we think it'd be just fine if you had a modified project.  Just do a project on one letter of IMPACT, and you're golden."  He gave me a big warm smile.

"No."

"Sorry?"  He asked, still smiling.

"I'm not doing it."

His smile was slowly fading, "But you only have to do one letter.  It's really not that much."

"Yeah, I got that.  I'm still not going to do it." I stated.

"But you won't be able to walk on graduation day."

"Yep."

"So what's the issue, exactly?"

"You called my mom."

His mouth was open like he was going to say something, but I guess nothing came to mind, as we sat in silence for a good twenty seconds - him trying to formulate an argument, and me making a [Jim Halpert face.](https://img1.looper.com/img/gallery/why-jim-halpert-should-have-been-fired-from-dunder-mifflin/intro-1565380589.jpg)

I told him if that was everything he needed to talk about, I would be heading back to class.  He didn't protest, so I just left.

It was after this meeting that I eventually got some context.  Apparently, California schools will shuffle principals around every few years for some reason that probably makes sense, but I don't care enough to research.  Our principal was going to be switching schools after the 2013 semester had ended, and one of his big plans was to leave that high school with 100% participation in the senior projects that would otherwise not affect any final grade...

He used the threat of preventing students from walking at graduation to bully everyone into doing the dumb project.  ...Almost everyone - I stuck to my guns and refused to do it.  And sure enough, after the deadline had passed, they made a big deal about how happy they were that 99.6% of students completed their senior projects, even though they were hoping for 100%.

And the absolute dumbest part about this exercise in stupid?  After everything was said and done, I was called in one last time to the VP's office.  She told me that despite my refusal to do the senior project, they were still going to let me walk, and gave me five tickets for friends and family.  I laughed, walked out without the tickets, and didn't attend my own graduation.

**TL;DR - I was given the choice of option A or option B.  I chose option B, the admins regretted giving me the option, and then it got personal.**

**EDIT (12/14):** Managed to get ahold of my pops.  I asked him if they ever called him, and what he said was;

"I don't know.  Maybe?  I feel like I had something prepared for if they did call.  You know, I would have told them that your grades were great, you had just transferred from a different school, you didn't know anybody, and that you were just looking to finish up and go to college.  But I can't remember if they actually called me and I told them that.  I feel like I did, but I'm not sure if I did."I was talking to some friends from undergrad and this story from my freshman year came up again. Having recently stumbled upon this subreddit (from r/StoriesAboutKevin, weirdly), I think this might belong?

Second semester of my freshman year, I was taking a music theory course. The professor was very serious about her job and this class was a bit of a weed-out class for students who wanted to pursue Music Education (I was taking it for fun). By the time the end of the semester rolled around, I got the feeling she didn't really like me much because I didn't pay attention in class but still got As on the homework/exams/playing tests (I'd played piano for a decade by this point), so she couldn't really punish me for anything since I wasn't disrupting the class, but was just a thorn in her side through lack of participation (thank god that wasn't part of our grade). Our final project was to find a poem we liked and craft a song using the poem as the lyrics. As she passes out the requirement sheet, she announced that she would be playing these for the class, so we need to put in effort so that we don't feel embarrassed by what she plays in front of everyone (about 30 people). She shoots a glance at me--the least involved student--as she says that, which I took as a challenge. I found a poem called ["A Minor Bird"](https://www.poemhunter.com/poem/a-minor-bird/) and decided to craft my masterpiece in the key of E-flat minor. The reasoning: 6 of the 7 notes are lowered a half-step. So it's not a matter of thinking "everything I see is lowered," it's "everything but one note is lowered," which is fairly hard to keep track of while sight-reading something that utilizes both hands on the piano (we were to hand them in at the beginning of class and she would go through the stack and play them, without practicing first. It's a freshman-level class. How hard could it be?)

I spent weeks working on this because I wanted to make sure it was both well-written *and* an absolute bitch to play. I had upperclassmen take a look at it to make sure everything was labeled correctly, and they told me I was the most magnificent bastard ever because this prof had irked most of the students in the department who had taken her class.

Then the day comes. We all turn our papers in, and I'm visibly excited by everything. The prof comes in, and goes full Dolores Umbridge--"I certainly hope everyone met the requirements and put care into their work. If not, we'll soon find out!"--goes to the piano and pulls the first paper off of the stack, and makes some comments about it that aren't negative but are a bit goading, regarding the amount of effort it seemed to take to write it. She (apparently) pulls mine up about 2/3 of the way, sits down to play it, and stops at the first chord. She looks around, makes eye contact with me and straight-up *glares* before regaining her composure and plunking through my piece. There's several chords that make a nice crunch before she corrects herself (that damn NOT-flat note tripped her up every time), and it sounds like whoever wrote this piece did a shit job because of how it sounded. At the end, the meek international student--who has Perfect Pitch--raises her hand, and goes "Excuse me, Dr. <Music Instructor>? That piece just played... it has 6 flats in the key, yes?" Prof: "Yes, it did. I didn't quite expect that" Student: "You..didn't play all 6 flats, it didn't sound." Prof turns, glares at me, and goes "no, no I did not"

Got a 97% because she marked a chord label incorrect. Went back in and showed her that she missed the not-flat note in the chord, and that it was actually labeled correctly; got it changed to a 100%.

tl;dr Music professor 'threatened' to play our pieces in front of us so we would work harder on it. I wrote something she couldn't play.


Edit: I have the music, played by Finale NotePad, and have made an account just to upload it here: [Enjoy!](https://clyp.it/ehzbip53) Unfortunately, I have no idea where the sheet music is at this point. That class was Spring '09, and I've had a lot of life happen since then.

Edit 2: The sheet music is definitely not on my current computer. The mp3 source also says it was created via Melody Assistant, not Finale, in case anyone cares *that* much. The best I can provide for "pics or it didn't happen" is [this](https://imgur.com/X697fUt), which is just the text of the poem in a word document with the date. Nothing too exciting. I'm going to see if my parents can find my old laptop at their house, and I'll search for the sheet music on there, and I'll share it with everyone who has asked (both publicly and privately) for a copy of it!

Edit 2.5: With my new job in “the real world,” I haven’t had vacation time to go back to visit my parents to find said sheet music. I’ve had quite a few people message me/comment to ask for it, so I’m sorry to disappoint still. There have been a few other people in the comments who posted a link to their reverse-sheet music creations, and they look to be pretty close (the beginning starts with a pickup note on Beat 4, so that throws a lot of the computer-created versions off). I’ll post comments from the people who messaged me theirs, as well, because this post is about to be archived and I won’t be back home before then Despite the big bold sign written in such a way that even the North Sentinelese could understand it, almost everyone with $50s and $100s thinks they don't need no stinking bank and will just go to us to get that big bill broken down. 

Well it keeps wiping out our tills when they raise a fuss and eventually they called corporate. Their response was to have us rescind the policy and... carry more money in the tills. Obviously they have never worked a till in their lives otherwise they would know why we don't carry disgusting amounts of money in the register. 


But they didn't tell us we needed $20s and $10s. So we decide to start some malicious compliance. 

We go to the bank and their mouths twist into a grin like that of a Midnight Lycanroc when we tell them. We get *Dozens* of $5s and $1s... and wait. 


First Fucker walks in and smugly places down a $100. his change is $95. Here we go! I start singing the Schoolhouse Rock song. Five ten fifteen twenty twenty five... he gets **nineteen $5s**. 
He asks where the $20s are and i tell him "We are out. People keep paying with $50s and $100s and wipe out the $10s and $20s."

Second fucker comes in and pays for a $0.50 cookie with a $50. When he gets nine fives he says he wanted twenties. I inform him that he could always go to a bank. 

This continues for four more fuckers. Take THAT. 

EDIT: Thank you for the gold, stranger. And the upvotes are OVER NINE THOUSAAAAAND! This story is from a dinner party I hosted before the pandemic. I invited 6 folks and shortly after the invites were sent I received a call from Sally.


Sally (not her real name) advised me that she was now on a salt-free diet due to medical reasons.   She advised that at home she cooked without any salt and gave me a speech about how wonderful salt-free life was.  


I was skeptical and advised her that I would personally find it difficult to give up all salt.  Was she sure she wasn't just on a low sodium diet? 


Sally advised that unless her dish was salt-free she wouldn't be attending.   While telling her no was an option, I'm not that person (see my previous malicious compliance).  I was pissed off at Sally for years of being difficult at the dinner table and restaurants.  Trust me, there was always something wrong with her meal, or it's preparation, or the flavor, or the waiter, or....

With a smile so large you could hear it through the phone I assured her that her request for salt-free was 100% going to be accommodated.


On the dinner night I prepped the meal.  Sally was getting the same thing as everything else with one critical difference.  All of her food was prepped in separate containers, baked on separate racks, and seasoned with exactly the same flavors sans salt.




Dinner time and my guest arrive.  I have all of Sally's food plated on white plates.  Everyone else gets grey plates.


First round: Appetizers.   Fried calamari with a lemon jalapeno butter sauce.  This dish typically has salt in both the batter and the sauce.  As Sally couldn't have that, I battered her calamari in salt-free seasonings and flour. Her condiment looked exactly the same but was made with unsalted butter and no added salt.  


I place Sally's plate in front of her first and she immediately states she asked for salt-free. I assure her that her dish is salt-free and I made sure to cook hers separate and even use a different colored plate to keep it straight. 


We all sit to talk and enjoy the squid.   Sally takes a bite and makes a face.  Mine has no flavor! She exclaims.


All of my other guest tell Sally it's divine, delicious, best they've had, etc.  I smile at Sally and assure her that her dish was flavored exactly as everyone else.  The only difference is that she received absolutely no salt.   


It's at this point that Sally has a moment of clarity. It's painfully obvious on her face.  She realizes she can't complain about the lack of salt as she's already told the table about her salt-free life.  She also can't claim it tastes terrible if everyone else is raving about the food.  She literally looks like she was about to cry at the table.  


As my guest enjoy their dinner Sally is slowly doing the toddler plays with her food munch and pushing her calamari around the plate.  After a few moments she reaches for the sauce that I made for everyone else. 

Sally!  Be careful the salt free sauce is in the white bowl.  That one has salt. 


She mumbles something about wanting to taste the difference before literally dumping the bowl on her calamari.  She then exclaims how much better it tasted. You and I know that, of course, things taste better with salt.  


So this drama repeated itself over the main course of honey roasted salmon with pine nuts.  I also am no heathen and had both salt and pepper on the table for my guest. I'm not going to judge you for needing more flavor.   Here we go!   


Sally takes a bite of her fish and once again realizes that it has no salt.  She reaches for the salt shaker and conversation stops. Another guest asked sally if she was okay with adding salt to her food.  She says that she can occasionally have salt. She proceeds to shower her fish with salt sprinkles.  


I also baked some cookies for desert. The dough uses a little salt.  I made sure to whip up a separate batch of cookies wrapped to go for her. Salt free of course!  

When I handed her those cookies the look of defeat that hit her face warmed my heart.  


Dinner is over, everyone is happy except for Sally.   I called her the next week to make sure she was okay as she's consumed sodium at my party.  Sally told me her doctor has removed her sodium restrictions and she won't need that accomodation at future meals.    On the phone I congratulate her for her good health.  When I hang up I laugh until my sides hurt.  Salt-free life apparently  doesn't taste good when the salt is actually omitted!!! 



Note: To any on a low or no sodium diet for their health- I commend you.  Sally, however, wasn't actually on this diet.  This is evidenced by her shock at how salt-free food tasted.  I confirmed with her husband that she's never stopped using salt at home.  Her salt-free claims were a ploy for attention that back-fried tastelessly. 



TLDR:. Sally lied and stated she required a salt-free diet.  She is defeated and miserable when forced to eat salt-free food.


Common question- why are we friends? Sally is married to one of my  best friends.  As my friend has elected to stay married to her I have tolerated her.  I wouldn't call her a friend but we are where we are.



Comment:

I'm loving the responses here. I truly empathize with those living with medically restrictive diets.  Life is hard enough without that being added into the mix.  This is funny and I'm sharing it with Sally's husband.  He needs to get some first hand knowledge of all the reasons claiming false dietary restrictions just isn't okay.  



And I want to be clear: never tamper with someone's food.  This MC worked because no harm could come to Sally.So this is about five years ago. I worked as a chef at a bakery. It was my job to make everything but the baked goods. Every morning the Baker and I would walk in at about 4 am and knock out all the food needed for the day. This would leave me ready to go home around 10 AM or so. This put us at the perfect time to deliver online orders.

It was common for companies or other entities to place large catering orders with us. The baker and I would split them down the middle and deliver them on our way home.

The delivery in question was for Bob, Dick, and Harry, Attorneys at law. I have never delivered to BD&H before, but they were a regular of sorts. Every financial quarter, they would hold a huge meeting. This meeting would require roughly $700 of bagels and bagel accessories. This spread included eight dozen bagels, all ten of our flavors of cream cheese, pastries, brownies, and enough coffee to power a college dorm though finals week.

My passenger seat, entire back seat, and entire trunk are filled with food. Now BD&H is located on the ninth floor of a commercial sky scraper deep in an industrial complex downtown. parking was non-existent. There were meters outside the building, but I knew I would need close to ten trips to deliver all this food, and didn't have a lot of change on me. Company policy was to just pay whatever fines I needed to park and then turn in my receipts. the money would end up on my next paycheck.

So the building has its own parking garage, so I pull on in. The security guard, lets call him Sam, stops me and says that the parking garage is for employees only. I happily show him my delivery invoice, and offer him a bribery bagel, (never leave the store without at least two.)

Sam refuses the bagel and says I can park in one of the guest spots on the bottom floor. the fee is $5 for every 30 minutes, minimum $10. I thank him and head to the bottom floor of the garage. So there are a total of six guest parking spaces. Just six. All of them are taken. I head back up to talk to Sam, when I see an open parking spot reserved for Bob, Dick and Harry, Attorneys at Law. There are cars in every spot, with many spots being reserved for employees by name. The last spot is empty, and is reserved for "Guest of BD&H".

Perfect. I pull on in. I grab the most important part of the delivery (the coffee) and head to the stairwell. I get into the elevator and hit the button for floor nine. The elevator asks for my employee ID card. well... crud. So, I try the lobby. That works. From there its nine flights of stairs until I am outside the law firm of Bob, Dick, and Harry. After introducing myself, I am shown to the room where the meeting will take place. A table is set aside for me. I set down the coffee and head for trip number two.

That is when I see Sam talking to the receptionist. He runs over and starts shouting at me. "I am putting a boot on your F\*\*\*ing car. I told you to park in guest on the bottom floor!" I don't get a word in before he launches into a speech about security and how I could be hurting his building or people. That is when a very well dressed man walks over. It so happens to be Bob, the Bob of Bob, Dick and Harry's.

Bob asks what is the problem and soon the two are arguing.

Bob: OP is delivering food for my meeting. He is allowed to use my parking spots.

Sam: Those parking spots belong to the building. You are leasing them like you lease this floor. I am the one who says who can park there. He isn't an employee so he isn't parking!

Bob: Then I am making him an employee!

Sam: You can't do that!

Bob: ... ... ... You know what. You are right. Harry! Harry! get over here.

Harry walks over with an amused look on his face.

Bob: Harry here is the head of our HR department. Harry, hire this boy.

Harry pulls out a piece of paper and scribbles, "OP is now a member of Bob, Dick, and Harry's" and signs it, then asks me to sign as well. I do so.

Bob reaches over to the receptionist, who is already grabbing some things.

Bob: Here is your employee badge, your -PARKING PERMIT- and your elevator key card. Now please, do the job I have -HIRED- you to do, and deliver my bagels.

Sam looks on in utter fury as I ride the elevator down to my car.

Seven sweet sweet elevator rides later, all the food is delivered. Bob and Harry meet me at the table.

Bob: OP, you have made great strides in this company and I am proud of your work, but I feel it is time for us to part ways. Here is your final check.

Bob then hands me a crisp $50 bill.

Harry: And your severance package. Now please be sure to return your badge and card on the way out.

Harry hands me a $20 and sends me on my way. The receptionist is sure to validate the parking ticket that Sam gave me, and I head on out. On the way out, Sam grins at me and asks for my ticket. I place it in the machine in his station. It sees the validation I got, and lets me out for free. Sam glares at me as I drive off into the... late morning sun.

TL:DR, Security guard said I didn't work here so I can't park here. Client pretends to hire me to get around the rules. Never argue with lawyers.Back in the days when 33.6kbps modems were hot shit, I worked for the engineering department of a growing company.

This company had started small.  It was privately owned, and the VPs had all put in a portion of their own money to start the company.  By this time in the story, they were finally making a respectable 30-40 million a year in profits.  

But they still acted like a small company.  Penny pinching.

Our engineering department was designing circuit boards with embedded computer systems.  And to program these, instead of soldering the microcomputer to the board, we would solder on a microcontroller socket, and then plug in an "In Circuit Emulator" that would *pretend* it was a microcontroller, and allow the programmer to create the required program.

This In Circuit Emulator, or ICE, was made by Hitachi.  It plugged into a free PCI slot on your PC, and had a ribbon cable that would attach to the specialized microcontroller die that plugged into the socket.

It was a mess.  It gave our tiny IT department headaches.  And it cost $15,000.  And it was an absolute necessity for most of our most popular product lines.  And there was only one of them.

And we were renting it.  It cost $4,000 a month. 

The first month we had it, our CTO and Marketing VP planned our whole new product line around this family of microcontrollers.

So, at the end of the month, us engineers ask management to buy this for us.  Since we would be using it for a while.

The Engineering VP saw the price tag, and told us to just rent it.  Surely we would be done with it soon.  Engineers, being practical, forgot about the objection and just put our noses to the wheel.

The CTO and Marketing made plans to keep us busy using this microcontroller line for a while.  They pre-ordered a few million chips.  

After a year, the VP of Finance asked about this recurring contract line item.  They called the engineer who had originally started the contract.  The engineer helpfully forwarded the approval from the Engineering VP, and his later email asking to buy it, and the VP's reply where he demurred.

By the end of the week, this toy was ours.  Along with a second one, since finance determined that product rollout was being affected by not enough access to the equipment.  

Hitachi just gave us the first one.  Stopped charging us, and never asked for it back.  We paid $15,000 for a second one.

No one got fired or demoted.  But at the next department meeting, the Engineering VP tried to tell us that we didn't have enough money to upgrade our PCs.  That one engineer spoke up, "Would $40 thousand cover it?"

The company found the money.Worked for a Medical Transportation company that had a contract with Medicaid.

One of their many rules was that you could not provide any assistance to the patient INSIDE of their house.

One elderly lady had an old house with a very small foyer that you had to climb three steps to get to the main floor.  The only other entrance was around back and up two and a half flights of rickety steps to an old deck that opened into a bedroom. 

Upstairs.  She's in a wheelchair.

Common sense says take her in the front door, up three stairs and she's home on the level she lives on.

Medicaid says take her up the outside stairs, dump her in the bedroom upstairs and let her worry about getting down to the living room level.

We ignored their policy and took her in the front door anyway.

A random inspection by a random inspector showed that we were not in compliance.

We appealed, the inspector came out and saw the different options and decided that we had no case for appeal.  Take her up the outside stairs.

Nope.  From then on, when the driver arrived at her house, he would get her out of the van in the sidewalk, and then get on the radio and tell the boss to shove his stupid job.

Now that he was no longer an employee, he was free to assist this lovely person into her front door and up the stairs.

Once finished, they would come back to the van, tell the boss they'd reconsidered, and ask for their job back.

Boss was ALWAYS understanding and took them back, but very carefully noted the 10 to 15 minute break in their employment, to show that the company remained in compliance.

Aftermath:  We had contests to see who could have the most dramatic "I quit" scene.

Medicaid noted our activities, but couldn't put a handle on how to stop it.

Malicious Compliance achieved!!This happened a few years ago, I was working at a large national chain restaurant as a Manager.   I was asked to temporarily re-assign to a location in a city about an hour away, and accepted...they put me up in a hotel, the whole 9 yards.   

The first weekend I was there, I discovered that the GM had screwed up and not ordered any change (small bills/rolls of coins) for the safe, and that the local branch of our bank would be closing in the next hour.   I also happened to have a personal account at the same bank, and had, in the past, gone and gotten change from the branch back home.

Since time was tight, I quickly looked up the address of the bank, grabbed $800 dollars, and jumped in my car.   I get to the bank, wait in line, and then ask them to make change ($400 in $5 bills, $300 in $1 bills, and $100 in assorted rolled coins).   The teller tells me that the bank doesn't make change.   Me, thinking it was because they didn't know me, informed her that our restaurant had an account she could look up.   She then told me, "No, we don't make change at all."    The thought going through my brain was, "WTF? You are a BANK!!!"   I tried explaining the situation, but was quickly shot down.   I left, went back to my car, then had an idea.   

I went back inside the bank with my personal checkbook.   Got to the front of the line, and (luckily) the same teller.   Before she could even greet me, I told held out my checkbook and told her, "I would like to close this account, since this bank is no longer customer service oriented".   She kind of rolled her eyes, but went about my request.   Then she asked how I wanted my cash back (an automatic response, I'm sure, and one I was counting on).    I said, "$400 in $5's, $300 in $1's, $70 in rolled quarters, $25 in rolled dimes, $4 in rolled nickels, and $1 in rolled pennies.    The rest can be on a cashier's check."   No reason for her to deny it, so I got my change.


And the following Monday, I returned, closed out the other 2 accounts I had there, and I opened accounts at a different bank where I have been banking ever since.


EDIT:   So, wow, never saw this exploding this much....I have only read a few comments and won't be back online until tomorrow to read the rest, but let me clarify something from the comments I did read... I did not open or close any accounts for the business.    I closed my personal account and took the payout in small change to help the restaurant, then kept the larger bills for myself.    In essence, I made myself into the bank...I made change for the restaurant.   On Monday, I closed all of my personal accounts with this bank, and opened new accounts at a different bank, and deposited the $800 in large bills along with the money from my accounts.    Also:   this was 15 years ago, so banking at the time was not all done on a Smartphone, and none of my bills were autopay, I still wrote checks.

EDIT 2:   Thank you so much, kind strangers!    My first Gold ever!   And I think it's only my 2nd or 3rd time getting silver, don't honestly remember!   Seriously didn't expect this to take off this way...My friend told me this story and it was just too good not to share:

So the town we live in has lots of good old fashioned British pubs, and one that is a pub during the week and then turns into (sort of) a club at the weekends. Since it's the only place open past 12/1am it tends to attract a lot of drunk dickheads.

My friend was working one night with two other bar staff. One other guy and a girl who I've been told was pretty attractive. It was about 11:55pm and a guy walks up to the bar, my friend wasn't serving anyone at the time and goes to take his order.

"No thanks mate, I'll wait for her"

My friend tried to explain that she was serving customers at the other end of the bar, and that he would be the one to take his order.

"No. I am ONLY getting served by her! No-one else!"

Sure mate, no problem.

My friend then waits for his colleague to finish serving her existing customer, by the time she's done it's around 11:57pm. So my friend turns to her and says "Hey, you've only got 3 minutes left of your shift, so you might as well leave now, we've got it covered"

So she leaves. My friend and the other guy working both refused to serve him for the rest of the night, as per his request.Up until fairly recently, I worked as a camp bus driver in a major industrial area. What my duties where, was to pick people up from the camp (where they lived for a certain amount of time, I was two weeks in, one week out) and take them into the plant and drop them off at a variety of dropoff areas (depending on what their job was), then pick up anyone that was returning to the camp for their rest period.

Now, there where certain designated areas for the buses to pick up and dropoff (you know, a bus stop) and only buses where supposed to be parked in those areas. The issue was that people would keep parking their work pickup in the bus areas and block us off. We kept asking them to not do that, they kept doing it and eventually it all boiled over when a higher-up in the company started giving us shit over picking people up out of the designated areas (because people kept blocking the areas with pickups), we explained why we did it and the higher-up promised to do something about it, but never did.

The second time that higher-up gave us shit over picking people up out of our designated areas, my manager told us (the bus drivers) that the next time this happened that we should let him know via radio and then just leave. So that's what I did.

Now, we didn't just spring this on our passengers. We made sure that every single one of them knew, that the next time it was blocked off, that the bus would just continue on it's way and leave them behind. When I spread the news to my passengers I heard a lot of laughter and could tell that they didn't believe me.

However, the next day, it happened again. There where pickups in our areas once again and like the good little minion I was, I did as I was directed, got on the radio to my manager, let him know what was happening, and left.

I understand that there was a number of interesting phone calls afterwards.

But we never had a problem with pickups in our areas afterwards.

EDIT: Jesus Christ everyone, I make a quick post, go away for a few hours and come back to this.

I am officially overwhelmed.

Thanks though.

EDIT 2: AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAaaaaaaaaaAAAAAAAA.

Why so many upvotes and comments and awards, you all have broke my brain.**You know all those Amazon vendors that are offering gift cards and free items in exchange for 5 star reviews? What I do is accept offer, write the review, get my gift card, edit the review to one star and explain the situation.**

I started getting items in the mail like headphones or whatever with a note that offers free suff and 10$ gift cards in exchange for writing a 5 star review on Amazon. I’m a fairly big reviewer, over the years I have written more than 2,000 legit reviews. ￼ To me, reviews are the most useful aspect of Amazon and nothing pisses me off more than fake reviews to promote a shitty product.

So I said “fuck it”, I started writing the review, emailing the “scammer” with a link to my review, get my $10 gift card, then I edit the review to explicitly explain how this scammer is trying to rig the system.

There’s absolutely nothing to prevent you from doing this. Not only do you waste their time and money, but your review can help raise awareness of this bullshit.I work in a major pizza delivery chain that has so far been unsuccessful in out-pizzaing the hut. Our store is in a college town, and everyone is bored as hell right now for obvious reasons. So we've gone from maybe one prank call a day to at least 3-5. Which isn't much but still really annoying with how much more business we've been getting, again for obvious reasons. 

The worst part is how uncreative and low effort most of them are. At least 80% of them are "Can I get a boneless pizza", or "is this the Kristy Krab", with the occasional *insert GTA fast food order copypasta here*. 

This had been going on way to long so I took up the habit of just hanging up whenever someone starts saying some stupid shit. The boss wasn't too happy about this but didn't care enough to say anything until an incident where I hung up on someone who wanted that boneless pizza and he called back pissed because he actually wanted to order. 

So I get a stern talking-to from boss man and he sends a message to the company's group chat app saying: "I know we've been getting more prank calls than usual, but please don't follow in certain people's footsteps and just hang up on them. Take the calls as seriously as possible. If they order something we can't make, calmly explain it to them and offer them something we do actually sell. We want to try to make money off of them even if they're acting dumb"

So the very next call is where the fun starts.
"Thank you for calling, what can I get you"
"I'm soooooo hungry, can I get an extra-extra-extra-extra large pizza with tripple every topping"
"I'm sorry ma'am, we can only go up to one extra and double each topping"
"Hmmmm ok then. Can I get twenty XL's of each meat y'all have. So like 20 pepperoni, 20 sausage, etcetera"
These people are obviously high as hell and giggling in the background the whole time
"Sure, give me a sec to ring it all up... Ok so that's 180 pizzas, the total will be $1000 (don't remember the actual price but close enough) and it'll take about 3 hours"
"Awesome thanks! We'll pay with a check when we get there *dial tone*" 

So I place the order, and not 30 seconds later I hear "What the actual fuck" from the boss and he runs to the computer. 
"How are they paying for this?" He asks me.
 "they said with a check, we do still take checks for orders over $200 right?". 
"They can't have been serious, was this a prank call"
"Not sure boss, you said take all calls seriously"

He just grumbles and picks up the phone and calls the customer, and all I hear is super loud laughter as he hangs up. 

Meanwhile, other employees have started actually making the ridiculous order not noticing anything weird about it. So by the time the boss finishes the call and cancels the order on the computer, there are already five XL pepperoni pizzas in the oven. So we got free dinner for everyone working that night as well as another message in the group chat app simply saying "in regards to my last message, please just use good judgement when taking orders"This just happened maybe 5 mins ago and I think it's hilarious.

I'm the facility manager for my building. Everything that happens and goes wrong, is my responsibility. So I make sure everything runs smoothly. My boss had made it clear: It's MY building and I was hired to not only keep people in line but run everything. I'm not a dick but I hold people accountable, forcibly but politely. There was no facility manager for a long time before I came along and both clients and employees ran amok, with no order. In the 4 months I've been here, my boss has praised my performance and has gone to bat for me countless times, she's the best boss I've ever had. I've got a firm but fair approach and my reputation reflects that.

I've got a Karen in the building and trust me, the name stereotype applies, who's just a counselor for family services, has nothing to do with our group. She likes to complain about everything and gives my boss a headache almost daily. She shares an office with another women, who's unfortunately, picking up on her Karen tendencies (Karen In Training), I've been doing a keycard audit all week and I knew to leave Karen's keycard alone because she's the only Karen in the building, so her name stands out. I am missing 75 keycards, lots of former employees having all door access, dating all the way back to 2015. Can't have that so I deleted a lot of them, especially if it had a wacky name or just a room number.  However, I did delete "KIT's" card information because it wasn't under her name. She just came to tell me her keycard wasn't working and Karen happened to be passing by and overheard it.

I went and fixed "KIT's" keycard and we went to go check to see if it worked or not. We found Karen outside the office waiting, complaining to my boss that her keycard didn't work either. Karen wandered away and my boss rolled her eyes and I smiled and I told her I would take care of it. After checking to make sure "KIT's" keycard worked, I went downstairs to check the system, looked up Karen and wouldn't you know it, her keycard was completely fine. In fact, it showed she had a MASTER keycard. So I changed all of her permissions and limited her back to just her room ONLY.

I went upstairs and got my boss's attention because her office is next door to the ladies and I mouthed LISTEN and pointed. I opened their door and was all, "hey Karen! I went and checked your keycard in the system. Everything is good to go. In fact, it said you had a MASTER key to the building and per the company orders, since you're not a contractor or a company employee, I can't give you that access. So I had to revoke your status to just this room ONLY. Can't have you bugging people on official business *Wink* Thanks for bringing your keycard to my attention." She started to object that she needed the master keycard because XYZ and I was all, "yeah sorry. Maybe before but I'm the facility manager and you don't need access to everything except this office and if you do, it's outside your pay grade, so you'll have to come get me. Ok? Cool thanks byyeeeeeee..." And then just closed the door on her mid sentence. My boss was quietly laughing her ass off in her office and gave me an air high five.

TLDR:
Karen complained her keycard didn't work, when it absolutely did. In fact, she had master key access and had she not said anything, would still have it but made me check and I revoked her status completely to just her room only.

Edit:
To be clear, I'm not talking down about my coworkers. They're fantastic people and no I'm not a suck up. They work in education and bend over backwards to help students and customers get the information and help they need. The building mostly got shut down and neglected and customers got lazy due to the C-word. We offer free classrooms to those who need it, including a computer lab, by a reservation 1st come, 1st serve basis. The problems we ran into was that the previous FM passed away suddenly and the replacement was temporary. Coupled with the C-word and this was our problem. My coworkers weren't able to enforce rules and regulations and rooms were left destroyed and neglected, keys stolen, etc. Since my arrival, I've enforced the rules and allowed the staff to resume their normal duties, without having to clean up after and babysit customers. Karen isn't staff, she's just renting an office. She has no business having access to our materials, supplies or workspaces. Especially when they're handling students private information.I do a lot of fly-in fly-out travel for my job. Usually I am so busy with work while onsite or I am stationed somewhere with food options I don't want to waste my calories on and I don't eat anything the whole day or just buy a coffee.  

Our employee expenses policy at work is $30 a day which is mostly fine. But there are some high cost of living cities and sometimes my meals go above that policy because there is not many options, especially if I want to eat healthy which is important when you are constantly on the road. Plus so many airports have completely shut down their food courts and haven't reopened them yet so there's hardly any options but fast food.  

So I submit my expenses one month and I have gone $1.50 over the daily limit because I treated myself to a coffee that morning as well as a lunch because I was tired after the god awful early flight I had to take.

The company had recently changed their policy and now a different set of people are approving expenses. The previous people didn't mind going over by a few bucks because it balances out with trips where I didn't eat anything but this new group are absolute sticklers and rejected the expense citing I was over the daily limit. 

I tried to argue I had 10 other visits that month in which I didn't eat a single thing but they still weren't budging. It really left a sour taste in my mouth. 

Now every single visit I force myself to spend as close to $30 as I can because fuck them. My husband is happy because it means I now bring back (slightly squished but free) food for him. I feel bad for wasting food but often I just buy a meal and eat a few bites and throw it in the bin.

However, the expense policy is $30 a day and by god I am going to stick to it now. 

While in the past I might have billed $100 for the entire month because I didn't bother to eat, I am now billing twice or three times that. I also used to push myself to keep working all day but now I religiously take my 30 minutes to go and buy some food so that's 30 mins less work they are getting from me too.**Uber**: You may not sue us in a court of law, you must take all complaints to third party arbitration.   
**12,500 Drivers**: Hold my beer.

A class action lawsuit would mean that Uber only needed to deal with one plaintiff.   But by filing 12,500 individual requests for arbitration Uber has to hire and pay for tens of thousands of arbitrators to deal with each complaint individually.

[https://gizmodo.com/ubers-arbitration-policy-comes-back-to-bite-it-in-the-a-1830892372](https://gizmodo.com/ubers-arbitration-policy-comes-back-to-bite-it-in-the-a-1830892372)Briefly during the pandemic, I worked as a manager at a Ralph’s (a NYC-area ice cream chain) and one night I as I’m helping out scooping I hear a customer getting annoyed at the window and starting to get snippy with one of the young kids who was working the window, so I head over to smooth the situation as manager. 

The woman is mad because the hot fudge on her hot fudge sundae is hot and going to melt the ice cream. I explain to her that hot fudge is indeed served hot but she insists so I make her a new sundae with magic shell topping instead and let her keep the hot fudge one. 

By the time I return with that, this customer is stirring her spoon through another cup of cream ice (kind of like a sherbet) she ordered, obviously about to complain about it. The flavor she ordered was called “graham crunch” and she proceeded to tell me that there wasn’t any graham crunch in it. That she orders this flavor all the time and she knows that I am intentionally stiffing her. I tell her that this is just how the flavor is and I don’t name or make the ice cream, but she isn’t having it. She wants me to “fix” it. 

We’ve got some crushed graham cracker topping in the back, so as she is berating me I just walk away from her and grab the entire container and come back to the window with it. At this point, we’ve got a line of people down the block because this lady has held us up so there are lots of witnesses to what I was about to do. 

Without breaking eye contact with her as she continues to tell me that I’m wrong about the ice cream I scoop 6 days a week, I open the lid of the container and empty the entire thing over her cup of the offending ice cream. Graham crackers are everywhere. Her ice cream is now definitely crunchy. 

She loses her mind at this and starts yelling at me she knows the owner and will get me fired. I tell her “Yeah, Steve is a nice guy” and she responds with “I’ve known Steve a long time” to which I respond “well his name is John. Get out of here and don’t bother my employees for free ice cream again.” 

Now sufficiently embarrassed in front of the long line of customers, the lady leaves in a huff and indeed never returns. The next few customers left us $20 tips in the jar to make up for her, so the kids who worked for me left with quite a bit more in their pockets than they normally would and realized that their manager had their back.My dad's words years ago when I started a discussion with my mom over some dumb racist shit  she said on Facebook. Facebook brings out the worst in my mother who in real life used to be a lovely woman but over the years got lost in her echochamber of stupidity. I tried getting her out but "I'm not to get involved in my mom's Facebookstuff."

Today there was an illegal protest in my city. A protest organized on Facebook by the lowest of the low of our society. We have a group of about 100 delusionals in the country who're actually willing to get from behind their keyboards and disrupt public transport in my city any opportunity they can get in the name of 'the people.

My parents (not a part of the 100 but seem to be well on their way) went to todays protest, the protest was illegal, they were told to seperate and leave, they didn't, they got arrested. Haha. They didn't have any form of identification on them so they were not allowed to leave. 

My dad called for the first time this afternoon asking me to go to their place, pick up the IDs and then the policestation. I asked if this was about the Facebookevent, he said yes, I said "I better not get involved then" hung up and ignored his next 17 calls.

My aunt appearantly went to pick them up later tonight and everyone's pissed at me saying I'm a traitor except for grandma, who called to say she misses me and I haven't been able to get the grin of my face.So this happened about 10 years ago when I worked at the box office of a movie theatre (before automated machines were the norm). Adult tickets (14+) were $11.99, kids (3-13) were $9.50 and kids under 3 were free.

I had a woman come to my till with two kids. Now, these kids looked to be about 15, though it can be hard to tell sometimes. As many kids don't carry any kind of ID, the rule of thumb was to sell either a kids ticket or adult ticket based on how old the adult told us the kids were. Many people would abuse this and say the kids were 13 in order to save a few bucks. Typically, I didn't care as I understood the prices were pretty high and this was a big chain so a few older kids getting cheaper tickets wasn't a big deal. What was different this time is that the woman was very rude throughout the whole transaction. 

We have a series of questions we have to ask throughout the transaction (loyalty program etc.) and we would randomly get scored by mystery shoppers to ensure we were following the script. This woman was annoyed and short with me throughout the whole transaction when I was being super friendly and just trying to do my job. When we got to the part about what kind of tickets she needed, it went something like this:

Me: How old are the kids?

Her: Why?

Me: So I know whether they need kids tickets or adult tickets.

Her: What is the difference?

Me: Adult tickets are for 14+ and are $11.99, kids tickets are for 3-13 and are $9.50.

Her: Oh, they're 13.

Me: Okay, and which film would you like to go see today?

Her: \[whatever film it was, I can't remember anymore\]

Me: Okay, no problem, for 2 kids and 1 adult that will be $30.99 total.

Her: Actually, I am not going with them, I am just dropping them off.

Me: Unfortunately, this movie is 14A, which means you have to be either 14 or accompanied by an adult to see it.

Her: Well, they're 14.

Me: You just told me they're 13.

Her: They're actually 14, I just didn't want to pay the price for adult tickets.

Me: Unfortunately you told me they're 13. Unless you have ID that shows they are 14, I have to assume what you first told me was correct and cannot allow them to watch this movie unsupervised as it is 14A.

Her: This is ridiculous, so what are my options?

Me: They can either go to a different movie that is not 14A, or you will have to buy a ticket and accompany them to this one.

After a lot of back and forth about options, she finally decided to bite the bullet and buy an adult ticket to accompany them. I like to think she spent the next 2 hours reflecting on how her attempt to save $5 ended up costing her $11.99 and 2 hours of her time. Realistically, she likely bought the ticket, accompanied them into the theatre, and then left them there to watch the movie while she went shopping. Either way, it still cost her the extra $11.99 for her ticket!About 10 years ago, during my first full-time job out of college, I had a boss who decided she hated me. I'm not completely sure why, but she would go out of her way to make my life miserable. Demoted me to an overnight shift but wouldn't give me a reason, changed my shift around on a whim without notice (once changed my schedule for the next day after I had left without telling me, then wrote me up when I didn't show up on time). Stuff like that. She was a monster. So I was looking for another job.

Well I found one, and I went in to give her my 2 weeks notice. This happened to be in the middle of a mass exodus for the company, as I was the 5th person to quit over the course of about 3-4 weeks. Morale was very low, and whenever anyone quit she would buy pizza for everyone instead of addressing why the place was so miserable and people were leaving. 

After I gave my 2 weeks, she said "Don't tell anyone you're leaving." So I said OK, and walked out of her office and announced to all my coworkers "Hey, guess what everyone! You're all getting pizza!" and they instantly knew what had happened. She was very unhappy and I felt great. I served out the rest of my 2 weeks and she never spoke to me again.So my first job was a server at a very popular 24 hour breakfast diner/chain. We had lots of colorful customers. One morning, I’m serving a woman sitting by herself. I ask her what I can get her, and she says she’d like an omelette. We have a list of pre-built omelettes, or you can build your own, so I ask her how she’d like her omelette. “Just a regular omelette, please” she tells me. 

“Okay, so you don’t want one of the signature omelettes, what would you like inside of yours?” I ask

“Nothing, just a regular omelette.” She replies with a huff 

I pause for a second because this order does occur, but not often. Some people like their eggs scrambled and cooked, then rolled up. “So you’d like an omelette with nothing inside?” 

“YES! A plain omelette!” She snaps, now irritated that I’ve questioned her several times. 

So I enter the order, a 5-egg omelette with no fillings and no toppings. A few minutes later it comes out, and she is appalled. “What is THIS?!” 

Your plain omelette, I reply...

“But where is the cheese, or the ham or the onions?!”. She is irate. 

“Ma’am, you ordered an omelette with nothing inside...” 

She gets cocky and says “An omelette is eggs rolled up with ham, cheese, and onions! Everything else is extra! You should know this, working at a breakfast place!”

I look at her deadpan and inform her “actually, ma’am, omelette is French for scrambled eggs that are fried and rolled or folded; everything else is extra”

I’m busy so I walk off and help other colorful customers, meanwhile she flags down a manager to complain, who confirms what I told her and points out that in the menu there is, very specifically, a ham cheese and onion omelette  with a large picture in the middle of the page. Then tells her she has to re-order her meal and wait a second time. 

She didn’t leave a tip.I originally posted this as a comment on another thread, but it brought up so interesting discussion so I figured I'd post its own topic. I use to work as a 911 dispatcher and I once took a call from a lady who was complaining about a black man walking down the street. He was doing nothing wrong...except, as she put it, "he's black and walking down the street". She insisted an officer be dispatched to speak with her and we had a policy that we had to dispatch. Soooo...I sent the only black officer on duty. It was out of his area, but a computer message to him and the supervisor made it obvious why he was going. When he arrived she went nuts and called again screaming that there was now a black man knocking on her door. I said, "yes this is the police officer you requested."  Ultimately I had to send the supervisor out because she refused to open the door and was throwing a huge fit on the phone. 

Edit: Thanks for the gold! I never expected this to blow up like it has. As for the few people who have felt the need to say this is fake..it's not, this is the world we live in and it happened. It happens every day. Years ago I worked at as a cocktail bartender and waiter. A group of suits came in and sat down and I went to take their order. I got a bad vibe off them from the get go and after I finished the order and went to leave this 30 something sleazy guy said loud enough for everyone to hear, “walk away slowly baby so we can watch”. I smiled at him and started to do an over dramatic slow motion back away, keeping eye contact with him and smiling the whole time. 
I told the other waiters about it and everyone started doing these slow motion walks whenever they walked past their table.  The best one was a bus boy who deliberately dropped something next to their table then did a very slow and sexy pick up like the ‘bend and snap’ from legally blonde. 

They left pretty quickly.This happened when I was 16 years old and just got my drivers' License.  My parents had me run to the store to pick up some groceries.  I stopped by my friend's house on the way back home for maybe 5 minutes to show him I got my license and I was out driving alone.  It was a really fun moment in the life of a 16 year old.

My stepmom Mary Ann freaked out. "We did not give you permission to drive to Bill's house!  We told you to go to the store and that is ALL!"  I told Mary Ann and my dad that they had let me drive to Matt's house the day before, so I didn't think it was a big deal. 

They went unreasonable and laid down the unbendable rule that set up the Malicious Compliance.  "You are not allowed to drive anywhere we do not give explicit permission for you to drive.  Period, end of sentence.  Just because you were allowed to do it previously does not ever give you permission another time.  Ever."

Fast forward three days later.  My 13 year old stepsister has been a jerk to me all day, and I'm sick of her BS.  She goes quiet for about 30 minutes and then comes out all sticky sweet.  "Hey Brian, it's time to take me to ballet."   

I have taken her to ballet 3 days a week since I got my license.  It's basically one of my chores.  But I see my opportunity to say "Screw you!" to all three of them at once.  "Sorry, Tina.  I'm not allowed to take you to ballet.  The parents didn't tell me to take you, and I don't want to get in trouble!" 

She screams, she cries, she begs, she threatens.  She calls her mom and leaves a message.  She calls my dad and leaves a message.  Just like Steve Miller says, "Time keeps on slippin', into the future."  I'm not sure I'm brave enough to hang on to the bitter end and actually go through with it.  I'm shaking, but I know I've got them dead to rights.   No call back from the parents and the clock goes on past the start of her class.

Stepmom comes home and Tina runs to meet her.  "Tina, what are you doing here?  You're supposed to be at ballet!" 

I hear Tina tell her rendition of the story, leaving out how miserable she had been, and they go back and forth.  Mary Ann comes pounding down the hall and yells (as God is my witness) "You just wait 'til your FATHER gets home!"  I had to stifle a laugh because I never really believed people actually said that.

An hour later Dad comes home and the TWO of them go running out to meet him and tell him how horrible I was.  I wait in my room for the hammer to fall.  About 10 minutes later my dad calls down the hall, "Brian, would you please come here and talk to us?"

"Well, Brian, you did it."  "What do you mean, Dad?" 

 "You got us all, and there's absolutely nothing we can do about it. OK, let's make this reasonable for everyone. .."

And they did.  They agreed that they were over-the-top.  They recognized that Tina isn't always very nice to me, and they spoke to her about that.  I was allowed to have reasonable freedom if I was driving somewhere, since I had good grades and had never been in trouble.  I walked down the hall back to my room, my back to my parents, with the world's biggest grin on my face.Apologies if the English isn’t perfect, it’s not my native tongue. 

Nearly two years ago I started work at Company as their digital marketing person. After I started, it turned out that I was brought in to put out the fires left by my predecessor, the VP Marketing, who had a team of 4 plus himself, spent over $1 million in one year and brought in 5 deals, 2 of them for under $10K. 

As you can well imagine, after a performance like that, I had lots of work to do, and very little to do it with. Aside from 1 or 2 paid tools, everything else was to be done using free tools only. I’m gonna do some bragging here, I beat the previous year’s figures in all categories with 10% of the budget. 

When I started, I thought Bossman (Founder/CEO) had a really good management style, saying things like: “Your successes are yours, your mistakes are mine”, and “The enemy of good is great. I don’t expect perfection, I want you to make sure things work and get them done”. In essence, I was allowed to run my own (one-man) department and outsourced freelancers, and as long as I was getting results, he left me alone. Since I was the only person on the marketing team, I also had to learn a large number of skills and platforms that weren’t directly related to digital marketing. 

Not to say everything was perfect, but things were pretty good. One of the main things that weren’t perfect was that Bossman had serious anger management issues. As I said before, he left me alone but I saw him blow up at and fire other people for stupid shit. He lost it at me too once or twice, but he’d calm down after a coupla hours and things would be back to normal. If it looks like an abusive relationship, that’s because looking back, that’s exactly what it was. 

As the year came to an end, I approached Boss and initiated a performance review. I ran him through everything I had done in the past year, and he was pretty surprised at how much I had done with so little. I asked him for a raise, pointing out that I was currently making 8,000/month in local currency (average is 4,500/month) when people with my (now augmented) skill set were making between 13-14,000/month. I asked him for 12,000. He said he’d get back to me, and never did. Every time I asked him about my raise, he had another excuse. After the last excuse, I began looking for something else.

The other day we had a meeting, and it turns out that two months ago I made a mistake. It wasn’t a critical mistake, and it was rectified within a few hours of discovering the mistake. No harm or damage was caused whatsoever to Company, but Bossman flipping LOST IT. I mean slamming on tables, yelling for the whole office to hear, what have you. Then he said the magic words: “Pack your things up and go home. Think about whether you want to keep working here”. So that’s what I did, and 10 seconds later I said “No, I don’t”. 

I started packing my shit up while he turned an even deeper shade of red and got even louder. I didn’t answer him at all, just kept on packing up my things and saying goodbye to my colleagues. Turns out that being ignored really pushed his buttons, to the point where he started threatening to call security to have me removed, while I was **actively** removing my self and my things from the office. 

Here’s the part where it gets beautiful: My country is very strict on employee’s rights (sorry, Americans, I feel your pain). His words and behaviour are considered an improper dismissal. By law he’s required to give me 30 days notice of dismissal, which he didn’t. When he realized his mistake, he convened a pre-dismissal hearing, but it was already too late, he’s opened himself up to a lawsuit, which I’m already talking with lawyers about. 

Because by law he **has** to give me those 30 days’ notice even though he already fired me, for the next 30 days I’m eligible for ALL the benefits and social rights in my salary, but I can do jack shit for him and there’s nothing he can do to me without making the incoming lawsuit 10 times worse. I’ve already got 4 interviews lined up for next week, paying almost double what Boss was paying me, and best of all, I’ll be interviewing for other places on his dime. The cherry on top is that because I’m the only marketing person, without me, nothing happens in the marketing department for the next month, and if he doesn’t hire someone on in time, I won’t be around to answer any questions the new person might have.So, when I was living in the city, I had a contract with my internet provider. (Rogers, for my fellow Canadians) After a year in my apartment I decided to move in with my then-boyfriend (now-husband) on a farm. A farm on a dirt road in the middle of nowhere. So I call to cancel my internet. 

Me: I need to cancel, I’m moving-

Them: (interrupting me) your service moves with you! You signed a contract for x years and it only ends early if we are unable to provide service!

Me: you ARE unable to provide service, I’m moving to a rural area. 

Them: not possible! We provide service to many rural communities. What’s your new postal code? (I provide it) that’s for townname. We have service in townname.

Me: but I’m not living in townname. That’s just my postal address. Im living on a farm OUTSIDE of townname.

Them: repeats contract speech, with the additional offer of an absurd buyout fee if I want to cancel my contract early “without cause”

*cue malicious compliance*

Me: fine! You know what, I would LOVE hi-speed internet instead of shitty satellite internet! When can you come?

The install guy had to call me three times from the van. Twice because he was lost and a third time because he was stuck in a snow drift. When he finally arrived it took him about 30 seconds to determine that there is obviously no infrastructure for hi-speed internet. I offered him hot coffee for his trouble coming out and he happily cancelled my service free of charge and accepted my equipment return. Cost Rogers a 3-4 hour call out when you count the drive, just to try to keep one impossible contract.

Edit to add: Wow, this went a little crazy overnight! Thanks for all the upvotes and awards everyone! :)For obvious reason I will be omitting names and anything specific so my ass is covered.  


TLDR at the bottom  


I've been serving in a certain military branch for 5 years and I'm nearing the end of my contract. So the "give a care" is completely gone. I'm in charge of inventory of specific pieces of equipment. Smaller pieces that are used by many people at my job. From time to time these pieces "disappear". Most of the time that just means things are misplaced, but we just got out of a certain period where we had **MANY** hired contractors at our job that tend to take things. Now every once and a while we conduct an inventory of these pieces of equipment for accountability reasons. When we lose things, it looks very bad on my work. More specifically, bad on my bosses.   


So I prepared the inventory and was startled by the amount of missing pieces. I did everything I needed to do and presented the inventory to my boss. **He didn't believe we had so many pieces missing and asked for me to inventory them again**. so I did, got the same number, and put the inventory in his inbox. Few months go by and I get the same thing. "There can't be that many! Do another one." So I'm very compliant and do it again, and again.....and again. **This gets dragged on over a year** and I'm starting to notice something. **My boss is about to leave soon and he is deliberately pushing this off to the next guy to cover himself.**   


So last week I was sleeping since I work nights and I'm woken up. My boss tells me I have to do a specific survey with my co-workers that will get sent up to the head honcho. This survey allows the small guy have a voice directly to the top. I tell him that I have the night watch, but he doesn't care and demands I go and do this survey. Fine. Before the survey starts our boss tells us we need to be completely honest and all these surveys are anonymous. Rad. I wrote down what had been happening with the inventory and directed where they could find the documentation of the done inventories.  


Fast forward to yesterday. All my bosses are fired and now I'm reporting to new people who are now fixing the issues with the inventory.   

Edit: Thank you so much for the Silver! 

TLDR; Boss was avoiding issues to cover himself. Told HIS boss during a mandatory survey to cover MY ass. Boss got fired.I had a manager who hated reading emails and would miss important issues/meetings because of it. I even suggested text to speech to make it less unpleasant but he told me off. He spent a lot of time "playing golf with clients" and was mostly inaccessible. It got to the point where most of the team cc-ed me (I was next on the totem pole) so I could grant approvals for stuff like expense reports and help out on projects my manager was supposed to work on.

When I was getting married I requested 3 weeks off for my honeymoon (EVERYONE knew I was getting married, manager even congratulated me on the engagement when it happened). I had 5 weeks vacation accumulated and didn't think it would be a big deal, especially since I was requesting it nearly \~8 weeks in advance.

Then a "vacation request denied" email comes in from our "time off" system. I emailed manager following up, left voice mails, and after a week he finally replied to an email,  "Look, we need dedicated people, if you think you can take 3 weeks off for a vacation, you need to reconsider your position here." Keep in mind, my request stated "Vacation request for honeymoon."

I replied with "No consideration needed, my last day will be <date in 3 weeks>. Let me know about transitioning duties." I forward this to HR, cc'ing manager and HR sets up my exit interview, but HR tells my manager to setup transition for my responsibilities. During my notice period, I even replied-all to this email twice, asking about transition plans, since I didn't get any transition plan...

I tell my team, they ask manager what to do with my duties and manger says he'll think about it but doesn't do anything nor email anything out.

Four weeks later, I get a call from my old boss, "Are you planning on coming in this week?""Why would I?""Because you work for me?""Not as of last week.""Stop messing around, get your ass in the office.""I told you my last day when you denied my vacation request.""How about giving proper notice and transitions?""HR asked you to develop a transition plan and to attend my exit interview. It's not my fault you don't read all your emails."

I hang up and block his number, but screenshot the call log and sent it to the HR contact with an innocent, "Should I be worried <old manager> thinks I still work for him?"

Fallout:Things went from bad to worse for my old manager.  Apparently I was doing most of his managerial duties, so he actually had to try and get stuff done himself. He also got into some legal issues (those client golf outings? he played golf...but not with clients) that made his termination "with cause," so no severance for him.

I ended up at a competitor with a nice bump in pay. I wanted to start after my honeymoon but new company really wanted my help on a pitch.  I joined for several weeks, reworking \~1/3 of the pitch and then went on my honeymoon for three weeks (they paid me for the entire time off - that garnered a lot of good will from both me and my wife).  I only left the company because mrs and I moved cross-country and they didn't have remote positions back then.  


ETA: Thank you for the awards!   
I don't have the all the details but know old manager had to hire lawyer**s** to deal with legal issues related to his dismissal and the expenses.  
Clarification: This happened in the late 2000s. Mrs and I are still married.I worked in an electricity retailer call centre. It was highly unionised, but the management tracked login times to the minute. 

One incredibly ridiculous thing they did was if you were a minute or two late, they would literally dock your pay by that many minutes. It wasn’t really enough for us to really notice, and I’m sure they didn’t actually save any money - I mean, if you were 15 minutes late I could understand not paying but 3 minutes late? 

Well, eventually the union discovered what they were doing, and were completely pissed that they hadn’t been consulted about this dick move. This is where their MC comes in.

The union demanded logon and log off times for everyone in the call centre. What management hadn’t counted on was that all of us would often need to wrap up calls and clear the call queue before the call centre could officially close. This often meant that operators would leave several minutes after their shift. On bad occasions it could be 15-20 minutes delay before they could clock off, but mostly it was only a few minutes.

The union made management recalculate everyone’s pay for the year based on clock on *and* clock off time. They also pointed out that staying past end of shift triggered penalty rates. It turns out everyone (and I mean everyone!) had spent more time wrapping up calls at the end of the day than they were late clocking on. Each of us got paid for lost wages, at overtime rates. 

It cost them a fortune and they never docked the pay of anyone who was late ever again.

Edit: wow, this got more response than I thought it would! Thanks for the Silver!Obligatory long time reader, first time poster, on mobile yada yada.

This is a story of MC that a previous boss had done, but involved me directly as will be explained.  Timeframe is early 2000s for reference.

In my late high school / early college years, I had a job doing telemarketing work during winter and summer breaks.  While it was boiler room cold calling, we primarily were soliciting donations for agencies that had contracted us to do the work, so felt less scuzzy.  Think police departments, fire departments, etc.  We kept a portion of donations for operating expenses, everything over a certain threshold went directly to the receiving party.  Everybody wins.

I enjoyed the job as the scripts were simple, I was allowed to read a book and such between calls, and a number of my friends were also employed there so we could hang out during lunch breaks.  The pay was a decent chunk above minimum wage at that time, so it was a good gig.  I also had a knack for it, and at one point was 5th in "sales" across all their sites they had in operation, 2nd in our building.

One summer, while driving to work, my car promptly dies with no warning and I'm left stranded on the road.  As you do in this situation back before cell phones for poor college students were a thing, I walk to the nearest house and ask to use the phone.  I call my dad who starts driving to get me, and call my work to let them know I'll be late.  My boss says fine and that he will chat with me when I get in.

Father shows up with my mother in two cars, I take the extra and he begins the arduous process of "towing" my car back to the house.  This involved tying a rope to the front of the car and to the back of his vehicle and crawling back home so he could fix it himself.  I've been in that back car, and did not envy my father being in the back car with only 10 feet of space between him and the car my mother was driving, but I'm off to work.

I arrive to work, clock in almost an hour after the start of my shift, and am promptly told by the front receptionist that my boss would like to see me in his office.  So I head on back.

Beginning details completed.  Cue the start of the MC story.

My boss and I have always had a good rapport.  I'm a good worker, get good reviews, and he and I have some similar interests outside of work we can chat about occasionally.  When I arrive in his office, he's shuffling some papers around and has laid out a few documents facing me.  As close as I can recall, this is the conversation that followed.

Boss - "Hope everything worked out with the car, glad to have you here.  Couple things I need to discuss with you.  First of all, as I'm sure you are aware, being more than 30 minutes late to work is considered a class C violation (3 classes, from C to A, C being the least egregious) if insufficient time is given prior to the occurrence.  This is your first violation, so I'd like to talk to you about what happens next."

I'm sweating at this point.  I've never even been talked to about being out of order on anything while working here, and getting my first violation scared the heck out of me.  So I'm sitting there, white faced, and he continues.

Boss - "No official writeup or anything occurs for a first violation, or even the first few Class C violations, but it is managers discretion on the punishment depending on past behaviors.  Now, you are a good employee and I've put in to corporate a few times to give you a raise, but because you only work during your school breaks, it is denied as you aren't considered 'full time'.  So the papers I have here are your termination papers and an offer letter I'd like to extend to you to hire you back on again.  So, in short, before I file these, I'd like to ask.  Is it ok if I fire you?"

So we go through the process of him "firing" me, which then allowed him to extend an offer to me to rehire me at roughly a 25% increase in pay, since he could justify to corporate the bump as he was hiring someone with experience.  In talking with him, he let me know it was something he occasionally did to the high school and college workers to get around the corporate's policy of not allowing raises to people that didn't work 1,000+ hours in a year.  It was his own way of being maliciously compliant with a policy that didn't allow him to reward some people that he thought deserved it.  He had been apparently waiting for me to do something that he could technically fire me for.  The way their back end systems worked, it wouldn't even show up as a break in service, since the firing and hiring happened on the same day, and since I never worked more than the minimum 1,000 hours each year I didn't have any tenure or anything to be worried about losing.

The laugh he and the receptionist had when he walked me back to the front to introduce her to the new employee was enjoyable, and I've had a fun story to tell ever since.

TLDR - Boss fires me for minor infraction so he can then rehire me at a higher rate of pay.




Edit - Thank you everyone for the comments and awards.  I had to Google what the awards meant, as I've never made a post or comment that has had more than a few upvotes in the past.  I've been doing my best to keep up with comments and thanking the award people individually, but I know there are many I missed or just didn't have the stamina to keep up with.  I also wanted to answer a few commonly asked questions.

1 - Why do the fire department and police department need more money?  - This was more for affiliated agencies and charities.  Think the firefighters boot drive they do every year.  They don't keep your change you toss into the boot, it goes to a charitable cause.

2 - Did your dad fix the car / what was wrong with it?  - I'm not a car person, so don't know what was wrong with it, but yes, my dad was able to fix it.

3 - Do you keep in touch with the boss?  - This was close to 20 years ago, and unfortunately I don't keep in touch with very many people from my hometown including this wonderful man.  Last I had heard, he was still working there 4-5 years after I had left, and it was still a great place to work.


Many of your comments had me laughing, and I've enjoyed responding to them throughout the day and into the wee hours of the morning last night, and they are still coming in.  Thank you all again for this enjoyable experience, I'm glad you had fun with my little retelling of years gone by.Hello Reddit,

I lurk a lot and realized I had my own malicious compliance a few weeks ago. 


My job is very mentally taxing. I also have my own mental health issues so I try my best to balance, but I just want to help so I get caught up taking more responsibilities than I am actually able to.


So a couple of weeks ago I realize my mental health is in steep decline, I was ignoring the signs to push through, but anyone with mental health issues knows that you can only ignore the signs for so long. I try to get ahead of a mental crash and talk to my supervisor to tell them that I need 3 days off (W, T, F) and as I had the weekend off after the days I requested I figured that might be enough to get a good rest and reset. I did tell my supervisor why I needed the days (burnout, mental health) and they said they understood and would get back to me.



They contact me back (I say they because right now I technically have 2 supervisors running my division) and say they can probably give me Wed., Thurs., but that they couldn’t give me Fri, I ask if we can do Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday instead and I could work the Friday, have my long weekend and that should still be fine. They say they will get back to me, I get a text soon after to ask me to help cover other shifts. And I obviously can’t, so I decline.


They get back to me the next day.

“We can get your shifts covered for Wednesday and Thursday,but not Tuesday and you have to make up the hours”


That was the straw. I just broke, I was asking for a break because I was working too much because it was hard for me to say no. I even call them (they had me on speaker) in tears and explain even further why I need the days, I have been going through trauma therapy and my mental health has been declining. I had told them that I had spoken to my doctor and that my doctor said I was showing signs of burnout and recommended some days off (which is true, as I had talked to him the day before). All they heard was doctor and said “we need a doctor’s note”.


Okay fine, good thing I have another appointment. I had to work that day just defeated because they couldn’t find anyone to cover my shifts. I talk to my doctor and he says that he can tell I’m in distress and he puts me on 2 weeks of leave immediately. 


They did not look pleased when I handed in my doctors note. That was 2 weeks ago, I went back to the doctor and he extended my leave for AT LEAST another month. Cause you know straw broke the camels back and my mental health just went down the drain. 


Oh also, when I gave them my doctor’s note with 4 weeks on it, one of them wouldn’t even look at me and the other just said “oh doctor’s note, thanks.”


TLDR: So that’s the story of how I asked for 3 days off to try to rest and reset and ended up with at least 6 weeks, with no confirmed return date.



Edit 1: holy barnacles this blew up! I thank everyone for all their support! Also for all those asking, no I am not in America. And I was able to apply for sickness benefits.



Edit 2: I can’t thank everyone enough for the support, it is immensely encouraging! My husband has been reading your lovely comments, I wish I could reply to them all. For everyone having their own struggles and still being so kind, it is very appreciated, and I’m hoping everyone gets what they need to recover / get better! ♥️When going over my expense report my company saw I tipped 20% for lunch one afternoon. Lunch was $15, the tip was $3. They told me that is too much "because I wouldn't do that with my money". Heck yeah I do. I just took the better part of an hour of my servers time. The least I could do is leave $3. It's $3 for crying out loud, but rules are rules. However my company is fairly generous allowing me $75 a day to spend on food, which I never do and that's about to change. For lunch today instead of my usual salad or sandwich, I went for the lobster grilled cheese. And of course upgrades my regular fries to the duck fat fries. Enjoy "saving" that 5% for the rest of my travel meal expenses.

Edit: For those saying tip out of my pocket. I was explicitly told to tip using the companies money and just count it towards my daily amount.

Edit2: Good grief people, this is not stealing or "destroying" the company. This money is already budgeted for when I travel and this company isn't going under because Vielden decides to spend $10 more on food to leave a tip. The company is juuuust fine. This won't be a blip on their radar.This might be a rarity for this sub, as I am the one who had the malicious compliance done to by someone else, but I had to respect it and thought it was worthy for this subreddit.

Context:
I own an escape room company in a town which borders a pretty touristy area and is very close to an airport. As such we tend to get a lot of bookings from people all over the UK who are visiting the area for the weekend or international people coming to do an escape room on the way to the airport.
We only take online bookings and don't take walk ins, therefore the site is only really manned whenever we have bookings.
As such, our cancellation policy is that we only allow refunds if the cancellation is more than 24 hours before the scheduled start time. If it is 2-24 hours before the start time, we can only reschedule the booking. Now, it's worth mentioning that for the majority of cases (weekdays) we are pretty relaxed with our policy as long as it doesn't cause any big issues and try our best to accommodate a group as usually I am the one hosting them so there's not any additional expenses on our part (i.e. staff wages/loss of income from other potential customers). However the only day where this policy is really relevant is on Saturday where we are almost always entirely booked from morning to night and have staff members working for us. So any cancelled slots would most likely have been filled by other customers, and we are of course still paying our staff for that time. Although I must say, we have only ever had to enforce this policy a couple of times as we are usually accommodate a group in some shape or form.


Now onto the MC:
So I get a call earlier today from a gentleman with a thick Scottish accent that was scheduled to come in with his group in around 2 and a half hours from the time of the call.

The group said that they would be unable to make their booking as they were running late with some other activities or something like that, and asked to reschedule the booking for a later slot. I checked our schedule but didn't have any slots left for today in any of our rooms. He then asked for a refund as they would be returning back to Glasgow tonight and didn't know when they would be next down here.

I told him our policy and that our system only allows reschedules instead of refunds due to the time frame and explained that given it's a Saturday we can't refund so close to the time as staff has been arranged, slot would have been booked etc etc. Rescheduling wouldn't have worked for them as they wouldn't be in the area anytime soon.

After a short pause, he asked if we had any free slots to schedule for next month. I checked the system and offered to move the booking to the same time on 16th November, to which he said "yeah I think that works"

I changed the time on the system and informed him he would get an email confirming the new time slot.

He replied "Great, so the booking is more than 24 hours away now right?"
Me "Yes it's booked in for 4 weeks time from today."
Him "Right so, the booking is more than 24 hours away, I won't be able to make it, can I have a refund?"

I paused for a second trying to process what had just happened in my head and realised that he had found a loophole in the system!

TECHNICALLY, his booking was more than 24 hours away so he is TECHNICALLY entitled to a refund. I started laughing and congratulated him on beating the system as I processed his refund.

Edit:lol I didn't think this would get this much attention but might aswell clarify a few things which came up in the comments. 

1) as I said these situations are so rare that it's never really come up often enough to become a big issue as most groups are fine just to reschedule to another day and we like to accommodate for groups as best we can. Perhaps if it does become more common we will look into it but in the past ~2 years we've been open, I can probably count on one hand how many times it's happened.

2) this is a common malicious compliance usually done with hotels, doctors etc. Which is why I recognised it as malicious compliance straight away and thought it would fit here.

3) obviously what I've posted is just the bare bones of the conversation. There was a bit of bantering back and forth which is why I didn't mind as much issuing the refund as he seemed like a nice guy. Guess it goes to show, if you're a nice person, you might be more likely to get the rules bent for you than if you're a complete Karen. Plus chances are, next time he's this way, he'll make another booking down the line because of this interaction. This is why I didn't think he was being cheeky by cancelling straight after rescheduling. 

4) yeah people do come to do an escape room on their way to the airport. Suppose it's a way of squeezing in a bit more entertainment into your holiday loolThis happened when I was 15.  My mom was (lets be real, she probably still is) a mentally, emotionally, and physically abusive narcissist.  Some highlights are when she was teaching my twin sister and I to read at the age of 4 or so.  It was around 2am and my sister was having trouble learning so my mother's solution was to beat her with a sandal every time she got a flash card wrong.  Same thing happened when my mother had me transcribe an essay she had written to my handwriting when I was 7. Everytime I started a letter from the wrong position (like starting a capital M from the bottom line) she would beat me with one of her birkenstocks.  This too happened later at night so when I got too delirious for the exhaustion and pain she would drag me, by the neck, and literally throw me into a cold shower to wake me up so we could more easily continue the waking nightmare.  When I was 13 I told her to wanted to live with my dad (they were divorced) and she told me she didnt care what I did after I turned 18.  I later figured out that this was because the child support stopped at age 18.

Aaaaaanywho. Fast forward to age 15. Our relationship was understandably strained. We had had guests and she liked to use guests as a way of controlling our behavior through shame.  It's easier to be an angsty teenager when your grown up friends from church arent watching and judging everything you do.  This make it easier for her to pretend to be a firm but loving mother all while slipping in sideways comments like velvet daggers.  Well I decided I wasn't going to subject myself to the whole thing and spent the day outside in the woods nearby (we lived in the mountains at the time so it was less than 100' from the house).  When I saw our guests had left I went to go back inside.  My mother, perhaps unhappy at being denied a day long emotional abuse routine, told me I wasn't welcome and that I should leave.  My 15 year old brain heard her words and knew that she only meant for a little while but it also recognized that failed to specify anytimeframe at all.  So, I hiked a couple miles too a friends house  and asked if I could spend a couple days there.  When my friends dad found out that I was there and why he was pissed and said I could stay as long as I needed.

I didnt go home that evening, or the next. My mom became concerned and contacted law enforcement (LE) to report me missing.  This is a big deal for several reasons. We lived in the mountains on a national park so it was a very real possibility that I had been attacked by a wild animal, become injured while hiking, drowned, or been kidnapped. Nobody knew of my mother's abusive tendencies or the squalor and neglect my sister and I lived in.  Most importantly the law enforcement was the local park rangers with which she worked daily. LE immediately contacted my dad's side of the family to see if I had turned up there or contacted them (they promptly freaked the fuck out and came to my house with lawyers on standby.  LE then hired dogs to track my scent and then everyone freaked out because the dogs tracked me to a nearby river where my trail died because the dogs couldn't pick up any more scent.

Over the next couple days there were people going in and out of my house, Rangers, lawyers my family etc. And several noticed the over powering scent of cleaning chemicals but only the lawyer considered why a 'clean' house would reek of chemicals. 

LE started to canvas the nearby woods and 'neighborhood'.  My friend's dad came to me and asked if there was somewhere else I could stay.  He told me that he wouldnt kick me out didnt want to have to lie to the police or let the dogs on his property.  My friend and I figured we just go camping for a week or so but instead I looked up my dad's side of the family and called and they picked me up right away.

Understandably, everyone had questions. When I told them what was happening the lawyers, horrified, pounced.  A judge issued an emergency change of custody and prevented her from gaining custody until she underwent a psych eval and therapy(which my mother would never allow).  The rangers, equally horrified, completely shunned my mother and she eventually lost her job. Since she was only allowed to live on the park because she worked there so she was kicked out of her house. My friend's father and the trackers were members of the local community and churches and they too shunned my mother.  

She lost her job, her house, her church, and her friends all because she told me to leave and I did.

TL;DR: Mom told me to leave the house. When I didnt come back she call LE and reported me missing.   When LE got involved my mother's abuse and neglect came to light and she lost her job with local LE, her house which she had through the local LE and her friends. Judge finally awarded custody of us kids to my dad so she lost her child support payments too.

Edit for clarity: I'm 32 now this happened a while ago.

Edit: I wasn't clear and didnt want to make it longer.  When my dads family got involved they were able to reach an agreement where I would leave with them for a time but my sister stayed. I had to go back to my mom's for a short while but the the judge issued an emergency change of custody and my sister and I went to live with our dad.  My sister and I have been in therapy and she is teaching now.  Life isnt perfect but its better.

Edit: people keep asking about the chemicals.  The house was normal trashed.  My mother kept an untrained dog and the carpet was soaked with dog feces and urine. The few times we had guests we would have to crawl around the dogs potty spot and clean it up and make the house smell good.  My mom freaked out when she realized that rangers and CPS might come round.  She did a deep clean of the house before reporting me missing because she couldn't afford to have them realize what they were walking on.This didn't happen to me, but to my dad, and it's one of my favourite stories he tells.

&#x200B;

Some years ago (by which I mean two or so decades, roughly) my dad was at a several-day course to earn some additional qualifications for his job. On the final day, there was going to be a multiple choice test to actually pass the seminar. On test day, everyone got settled into place, and the teacher announced that he would not go easy on cheaters: You had one strike to be caught trying to copy off of someone else or use a cheat sheet, but if you were caught a second time, you would be immediately thrown out and your score made invalid. Now, this teacher was very old-school strict, and treating grown working people like unruly schoolchildren, and my dad does not like that very much.

So my dad proceeds to take the test, and it goes pretty well! When he's through with the questions, there is just one left where he's not sure he's got it right.

And he has a free strike, after all.

So my dad... yells out into the class. Just calls out, "what's the answer to question 14?". Some complete bro elsewhere in the room yells the answer back. My dad fills in the sheet, gets up, walks to the teacher's desk, presumably tries to not trip on the teacher's jaw as it lies on the floor, hands in his test, and leaves the room.

To the teacher's credit, he approached my dad afterwards with some... begrudging respect. I don't know if he changed his policy afterwards, or the tone in which he conveyed it.

&#x200B;

EDIT: Holy crap this blew up!! I'm glad my dad's shenanigans brought a smile to so many people <3 And thank you for the silver, even though I had to google what that means!

&#x200B;I worked at a subway that didn't have any authority/managers, just a couple minimum wage base level workers. I don't remember what this particular customer was mad about but she was arguing with me and didn't like the answer I gave her. She asked to speak to the manager, and there not being a manager I decided to promote myself on the spot and replied with "manager speaking, how can I help you." This did not make her very happy because she realized she was not going to get a different answer and asked for a phone number to call. The owner has specifically told us never to give his cell number to customers so i gave her the store number. She gives me a shit eating grin thinking about how much trouble she's about to get me in when the phone behind me starts to ring. I will never forget the face she gave me as I answer the phone, look her in the eyes, and ask her how may I help you.
I posted this on AITA and a lot of people told me to post on here. This is pretty much copied from my post on AITA 


Yesterday I (F16) emailed my teachers and I told them I’ll be in the hospital getting an infusion for a chronic illness that I have and a blood transfusion and I asked if they would mind if I had my camera off for the meetings. All of them said yes except for my history teacher. She said she needs to know I’m actually in the class. I tried to explain my situation and that I was uncomfortable with the class seeing me in the infusion clinic with my central line (I usually wear sweaters to cover it at home but it feels weird when I wear a sweater over it during an infusion) and all my monitors. She basically said tough shit and that I need to show up for class. 

So the class starts and I log on to the meeting and you can very clearly see the central line in my chest, the iv pole with the unit of blood, the monitors that go on my chest (I forgot what they’re called). My teacher looked visibly uncomfortable the entire time and emailed me after class saying I made her uncomfortable and what I did was completely unprofessional. I reminded her that she said I had to have my camera on the whole time.


Holy shit this blew up. I wanted to clarify a few things for y’all. The reason I still went to class because I’d already missed a lot of school this year and was starting to fall behind so I didn’t want to miss more school unless it was absolutely necessary. 

Also, I know there weren’t too many comments on it but I wasn’t wearing anything too exposing or anything. It was a low cut shirt that I’d worn to school plenty of times so I assumed it would be fine for zoom.

And my parents aren’t on my side for this. They think all children need to respect their elders and the adult in the situation is always right so if I do go forward with reporting her, I’m on my own.My brother has struggled with a drug addiction for most of his life. About five years ago, it tore his family apart. His wife filed for divorce, and was awarded full custody of their son. This is all right and proper, as brother was in no condition to be a father at this time.

The road to recovery has been long, but my brother has been working the program and has now been clean for several years. He has no formal custody of his son, though he gets visitation at his ex-wife's discretion. He's been a good and stable father to his son in the last years. However, his ex has not wanted to allow for the possibility that brother has become well. In fact, she has begun jerking him around with visitation, even planning on removing son from his father for a period of several months so she can take a long vacation with her new family.

Brother, not willing to let this slide, immediately filed for joint custody. The court case was just a day ago, and as expected, his ex has badmouthed his former drug abuse and attempted to paint him as still an addict and a threat to their son (again, he totally is not - him being clean for years, employed, and owning his own home now). The ex was so self-deluded and confident that he had backslid, that she loudly demanded, in front of the judge, that my brother provide a letter from the local president of \[drug counseling program\] stating that he has attended every meeting for the last several years.

My brother smiled at the judge, and said, "Not only is that not a problem, your honor, but I can provide that document today." The judge asked how this is possible, did brother already think to bring it with him? "No, your honor, but, you see, *I am* the president of our local chapter."

I wish I could see the look on that hateful bitch's face. It's not official yet, but yeah, he's totally getting joint custody.

&#x200B;

EDIT: I hate adding edits, but it's apparently necessary. Yes, I said "hateful bitch." I understand that this may not seem justified to many of you given the context of this story. A story. A story that is limited in scope, and in no way attempts to capture the whole of reality. I have my own personal reasons for my feelings toward the ex, which are completely outside of the scope of this story, and which I have no intention of sharing here. But I understand why you may be confused reading that.

Since I've now had to repeat myself explaining this dozens of times, even after adding this edit, and since this statement was an OP comment that has absolutely nothing to do with the story itself, I will no longer be acknowledging comments whinging about my choice of words here.

UPDATE: Joint custody has been awarded. Primary placement is with the mother, but his visitation hasn't changed much and, more importantly, is no longer subject to her whims. More importantly, she can't simply disappear with his son for months on end whenever she feels like it. If you are an addict or on the road to recovery you CAN come back from it!I worked as a cook at a chain restaurant that had a 'wing night' where you could get a pound of wings at a discounted price.

We didn't actually weigh the wings, our specs said eight wings to a pound. Four drums and four flats.

One night a table comes in and everyone orders a pound of wings. A little while after the wings go out, the server comes back a little flustered and explains there has been a complaint.

Apparently, one of the guys at the table complained that it was 'obvious' that he didn't get a pound, because it would be a *huge* coincidence if everyone's pounds led to the same number of wings on each plate. He insisted that the server go and weigh these (already discounted) wings to make sure he was "getting what he paid for".

So we weighted it. Sure enough it was not a pound. It was a pound and a half. We tell the server to bring it out and tell him he's getting more than a pound. She says "fuck no. He paid for a pound, he's going to "get what he paid for"" and threw two of his wings in the garbage and re-weighted the food. Still over. Throws another one out. Bang on 1 pound of wings.

So she brings back out his 5 wings and calmly tells the gentleman "here are your wings sir. You were right, there was more than a pound there. So we threw the other ones out. Good catch".

When they ordered a second round, he didn't complain that everyone got 8 wings to a "pound".

&#x200B;

Edits: Obligatory thank yous to everyone. I've never had a post generate this much discussion or get this much attention. Nor have I ever gotten anything like this number of awards. Thank you kind strangers.

On the size of the wings: You can buy 6-8 count wings if you shop around a little bit. Like shrimp, for example, wings are sold by their "count" of pieces per pound. This place made wings (and burgers) their signature items. Yes, they were very large wings, which were then double breaded.

On the fact that they ordered a second round: This is not unusual. If you've ever worked at a wing joint, you would know that people will order round after round of wings. Minus the bones, there is not a lot of food there compared to, say, a steak or a chicken breast. 

On throwing the food out: we got staff meals and no one was terribly interested in eating food that was already pawed over by someone else. Plus, cooks rarely go hungry. There was plenty of fresh food on the line. We certainly were not going to put them on some other customer's plate.

Thanks everyone. Glad you all enjoyed this so much.I know that's a wild ride of a title, but I promise it's all true so buckle up

When I was in eighth grade, I was in the first year of an experimental technology school.  I had a class of about 180 eighth graders (12-14 year olds) and about 10 teachers.  So everybody shared the same math teacher.  For our first semester we used a software called Gage. Its was alright for most classes, but it was absolutely atrocious when it came to math.  Nothing worked with math.  We were supposed to use the lessons they had, but it just didn't work.  Math symbols didnt show up right and some questions even had the wrong answer marked.  

My math teacher wasn't allowed to just move to paper, and the company insisted that the problem was that our math teacher was older and just didn't understand technology.  They said that if she had a genuine issue to email them. 

One day, I get to class, and there are 7 email addresses written on the board. She told us that we were going to go through our math lesson today, and take screenshots of every mistake we found and email them to the companies executives. One screenshots = one email.  10 emails = a packet of gummy bears. We had a blast trying to send as many emails as we could.   One kid got ten packets of gummy bears by end of the hour class.  

By lunch the principal called my teacher aside and asked for her to stop.  She said "Hell no! My afternoon classes haven't had fun yet!"

Long story short, our school district got all of its money back from using the software, and the company no longer exists (or they changed their brand out of shame.  Idk, I just cant find them anymore)

Tl;dr: the software company said to email if she found a actual issue, so she had an army of either graders, inspired by gummy bears, send thousands of emails to the CEO and other executives.Gonna preface this with the fact that I have anorexia so read at your discretion if it can be potentially upsetting.

One day as I was hanging around in my school's biology labs talking to professors, my academic advisor walked in. I had just started treatment because I lost upwards of 20 pounds in two months and needed to get back on the wagon to stay in school. Since my advisor had walked in on the conversation, I was hoping to segue into bringing her aside to talk about extensions.  Nope. She came into the conversation with,”Wow, I wish I could lose weight like that." She rattled on about her unsuccessful dieting and her lack of willpower not like mine. How could I do it?I lost it internally.  Mind you she was fully aware of my issues because I had taken medical absences and have had to maneuver classes around treatment. Never stopped her from telling me whenever I ate french fries that I don't eat real food.

Here's where the malicious compliance comes in. I in jest I said, "Do you want tips?" She obviously jumped on that. Of course she'd love tips. The next day I sent an email with every single detail of behavior usage. How to restrict, how to vomit, lying to your friends and therapists, how to run a 5k after not eating for days, etc. It got graphic too with how to deal with vomiting blood, passing out in public, acid erosion on your teeth, and having your hair fall out.
She didn't respond to that email, but she stopped talking about dieting in front of me for the rest of my time in college.



___

EDIT: I am so unbelievably thankful for all the upvotes & words of affirmations. I would also like to give my sincere love to everyone who has suffered as a result of comments like this. Will try to respond to as many people as I can. ❤️
Also, for those saying I have psychological issues, fucking duh.Many years ago I worked for an outdoor activity centre/playland in the retail department. Throughout the park there were many different shops that we manned and I absolutely loved working there despite it being hard work for little pay. One day I had a run in with a manager who seriously berated me in front of the entire team along with others from different departments. I was advised by a manager from a different team to make a formal complaint which I did. Others came out with similar complaints and said manager was advised to find employment elsewhere, but not sacked. Now, unbeknownst to me, I triggered the chain of events that would lead to me leaving the company.


Now before the main story there's some background info that is relevant to my malicious compliance. There were a few rules in place that were designed to prevent theft including no more than £10 to be allowed on the shop floor which was to be checked before your shift, anything over this must be declared to management and left in your locker and all staff had to agree to random locker/pocket searches. 


In the two years I'd worked here had never been picked for a random search. There were around several hundred employees so the odds were incredibly slim. As soon as our disgraced manager left I suddenly found myself picked at random for a search. This involved turning out my pockets, removing my shoes/socks and then being escorted to the locker room to empty the contents out. Nothing was found so I was sent back to the shop floor. The following week I was again picked at "random" for a search which again turned up nothing.


Rumours were soon doing the rounds that I had upset my departments remaining management team after instigating the action against my former manager and they were going to force me out using any means necessary. I realised that I needed to act so started job hunting and then began my malicious compliance. I started taking a backpack to work filled with £20 in pennies . Every morning I declared the amount in my locker as required and sure enough after a couple of days I was once again selected for my weekly "random" search. I got paid to watch a security guard and supervisor count  2000 pennies. As expected I passed said search and off I went. This happened a second time with now £30 in pennies and I decided to up my game. 


At the start of the following week I patiently awaited my "random" search with glee knowing what awaited them. The day soon arrived and off I was marched to the lockers ready for their treat. I lift out my backpack and pass it to the security guard and supervisor who dive straight in without any gloves. Oh, how they retched as they discovered what was in there. I had several pairs of my period soaked pants waiting in there especially for them. They were gingerly laid on the floor beside my bag as they counted my bag of pennies. The smell from the pants was unreal, they'd been festering in there for days in anticipation. Once again the search revealed nothing and off to work I went.


After that I was not picked for another search again. I left after a couple more weeks to a new job and keeping in touch with some people I discovered that new rule was introduced that tried dictating what you could and couldn't take to work with you. This soon led to a mass walkout of staff and after a year the place shut down due to unrelated matters.So I am a business consultant, and usually during the week we are at client site and get paid for travel, meals etc. The meal reimbursement policy is quite flexible, and doesn't limit what we can claim, like some of the other consulting companies. So we can claim lunch, alcohol, whatever. The policy, however, does lay down a GUIDANCE for a daily limit for food expenses, based on the country where you're travelling. I capitalised the word GUIDANCE, since that is exactly how it is written in the policy - it is a guidance, not a hard limit. For the UK, where my current project is, the limit is £40 per day, which is mostly ok, but can be a bit low if you're in the centre of London for example.

Now I do Intermittent Fasting, so most of the days I don't have breakfast and lunch, and just have one big meal a day, and have no problems keeping to the £40 (usually around £20). On some days, I might go to a fancy restaurant, have a couple of scotches with a steak, and run up a $60 bill. But during the course of a 5 day week, my average meals would run about £30 a day, if not less. 

I've never had a problem claiming these expenses in my 9 years with the firm, but recently a new project manager (read bean counter) came on board, and he sent back a couple of my expense reports for having meal expenses in excess of the £40 for a couple of days, even though the average meal expense over the week was much less than £40.

I tried to reason with him, told him that anyway it was a guidance and not a hard limit, and I was keeping the costs down on other days, he refused to budge and said I could only claim £40 a day for food.

So guess what, I started doing exactly that. Every day, I made sure I was claiming £40 or thereabouts for food. I started buying meals for the homeless people around the train station to make sure I could make up the £40. 

So now, where I was claiming less than £150 a week for meals, I now claim £200 and get some good karma for it.

Edit: Wow! This blew up! I went to dinner after work (gotta make sure to get the £40 worth of food in), and got back to thousands of upvotes, hundreds of comments, gold, silver, front page, and god knows how many subreddits I’ve been added to! 

Thanks a ton folks! Glad to see my little way of getting back at the man has given you some entertainment!Throwaway because it'll be easy to find my real identity.

In 2008 I was involved in a Federal lawsuit when my rural Texas High School tried to suspend me for wearing a shirt supporting then democratic hopeful John Edwards. (Hindsight is 20/20). They said it was a violation of the dress code, which was only ever selectively enforced.  My parents had my back and agreed that it was, to quote my very white dad " redneck cracker nonsense".

I'll never forget during the initial meeting when my principal called in a school board member.  He said that if I got suspended I would probably get kicked off the football team, and that could hurt me getting into college.  It didn't matter, I was a miserable player and a smart kid so it wasn't gonna be what took me to college. But the slimy fake concern as he tried to leverage my future against my speech is something I'll never forget.

Anyway as the case goes on the squeeze gets tighter.

First they have the football coaches try to get me to drop it, having the football coach's talk about how my " selfishness" means that they can't wear Fellowship of Christian Athlete shirts anymore, trying to embarrass me in front of the team.  I'm a fat kid who openly plays Magic the gathering in highschool, hit me with your best shot i have no shame.

Next they host a meeting with all the teachers telling them I'm a "problem" and that they need to keep an eye on me in case I "slip up". I found this out years after the fact when I bumped into my English teacher at a friends wedding.

Finally, they just start pulling in students from my classes to get them to say bad stuff about me.  I was a class clown so this turns into every single dirty joke, rude comment, or loud fart i ever made getting reported to school administration.  Which then leads to this awful little toady vice principal calling me and my parents in and reading them back **in front of my mother.**   That one stung.  My parents still knew it was bullshit but who wants their locker room jokes aired in front of their mom.

They used this as pretext to expel me for 6 weeks, citing "inappropriate sexual conduct". They shove me into the Disciplinary Alternative Education Program, and i am fucking steaming.  The Program is basically where they warehouse kids with emotional problems they can't handle, you just sit in a room in a refurbished insane asylum and can't do anything but read or use the computer for monitored educational purposes.  You also get booted from extracurriculars while you're in there.  I know at this point they want me to make a scene so they can punish me further, so I do the exact opposite.

I channel all my rage and new free time into my school work, doing homework I would usually ignore because I knew I could ace the test.  Now I'm doing both and my GPA is climbing.  I start looking into scholarships and find a bunch that are really interested in political activism and guess who now knows a little bit about that, I apply and rip my school a new asshole in every one. Then, i work with my dad and we find an attorney who will take our case pro bono, which means while the school bleeds fees it doesn't cost us anything to keep it in court.   I spent those weeks like a monk, motivated entirely by spite, doing everything i could to make their bullshit work for me.

I got out, got back on all my teams, and ended up  applying for a prestigious honors program at my dream school.  Not only did I get in but I got way more financial support than I thought I would.  Eventually we lost the case, but the school had to abolish the dress code anyway because they couldn't afford to get sued over it again.  I don't like the idea that a school lost money but man they made the choice they could have backed down whenever. Now I've graduated law school, am taking the bar in two weeks, and already have a job investigating government corruption. I'm getting paid to be a pain in the ass of petty authority, and it's pretty sweet.  


Edit: Thanks for all the awards. To the many people who have expressed concerns about my Dox, it would be more or less impossible for me to talk about this story without doxxing myself.  I have no other social media,  and i'm completely comfortable being linked to this story.  Therefore, i am largely unconcerned with the information being out there.  I'd rather share the story than live in fear of some truly motivated maniac committed to targeting me. My first job out of school was as a language teacher in a private school, and it sounds like it's straight out of a fiction book. I was employed to teach Grade six to nine. However,  because  I was the only teacher for that language, the owner begged me to teach grade one to five when I had any time to spare( I wasn't paid for the extra work). I taught each of the classes I was employed to teach, twice a week, and the other classes once a week. Aside that, lunch duties were added to my work, so I hardly sat all day.
The school had a preschool at a different location, and all the teachers there wore uniforms. The preschool workers(all females) were the only ones required to wear uniforms.
I was the only female teacher on the Grade one to nine staff. 
One day, the owner calls me to her office and asks me why I'm not in a uniform like the preschool staff. I tell her no one informed me about wearing uniforms in my department, and also the male teachers do not wear uniforms.  She gets slightly angry and orders me to sew one with my own money.  I try to protest but I see there's no way getting through to her. My parents convince me to let it go and sew one.
When she sees me in the uniform, she goes off about how figure flattering the uniform is on me, tells me I'm trying to seduce the boys, and  calls me a prostitute. She orders me to sew a new one or don't come back. My uniform was not short(way below the knee) didn't show cleavage, nor was it tight. 
I ignore her and she fires me a week later, while I'm in the middle of a class. I just packed my stuff and left. 

The next day, the principal calls me to tell me the owner is asking why I didn't show up that day. Duh. You fired me. She calls me herself and orders me to come back to work, talking about how do I expect the kids to eat lunch. Good luck finding a donkey like me to work for that pittance. I went back though, but not without double my pay. I then quit the next month.

EDIT: I'm glad the whole ridiculousness of my story makes its authenticity doubtful, but it's not uncommon behaviour in sole-proprietorship schools where I come from. Not every country in the world is an utopia for workers.For background: I work in mental health and substance use services 

I have worked in my job for a long time now. 
My boss is never available for help and hardly on site. 
Recently she has got a new manager who is not impressed with her work ethic, but then lock down happened and he had to shield, she has gone straight back to her old ways. 
Boss will often ask me to do her work for her to save her coming in which I have never minded doing up until recently. 

I had a meeting with my boss after an incident at work where someone tried to assault me , I told my boss I didn't feel supported by her after it had happened as she wasn't present and didn't manage it well afterwards.

In the middle of the meeting boss says perhaps you want to consider some easier work in a different department?

Me: what, why?

Boss: Well you do take on a lot of extra work that you don't need to a lot of this work is managers jobs.
Maybe you need to learn to say no to taking on all this work? 

I asked if there was something wrong with my standard of work, if she had concerns etc. and she says no.
3 months down the line 4 of the team leave and they get new people in.

Boss: Oh OP can you induct new starters on their first day?
Me: Sorry boss, that's a managers job

Boss: Can you complete Fire risk assessment?
Me: Sorry boss that's a managers job.

After a while she stops asking me things, then one day she's working from home, I'm pretty sure she has been telling her manager she's on site throughout lock down but mostly isn't 
Huge incident kicks off with residents, emergency services are called etc.
I call boss and explain to her what happened
Boss: OP can you please do follow up with, commissioning body, staff and residents involved and write the report send it all directly to me please? 
Me: Sorry boss you will need to come in to manage this, I'm not a manager, that's not my job. 
Boss: Just this once please?
I refused to manage the incident, turned out she was visiting a friend who lived at the coast whilst she was meant to be on site!
 Someone accidentally let slip to her manager when he called in the incident and there was no one to manage, he asked me to deal with the incident.
I explained I couldn't and that boss had reported me as taking on to much work to OH.
A full investigation has been launched into her conduct and ability to do her job.
Manager now talks to me directly and supervises me, he is helping me apply for a promotion 
Boss is on 'leave, pending investigation'

Edited to show difference between my boss and manager for those finding it hard to read, also sorry if this is not enough for people, my grammar has always been an area I struggle in.

Edit again to answer people who ask why I would do bosses work in the first place? 
The residents still deserve support and to be given the best chances, if I can make that easier for them by taking on extra work I will. There is enough going on for people who come to us they don't need things being messed up because others don't want to do their jobs.

Edit again: Thank you everyone for the awards, I didn't expect this to gain any real attention, I just wanted a place to share. 

All the people who have worked in these services. You are all awesome people, thank you for sharing and all the work you do. I don't think you can ever hear that enough.
Everyone who has used services - you guys are great too, remember take everything one day at a time, and be super proud of yourselves every day.
Don't be afraid to ask for support there are lots of people who care out there for you.

For people asking yes I now have a mangers job in a new service which I am helping to create, my ex manager went sick for several weeks and hasn't returned since.Happened just a couple of hours ago, this story is so fresh you can still smell it!

On our community garden we get teams of kids from the local school come to help and it's often the case that they turn up on a Saturday morning as well. They're almost entirely well-behaved which is a good job as there's not a lot we can do about bad behaviour beyond a stern voice (although one time a lad kicked one of our rabbits so a girl brained him with a shovel, rough but effective justice).

There's this one lad who came for the first time last week, don't know him but we made him very welcome. He only lasted half an hour before storming off in tears after his THIRD telling off for spinning round and round holding a tool and then letting it fly off at head height. This morning his mum (I assume) came with him, I saw him point out my friend and me, but he didn't ask to join in so after shouting hello we let them be. After about ten minutes he started wandering and my friend shouted to him "don't go round behind the greenhouse mate, it's not safe round there". Well, his mum had obviously been waiting for this because she went 0 to 100 in two seconds flat, demanding to know do we OWN this garden, and if not what business is it of ours where her son goes? We explained we just want him to be safe and she replied that she's quite capable of taking care of that herself, thank you. Fine, on you go.

Off he went, exploring behind the greenhouse, which is not safe because it's the compost heap, which is very unstable, and the muck mound, which is a giant pile of horse manure we get delivered every autumn. By the spring the inside is all nice and rotted down, and the outside is hard, crusty... and less strong than you think. After a minute there was a crunch, a squeal... and I think we did very well to drag him out without saying "I told you so" or breaking into guffaws. He was *absolutely* black from chest-height downwards, and although well-rotted manure doesn't smell *really* bad it is very thick, and sticky, and slimy. 

His mum grabbed him without a word and they headed for the gate, he started bawling as soon as the surprise wore off. My friend said "would you like some bin bags to spread out in your car" and to her credit she did say thanks when he handed them over.

I wonder if we'll see them again next week?

Edit: to everyone saying we should have made a point of some kind - if you’re mean to kids or they think you’re making fun of them they just don’t come back. Kids (and adults!) do stupid shit all the time, and you quickly get into the habit of just dusting them down and getting on with things. Don’t get me wrong, we *definitely* laugh about it later - but how’s a little nobhead like this going to learn, if he doesn’t come back to the allotment and get his hands dirty?Someone’s story about their friend wearing a skirt to school and getting bloomers reminded me of my own malicious compliance in high school. 

Waaaaay back in 2013 I was a sophomore in highschool, and there was a tradition that on fridays, the cheerleaders, football players (without their pads of course) band members, and the other groups performing wore their uniforms to class. This wasn’t a written tradition, and only the cheerleaders and dance team’s uniforms broke “dress code”, nobody really batted an eye to it. 

I wasn’t a skirt person, but I liked dresses once and a while (once IN a while *sorry*). As one can tell by my user, I grew up in Texas, and it’s still significantly hot in August/September. So one time while wearing a casual sun dress in September, I was pulled out of class and reprimanded because the end of my dress was 4 inches above the knee, when the dress code said no shorter than 2. I pointed out the cheerleaders and dance teams uniforms every Friday and how they reached mid thigh at their longest, but was told that was okay because “students can wear official school uniforms”. And was sent home to change.

Clearly, somehow someone had forgotten I was on the golf team. Immediately my mind was turning to the next Friday.

The school had recently upgraded the golf team uniforms the year prior, and the girls team uniforms consisted of a short sleeve collared polo shirt, and a skort. If you don’t know what a skort is, it’s essentially a skirt and short shorts combined. It looks like a skirt, but they essentially act like built in bike shorts, and these fuckers were SHORT, I’d argue shorter than the average cheerleader skirt. 

So that next Friday (about 3 days later) to my parents surprise, I was ready to go that morning in my golf uniform, as compared to taking a bag to keep the clothes in to change into after school. But I just said “Fridays, we can wear our uniforms to class”, and they accepted without question and took me to school. 

Well by second period, I was sent to the office yet again and the first thing the assistant principal asked me was why I would “deliberately disobey her right after our last conversation” and threatened in school suspension, I’ll never get anywhere in life by not listening, yada yada yada. 

When I finally had a chance to get a word in, I said “but this is my school golf uniform” and I pointed to our schools logo that was sewn into my polo shirt. “You said students can wear official school uniforms to class, why are the cheerleader uniforms okay and mine isn’t? This isn’t even a skirt, it’s a skort, it has pants!” 

I still remember how pissed off she was. She stared me down for what seemed like a millennia. Then she snapped and told me to get out of her office, and go sit in the lobby area. That I knew what she meant and she would be calling my parents about this blatant disrespect. So I waited and played on my iPod and chatted with the nice secretary, trying to keep myself distracted, because in reality I had been really trying not to cry. I had massive anxiety when it came to authority, but I still had my naive sense of injustice, and I didn’t just want to let this go.

After about 20 minutes, she popped her head out and in a very monotone voice, told me I could go back to class and to let teachers know I had gotten permission from the front office to wear my uniform. Then she went back in and closed the door before I could even think to respond. I spent the rest of my day dealing with teachers questioning me about my outfit and 1 or 2 calling the front office to double check my claim that I had in fact gotten permission, and went to practice after school as normal before being carpooled back home. 

My dad met me at the front door with a small smirk and I asked him what in the world happened because I knew he was the go-to contact for my school, so I knew she called him. He explained that when she called and tried to get him to come to the school and get me and talked about punishments for my insubordination, he immediately began to argue with her and admitted he raised his voice quite a bit, asking why I wasn’t allowed to wear my sport uniform that the school provided to me as a dress requirement at my golf practice, and mentioned taking this all the way to the school board and resolving this “obvious favoritism”.

He then asked me not to do that again, but that he was proud of me, and told me “I know I had told you never to start a fight, but to always fight back, I always thought physically, but you damn sure took the advice.”

Edit: I’m sorry for hurting my fellow 20 somethings with the reminder that 2013 was 8 years ago, please don’t look for gray hairs in the mirror for too long

Edit 2: an even deeper apology for my 30-60 year olds who I offended even further with my edit

Edit 3: I do actually need to clear something up. The band did not wear those heavy wool uniforms to school, they had their own custom shirt/nice pants combo the directors were apparently really strict about all the band kids wearing every Friday. 

Also sorry to my 30 year olds for grouping that age range, sorry to my 60+ for not mentioning it, those responsible for sacking those who are responsible for the edits have been sackedSo.. I was granted a legal name change a few months ago. Long, boring story as to why. Simply put - hated the 'unique' spelling of my first name and wanted to ditch my surname.

Didn't have much trouble updating my name most places. Social security, driver's license, insurance, yada yada. No bumps in the road until I got to the very last thing to update. My credit card. I use this particular credit card a lot. I'm self employed and use this card to rack up travel points for flights, hotels, rental cars, etc. However, if you've ever checked into a hotel or picked up a rental car, you'll know the name on the card must match the name on the ID.

So I call the CC company. Told I have to fill out a certain document and mail that in, alongside a copy of the court document. Fair enough. Two weeks go by. Hear nothing, so call again. They say they haven't received it. I'm then informed they have a fax number that I can use to send in the documentation.

So I fax in everything necessary using an app on my phone.

Another two weeks go by. Still nothing.

I call again. Same spiel on the other end of the phone. "Please mail or fax......" You get the deal.

I once more did what they asked. Yet another week passes. 

I call.... *again*. Told the same damn script. I'm starting to get annoyed by this point. I have an upcoming trip planned and need the card to match my ID. So I ask to speak to a manager. They give me some BS of a manager not being currently available

Anyways.

I fax in the document and court order once again. However, this time I decided I was just going to keep hitting send after the previous one had shown as delivered. I thought I'd repeat the process a few times. Just to ‘make sure’ they got it. 

After sending it 25 times the first day, I got no response. Next day I was sitting on my couch watching football. Thought I'd send the fax a few more times. By the time I realized how many times I'd hit send, I had sent it over 130 times.

The very next afternoon I got a call from a manager at CC company. She sounded quite angry over the phone. I just played dumb. 

"You guys asked me to fax it in..."

I got my updated card in the mail 3 days later.






**tl;dr** - Spent almost 2 months trying to update my name on credit card. CC company gave me the same run around every time I called "Just fax us x and y." Faxed them X and Y about 150 times. They finally sent me a new card with the correct name.


Edit: holy heck this blew up! Glad I could provide some entertainment. Go forth and maliciously comply my friends!

(I’d also like to mention how painfully easy dealing with Social Security and the DMV were in comparison. For whatever reason, CC companies would look at my updated driver’s license, social security card, and court order document, but still not be convinced my name had changed. I understand fraud happens, but come on…)Edit: First and foremost, thank you for the upvotes and awards. Greatly appreciated, I love all the discussions below. There is some food for thought here.

To clarify a few things: this took place in Europe. I was a salaried employee (40hr/week). I left that job about 10 months after the "event" took place. I didn't get into trouble and nobody tried to fire me (my probation period was over and we have employment laws regarding constructive dismissal, so I knew their hands were tied).

&#x200B;

About four years back, I started a new banking job. All was well, just that the management was pretty strict with timekeeping, which was weird as we were back office (my experience was in a similar field at another bank, and we had flexible schedules and received time in lieu). But rules are rules, so I followed them. I learnt my tasks and got to know the wider team.

Anyway, about four months in, I started to realise my senior manager didn’t like me. I’m pretty assertive as a person, and I do know how to stand up for myself. He hated it. I would speak up during the meetings, ask questions, give suggestions, and so on, while the team would stay quiet.

The week everything went south, I was working overtime, which was (obviously) unpaid. On Thursday, I did nearly two hours of overtime. On Friday, I thought I’ll leave a few minutes early as I was done for the week. My manager was off. I left 10 minutes early.

On Monday, I come to work, and I got called into a meeting straight away. There were three of us in the room: myself, my manager, and my senior manager. Our conversation went as follows:

&#x200B;

My manager (MM): I heard you left work early on Friday

Me: I did. I left 10 minutes early.

MM: did you ask for permission to leave early?

Me: it was 10 minutes. You know I did about 4 hours of overtime last week. Why are we having this conversation?

Senior Manager (SM): because you left early without asking for permission. As a senior, you should be setting an example for the rest of the team.

Me: Is this a joke?

SM: Your working hours are 9 am to 6 pm, not 9 am to 5:50 pm. You shouldn't leave early without asking for your manager or my permission first. Is that clear?

Me: Got it. It’s perfectly clear.

&#x200B;

I listened and started coming into the office at 9 am and leaving at 6 pm on the dot. At first, they didn't realise what was happening, but the week after the meeting was the last week of the month. And let’s say the last week of the month was… intense. Especially the final day. The reports had to be completed, signed off, and submitted before the month's end. We covered multiple jurisdictions and would deal with Southeast Asia in the morning and the Americas in the evening. Our team was “expected” to work overtime due to this.

&#x200B;

Here comes Friday, the last day of the month. Showtime!

&#x200B;

I’m at my desk at 9 am sharp. Most of the team have already been at the office for at least an hour. I, of course, have a cup of coffee from the cafeteria because I was a bit early. My manager looks at me and raises his eyebrow, but he doesn’t say anything.

Work work work. Break time (we had two 20 minute paid breaks and 1-hour unpaid lunch). I’m the only person to go on my break.

Lunchtime. Everyone was eating at their desks, while I go to meet my friends for lunch. On the second break, I once again leave my workplace and go for a short stroll around.

Back to work. About a quarter to 6 pm, I get a call from one of the senior managers in the US. She needs the report amended. There were 4 of us on that call. I’m doing the amendments as we speak and closely monitoring the time. I see it’s two minutes to 6 pm… One minute… 6 pm.

&#x200B;

SM2: \*rambling about the report

Me: apologies, but I have to stop you right here

SM2: yes?

Me: It’s 6 pm here. My day is over.

SM2: Huh?

Me: As per my management, my working hours are 9 am to 6 pm, so I must leave now. Have a great weekend, and we’ll catch up on Monday!

&#x200B;

I logged off, got my coat, wished everyone a great weekend, and left. It was 6:04 pm. Both my manager and my senior manager were dumbfounded by what has happened. Looking pale, and stare at me in disbelief. It was a glorious sight.

I wanted to apologise to my senior manager that I wasn’t able to leave at 6 pm on the dot, but I thought that would have been way too passive-aggressive, so I just left.

&#x200B;

I relaxed the rule a bit after a few months. Yet, I never did more than 30 minutes of overtime. Ironically, once my stakeholders understood that I will not be available for 10+ hours, they started collaborating earlier in the month. I would have most of my reports done and submitted by the last day of the month.Short and sweet. The names are made up, and the location doesn't matter. 

I work for a flooring company, running installation for one of our markets. The vast majority of the crews that work for us are filled with guys (and the occasional gal) from Central America. Being in a state with blue cities and red country between, we definitely get some of the "Good Ol' Boy" mentality from some of our customers. 

We had an install go out months ago, and the customer specifically requested: "Don't send no dirty Mexicans to my house." While we have some guys from Mexico, we truly have the gamut of Central America represented in our subcontractors. So we do our schedule, not sending one of the guys from Mexico. 

The salesman was in the installation office when the customer called, rather frustrated: 

>Customer: I thought I told you not to send Mexicans out here.   
>  
>Salesman: Yes, sir, you did.   
>  
>Customer: So why are there Mexicans at my door saying they're from your company.   
>  
>Salesman: Well sir, it looks like Gustavo is out to your house today. Gustavo is actually from Honduras. 

At that point, the rest of us couldn't hold in our laughter, so the salesman left the office to finish the call. Gustavo and his crew were allowed into the house to install the flooring, but we haven't made a repeat sale to the customer just yet.Back in 2015 I worked for a pretty dismal call centre. It was an outsourced centre that handled customer support for a lot of UK retailers. Staff turn over was real high, with the vast majority being on temporary contracts and the promise of a permanent contract being hung over people heads to make them suck up being treated like crap. 

After working there for about two years, in late February of that year I was offered a permanent contract because they wanted to put me on their team leader programme. 

The pay was slightly  better, the job security was better, the only major difference was how holidays where handled. People on temporary contracts where paid for any unused holidays at the end of the working year in April. People on permanent contracts had to use their holidays or they would lose them. 

I had just over 3 weeks holidays saved up, so the day I accepted I booked 3 weeks of in March so as i wouldn't lose them in April. 

March rolled around and my manager told me that my holidays had been refused. I said that's fine as long as they pay me for them, and he replied that no if you dont use your holidays you lose them. I said that i was trying to use my holidays and they where not letting me. He shrugged said it's the "duty of the employee to manage their holiday time wisely and I should read my contract" despite the fact i had only gotten that contract 3 weeks earlier and the holidays worked differently. 

Understandably annoyed that evening i went home and read my contract from beginning to end and discovered my manager had overlooked one crucial part of the paper work. 

The contract clearly stated I had to give a weeks notice, and that any holidays not used would be paid to any leaving  employee in full on their last paycheck. 

The next day I came into work and announced I would be quitting unless paid my holidays or allowed to take the time off, and if they accepted my notice then to be sure my holiday days was included in my final paycheck. 

My boss asked me if I was really going to quit over this, and I replied was he really going to lose one of his most reliable employees over this. 

He wouldn't budge, I assume he thought I was bluffing. 

So I handed in my notice, and on my leaving interview with my managers manager made sure to explain exactly why I was leaving. 

And yes my final paycheck did include my unused holiday days.

The end.Super short one.

A few years ago, I went to the doctor's to make an appointment (I had to go to the pharmacy next to it so thought I'd pop in instead of calling).

Receptionist tells me they cant take walk ins (I didn't want an appointment then anyway), and can only take bookings over the phone.

So I stood at reception, got my phone out and called the number for the phone right next to her. I made eye contact with her, the whole time, as she answered the phone, and booked me in.Disclaimers: on mobile, English isn't my language, if you want to share it elsewhere, drop a link. 

A bit of background: I own and operate a bbq and grill restaurant. We run a special promotion for the Euro. We have a promotion for 1kg of skewers (pork or chicken) for 6,50€.

This happened on Saturday night. A group came to watch the match between Belgium and Portugal. One of them is a guy known to almost of the restaurant owners in town. Let's call him Dick. Dick has a tendency to complain about the food, in order to get freebies (either something extra or the whole order). 

They place their orders and about 20 minutes later they're served. A few minutes later my head server, Mary, comes inside (sit downs are only permitted on the patio due to the pandemic) furious. 

Mary: Give me the scales!

Me, slightly confused (I was sweating over the grill, since we had a lot of orders): What for?

Mary: Just give me the fucking scales!

I give her the electronic scales, she grabs an empty plate and heads outside. I follow her, because I know that something is up. She goes to the group that includes Dick, puts the scales on the table and proclaims "Let's weigh them!".

You see, Dick had ordered the promotion and then said that his order was missing almost half of it and demanded four more skewers "to make it correct" (his words). Now, in almost any other place he would be probably right. Most of them buy their skewers already made and they weigh between 100 to 120 grams, which means that a kilo is usually 10 skewers. But we prepare our skewers in house and are much bigger, between 180 to 220 grams (which is written on the menu), so our kilo is usually six of them. So, basically Dick was demanding almost another kilo of meat for free.

Dick, smugly: Yeah, let's weigh them and then you can bring what you still owe me!

Mary grabs the skewers and a fork and starts removing pieces of meat and placing them on the scales. Initially, Dick has a very smug smile. But he starts to frown when 3 skewers are emptied and the scales shows more than half a kilo of meat. Finally, with the second piece from the fifth skewer, the scales shows just above a kilo.

Mary, holding the remains skewers and smiling smugly: It seems you were right about the order not being correct. We put more. I'll take those (waving the skewers in her hand) back to the kitchen. Enjoy your food!

Mary returned smiling to the kitchen and put the skewers aside, while Dick ate his kilo of meat sullenly and the rest of his group smirking.When I was doing my articles at a small law firm (internship to be admitted as an attorney) I was the go-to person for everything at the office (setting up computers, buying stationery, paying bills, going to court, seeing clients,etc). After being admitted as an attorney I continued doing all this because the secretary only did about 20% of what a secretary would usually do and refused to do anything else. My boss does some shady business (don't pay taxes, etc) so he couldn't just fire her for fear of her ratting him out. He also never disciplined her. We are not in the US. 

Since we worked from my boss's mother's house, the secretary also spent about 50% of her day just chatting to his mother and they became fast friends. Guess who was always the evil one that everyone ganged up on? Yours truly. I was made out to be incompetent at my job and I used to cry a lot and almost became an alcoholic from work stress.

One day the secretary got really upset with me (after I asked her to buy stationery since we didn't even have staples) and after a heated argument told me that I'm not the office manager and should stop lording it about as if I was (bear in mind I was her senior both as an attorney and in number of years worked at the firm). My boss did nothing and rather got upset with me and so did his mother.

I decided there and then I am done doing both secretary work and my attorney work because I was working roughly 50-60 hours per week (standard is 40) trying to get everything done without receiving overpay (the unemployment rate in my country is around 30% and in the legal field supply of lawyers exceeds demand). She knew this and my boss knew this but no one cared that I was basically working myself into an early grave.

Cue malicious compliance. If everyone agrees that I am not the office manager than I will stop managing the flow of the office and only do my attorney work. I stopped paying the bills, buying the stationery, reminding my boss of important meetings, etc.

Within two weeks the electricity was cut off for 10 days because it wasn't paid and my boss' elderly mother and the rest of his family had no electricity. We could also not work for those 10 days. Once the electricity went on, the phone lines were cut because of non-payment. We could again not work. The post piled up, there were no stationery. We couldn't do service of court documents because our service providers cut us off. It went on for weeks. I simply worked around the issues and sorted my life out (one example: when the wifi was off I used my cellphone to hotspot my laptop without telling anyone). 

In the end my boss and his mother begged me to do what I used to do but I refused. Since I was focusing more on my actual work my fees increased and my pay increased as well. Shortly thereafter I moved away from that office to our secondary office and worked alongside lovely colleagues who all did what they got paid to do. I have been at this new office (same firm just a different location) for the last two years.English is my first language and I’m typing on a laptop so I expect you all to judge this post harshly.

I moved from Pennsylvania to Michigan a few years ago and only go home once a year or so.  A few years back I transferred the vast majority of my bank account to Michigan, but they were giving me a hard time about closing the account and so I withdrew all funds except for $1.31.  

I haven’t touched the account since that time so two years later I get a notice for inactivity stating that I will be charged five dollars if my account remains inactive for 2 years.  I spoke with 3 different people on the phone but they would not let me close out the account without incurring a fee and since I’m never moving back to that town I refuse to pay them or add any money to the account.

Cue MC- so I have to interact with the account once every two years or else pay you five dollars? Fine, give me $0.01 please.

When I was there in person last month I withdrew one penny from the account so now it’s good for another two years.  The attendant definitely gave me a weird look but at this rate my account will remain open for the next 260 years!

Edit: grammar- thanks for calling me out!I’m a nurse at a large hospital. The floor I worked on was selected to be the COVID unit during the first and second waves. More nurses than not were catching covid. So whenever I got an inkling of being sick I would call out and get tested. Now if I tested positive then I would get two weeks off without penalty. But I tested negative and returned to work. I get called into the office and got a verbal warning because I had one too many sick days. I said to my manager “you realize we are in a pandemic right?”  She says “yes, I know that but we still have to stick to the original policy.” When we clock in, there is an electronic message that pops up on the time clock that reads “During the pandemic we need to self monitor ourselves and by clocking in you are declaring that you are fit to work.” There was no adjustment to the policy even though we were a covid unit during a pandemic. So I would either have to lie about feeling sick when I clock in, or call out and get in trouble. 

Here is where the malicious compliance comes in. I had always picked up a lot of extra time in a sister department. Not because I needed the extra money but because the hospital was always short staffed. My manager didn’t like the fact that I picked up extra time the other department. She wanted me to pick up extra time in our department. So she said. “As punishment you can not pick up extra time in the other department for 90 days (The length of my disciplinary period). You should be responsible enough to pick up extra time in your own department.” As I didn’t need the extra money, I didn’t pick up ANY extra time in that period. I got called almost every day to ask if I could come in because they were short staffed. One of the reasons they were short staffed was because our sister unit was even more short staffed and the nurses on my unit were getting pulled to go work there. If only more nurses picked up extra time on the other unit, hmm. 

At the end of the 90 days I was told I could pick up extra time in the sister department again. At which point I handed in my two weeks notice and told her I accepted a position at another hospital. She then tells me that because of my years of service I need to give four weeks notice. I tell her “no, that’s just a courtesy. So I’ll extend the same courtesy I got when I needed to call out sick.”This is a story of my mothers. She has always been incredibly hardheaded, but this sticks out a lot from my teenage years.

Once a year she always had us pull everything out of the garage (lots of boxes my mom has a concerning amount of possessions) so we could go through it and clean/reorganize. This particular year the couple who owned the house across from us (flippers) where in the process of selling their house. Unhappy with my mothers "unsightly" driveway covered in boxes soiling their good image, they made a call to the HOA.

By the time my mother received the letter, the mess had been put away, but they decided to get her on a few other complaints such as the bikes against the side of the house and the "patchy" gravel. She had two weeks to have everything up to standards.

Petty and easily frustrated, my mother knew immediately who called since the couple had come over and told her flat out with their renovations they were selling that house for "way more any other house and this neighborhood" and would appreciate if she respected that by keeping her property on par.

For the next two weeks every box from that garage was in our driveway. The couch and the living room TV came next. This was early summer, so it was perfect weather to sit in your yard in your short shorts and sports bra. My mom made sure to wave and smile every time they brought someone over for a showing.

The final step came at the end of that two weeks though. After the yard had been cleaned up and cleared by the HOA, my mom went to the local walmart and bought a for sale sign. She wrote about 1/4 of their ridiculous asking price on it and finished off with a big SOLD written across the front and stuck it out in our yard.

No clue what they ended up selling their house for, but it sat empty for a while so I'd assume it was below offer.

TL;DR Don't tell my mom she's devaluing your house, or she will go far out her way to do so, all while complying with the HOA.A few years ago my wife was working as an EMS worker in our local township. She got home from work one night after a long day and posted a picture of herself holding an unopened beer and saying "I needed this" (in the picture you could tell the beer was still closed). A few minutes after she posted her picture a major storm decided to suddenly roll through. My wife, being the good employee she was, called her supervisor and asked if he needed any help. He said "No! you can't come in you posted a picture of yourself drinking alcohol" She objected that the can wasn't opened and every idiot could see that but he wouldn't relent but he said something about how it could be construed wrong.

Fast forward a couple of weeks, it had been a stupidly busy day for her and when she finally got home, she ran over to the shelf that we had a  bottle of whiskey on, literally tossed me her phone and said "Quick, take a picture of me "drinking" this!" The cap was obviously still on the bottle but she tipped it up like she was drinking it and she posted it online as soon as I gave the phone back.

Her boss called her 10 minutes later and said "We need you to come back in, we are short staffed tonight". She said "sorry boss, I can't, I've been drinking. Check online" He tried to object that the cap was on and she said "last time I posted a picture like this, you wouldn't let me come in because it would set the wrong precedent, I wouldn't want to do that to you this time".

Edit: 50(ish)% of the people commenting are saying they do or have done the same thing (mostly military) but 1(ish)% of the people commenting are saying this is made up and never happened. It's quite amusing.

Edit 2: For those saying the supervisor was correct on the closed beer, I agree...but you can't have it both ways.Disclaimer: I tried to keep it as short as I could but it still turned out pretty lengthy. No TLDR...read it or don't.

This is the story of my former employer. I work in the northeast US and my employer at the time was a very small company (Boss and 5 employees) in a very specific industry where 90% of our work was on construction sites and finding a well-qualified person in this very specific industry is a very very hard thing to do.

My boss was the kind of boss that every employee hates. Corners were cut every possible way in order to keep overhead costs down. On top of that he would constantly overbook on jobs (like signing contracts for 6 projects during the same week knowing full well that he only has 5 employees) which would result in the employees often working 14 hour days or more....which really sucks when you're on salary (no overtime). 

His worst attribute by far was approving time off and then during your time off calling or texting you asking if you would be willing to work a day or cut your vacation short. Sometimes he'd even ask you to move your time off to the next week or next month "when the workload lightens up" (hint: it never lightened up due to his constant overbooking).

After working at this company for 6 years I got used to all the aforementioned annoyances. But then things changed, my son was born. In the months leading up to his birth I made it very clear that I would be taking a 5-week unpaid leave of absence once he arrives. The state we're in allows new parents to take up to 8 weeks of unpaid leave. I told my boss that I know 8 weeks would be a huge strain on such a small company so I was willing to take 5 weeks but those 5 weeks would be completely "off the grid" meaning dont call me, dont text me, if youre going to ask me to do anything work-related the answer will be no so don't bother. I'm going to be spending time with my family. He 100% agreed.

Fast-forward to my son's birth. He was born on a Friday and after a short stay in the NICU (don't worry, he's fine) was released on Monday and we took him home. Tuesday morning (yeah...the next day) I wake up to a missed call, an email, and 3 texts all from my boss asking me to call him back ASAP. For reasons still unknown to me to this day I call him back and he tells me there's a slight emergency (code speak for he screwed up the scheduling and has a job with no employee at it) and asks if I could maybe come into work that day and maybe work a couple more days that week until he finds someone to cover it. 

I lost it. I literally felt something in my neck snap and unleashed a verbal assault on him that I still feel bad about now, a year later. I ended my rant with an apology...as much of a dick move it was for him to be calling me in that situation it was still completely unprofessional of me to say what I said to him. Obviously he wasn't a big fan of what I said and after a small rant of his own ended with the sentences that made this whole story possible. 

He said, "You've got a pretty good gig at this company that most people your age would be thankful for. I'd be impressed if you could find a better job in this field because I've been doing this for 30 years and I know how small this industry is and trust me, good jobs like yours don't come along very often. Think about that."

So we ended the call and I did what he said. I thought about it. After thinking about it for about 30 seconds I got out of bed, sat down in front of my computer and started looking at job postings.

5 weeks later my time off came to an end and my first day back I came in to work, walked into my bosses office and handed him a piece of paper.

Boss: "What's this?"
Me: "I thought about what you said about how you be really impressed if I could find a better job than the one I have here. ...so I did."

My boss reads over what I handed him...a job offer from a competitor for the exact same job I was performing but at a 25% higher salary, an extra week of paid vacation compared to what I had AND a stipulation that company policy was that work hours are capped at 8 per day meaning that once I hit 8 hours on a job I pack up and leave it until tomorrow. No exceptions.

Boss: "Well then...ummm...can I have the day to crunch some numbers to come up with a counter-offer?
Me: "No, don't bother. I just wanted you to see it because I know you wouldn't have believed me otherwise."

Gave my two week notice and left for whatever job site I was on that day. That was a year ago and I could not be happier with my new job. I get to spend lots of time with my boy and that's the best job perk there is.

For all you bosses and managers out there. Dont fuck with your employees...especially the good ones. Treat them how you'd want to be treated. 

***Most employees don't quit their jobs....they quit their bosses!***So yeah, a couple of years ago I was working for an IT company which also provided server management and general domain and E-Mail services. We had some really big companies as clients, so we were used to some really idiotic demands, but most of the time we could convince the people whose main job seemingly was "to be in charge" to listen to our expertise. Not so Mr. Bigwig. Mr. Bigwig was the CEO of a large automobile sales company. He also was the type of guy who prided himself with being a "great negotiator" and "thinking so far ahead, regular people can't follow". And he was a complete ass to everyone.

&#x200B;

Mr. Bigwig went on a holiday once and set up an automatic out of office reply in his mail account, but - as is the technical standard - everybody who wrote him during that time only received the reply just one single time. When Mr. Bigwig returned from his vacation this infuriated him a lot so he called our support line and yelled and cussed his way up our hierarchy until he had me on the phone. I tried to tell him that this was working as intended and tried to explain why, but Mr. Bigwig wouldn't have any of it. This went all the way to our CTO who sent him a waiver to sign, stating that we would deactivate this limitation, but not be liable for any consequences (in short). Then he told me to make the changes to MBs account. I tried to object, but the CTO just smiled, shrugged and went into his office. Mr. Bigwig was happy. He won and booked this as his latest negotiating victory.

&#x200B;

Now let us jump to December the 29th of the same year. I get a phone call. From Mr. Bigwig. He is not happy. He is not happy because he is blacklisted on about every blacklist in existence. He is also not happy because he can't receive or send any email. And he is not happy because he can't find any mail he received during the Christmas holidays or near them. He can't find them because the nice number in brackets besides his inbox folder, that indicates the amount of unread mails he has, reads 50,000. A quick look around the server logs tells me there are indeed some mails he did not receive. 150,000 to be exact. They are still pending delivery because his inbox is full.

&#x200B;

He is also not happy because he is the laughing stock of everybody he ever respected.

&#x200B;

Now let me guide you as the reader to the bottom of this. What you don't know and we also did not know at the time is: Mr. Bigwig was member of a very exclusive group of business owners, CEOs and high ranking politicians around the globe. The kind of people you would imagine sitting around a large oak table, smoking cigars, drinking 200€ whiskey and discussing world dominance.

&#x200B;

This group had a mailing list. A shitty, basic mailing list.

&#x200B;

It went something like this:

&#x200B;

Bigwig: (Out of Office Reply) Hey, thank you for you mail, but I am on holiday! I will reply later.

Somerandomdude @mailinglist: Merry Christmas!

Mailinglist @everybody: Hey guys, Somerandomdude is wishing you Merry Christmas.

Bigwig @mailinglist: Thanks for telling me, but I am on holiday! I will reply later.

Mailinglist @everybody: Hey guys, Mr. Bigwig is on holiday, he will reply later.

Bigwig @mailinglist: Thanks for telling me, but I am on holiday! I will reply later.

Mailinglist @FUCKING EVERYBODY: Hey guys, Mr. Bigwig is on holiday, he will reply later.

Bigwig @mailinglist: Thanks for telling me, but I am on holiday! I will reply later.

Mailinglist @FUCKING EVERYBODY: Hey guys, Mr. Bigwig is on holiday, he will reply later.

Bigwig @mailinglist: Thanks for telling me, but I am on holiday! I will reply later.

Mailinglist @FUCKING EVERYBODY: Hey guys, Mr. Bigwig is on holiday, he will reply later.

...repeat until the servers give out.

&#x200B;

So B-Diddy was not the only one who had thousands and thousands of mails in his folder. All his fancy pants networking contacts had too. Mr. Bigwig raged hard at everyone who was brave enough to get on the phone with him, threatened to sue us for millions of Euros and to "end us as a business". We finally put him through to our founder, who listened to his rant and told him he would send him a solution within the next ten minutes.

He sent two documents: A scan of the signed waiver, in which the consequences of disabling the out of office message restriction were outlined in detail, and a service contract, allowing us to fix the problem to our abilities without any financial budget limitations, but with a really nice (read: enormous) estimated budget.

&#x200B;

It was a good year for the company, with an unexpected spike in revenue, just before new years eve.

&#x200B;

//Edit: Thank you kind stranger for Reddit Premium! I have no idea what to do with it, but knowing somebody liked this enough to gild me with it makes me very happy :-)I'm not sure if this belongs in Petty Revenge or Malicious compliance for there's a little of both - so sorry if this has been put in the wrong place.  Either way I've enjoyed my malicious revenge/compliance so I hope you do.

For the past few years our business has been receiving telemarketing calls from an offshore call center trying to make appointments for "Optus Business Centre".   Every time they call, we'd politely tell them we were not interested and to remove us from their list and they'd promise not to call again.

You can probably tell by my use of the words "every time" that having ourselves removed from the list didn't work.  It didn't work the first time, and it didn't work the 50th time.    Offshore are cheap, and get paid per appointment.   So they would get quite aggressive.   It was clear that a new strategy needed to be found as it was taking too long to get them to bugger off.

So began my campaign of malicious compliance/petty revenge...

*"Hi we're calling from Optus business centre and we can save you 40% on your mobile phone bill!  Can we come and see you tomorrow at 11am?"*

You can save me 40% of my mobile bill?  That's like sixty Grand a month!

"*What? How many phones do you have?"*

150 or so that I'm responsible for directly, plus a few others..

The appointment is quickly confirmed.    The next day a salesman calls me up he's running early - can we meet earlier.  I refused.  Our appointment is for 11am after all.

11am rolls around and in he walks - we sit down in reception and go through the greetings.  I then ask him if it's possible to make the telemarketing calls stop now.    He assures me that it is, and so I stand up, shake his hand and thank him for coming in.

*What? That's it?  You could have said that over the phone!*

I point out that we did. Many times, and it didn't work - and I hoped that this waste of his time  (45 min trip from Homebush to Sydney) would perhaps teach him to mend his ways.

Over the past 2 years they have sent out 5 different reps to see us.    They call for meetings - we accept them, shine them on about the value of the account and they roll in to be greeted by me dressed in a chicken suit;   made to wait in our meeting room for 20 minutes before being asked to be removed from the list; being turned away at the door (they sent two reps that time).

I'm posting this today because it was visit number 6 and it was the best yet.    We got a repeat customer!   I sat him down in the meeting room and played the video recording of our last meeting :)

Is that you ?

*Yes! It's me!  Didn't I follow up ?   Did we have a good Meeting?*

I point out that I certainly enjoyed our last meeting, and zoomed forward in the video to the part where I explained that we didn't have 500 mobile accounts - and he needed to please remove us from their list and you could see his heart break.   Which it did again, once he realised that whatever account he thought was being discussed today was not going to be discussed.    Which we also have on video, so we can go all inception if/when he shows his face again.

&#x200B;

Edit:  [https://pasteboard.co/ICnJFPn.jpg](https://pasteboard.co/ICnJFPn.jpg)  Here's me in the chicken suit prepping for the meeting apparently hugged to death, try this:  [https://imgur.com/kKsHycQ](https://imgur.com/kKsHycQ)

Edit2: Yes, it's a duck costume not a chicken suit. But we've called it the chicken suit in our office for years now, so forgive the fowl language error.The  jury duty letter came while I was in Royal North Shore ICU in 2013 for a brain haemorrhage from an aneurysm. I was 4 days post surgery when the letter came and bored I read it in the hospital. Told them I couldn’t. They said no excuse do you have evidence. The nurse had me hold up my licence, wrote a sign that said “are you kidding mate” and took a pic of me 80 scalp staples, black eye, IVs and the spinal  fluid drain in my head at my request. Never heard a peep after that lolI used to work at a call center where we would get flooded with calls constantly. This is a story of how a busy body boss thought they understood everything since they were in charge. At the work we were given two 15 minute breaks and one 45 minute lunch break. The breaks were scheduled into our day so you could see when they would be, but this would change day by day. 

My role was a bit different than the normal agents as I was specifically dealing with the higher issue calls. These calls could take up to 1 hour to complete and the caller would need to stay on the line, unless they were fine with a call back later but this was rarely the case.

Since I never knew when I would be getting these calls, my break times were a shot in the dark if I would or wouldn't be on a call. I would just take them as soon as the call was done if they ever intersected, which they did 99% of the time.

Enter my boss. During a performance review I hit all the marks except for "Attendance". I asked about this as I know I missed a few days but always with a reasonable update for time frame and never had a no show day (where there is no warning that I'm not coming in). My boss stated that attendance also applies to break and lunch times and since I rarely took them at the requested time, I was getting written up. I explained my role, that they hired me for, and the challenges involved. They did not care and stated I needed to take breaks when I was told to. I asked for them to send me an email so that I could print it out, put it on my desk and never forget again. My boss smiled ear to ear, probably because they thought i was groveling at that point, and sure enough they did stating in the email "You must take the your breaks only when the schedule tells you to, no time else. There is no excuse."
I saved it, printed it out, sent a copy to my own email and followed it to the letter. Next call that happened that same day of course, had the long call crossing over with a break issue. I asked the customer if it would be ok for a call back, they said no, I stated that unfortunately I cannot stay on the line as I am required to take my break. They became enraged and demanded to speak with my boss. I told my boss, they said that I need to apologize and finish the call. I showed them the email they just sent to me and said "you told me to take my break at this time no matter what. I'm just doing what you told me to do. I'm taking my break, would you like the customer transferred over? Or should I just hang up?" They took the call over and from that day on I never had a missed attendance mark.
God busy body bosses are the worse.This happened a couple days ago, also mandatory English isn't my first language. 

For Americans: 50g=1.76oz  200g=7oz  23kg=50.7lb

So when I travel by plane (which happens about 2/3 times per year) I'm usually quite conscious about the weight of my luggage because of how much you have to pay if it exceeds the limit. This time I put a bit more stuff in because of gifts but I thought I was fine. 
I pass the police and get to the check-in, where a woman in her late 30's/ early 40's that reminded me of my old history teacher indicated me to proceed. I give my passeport, do the usual stuff, and I put my luggage on the scale which shows 23.05kg (the limit being 23). 
I was quite pleased with myself while looking at it, thinking I got it just right, but *NO*, the woman tells me I need to pay 50€ for excess baggage. I look at her confused, telling her it's 50 grams, surely it doesn't matter, she repeats herself and we start arguing until she says: "Either you pay 50€ or you somehow make the luggage 50g lighter". (I didn't have a carry on so I couldn't take anything with me).
At that moment I remember the 200g of chocolate that are sitting in the luggage and I start smiling. I open the luggage, take the chocolate out and start nibbling at it with a grin on my face while looking at the woman, who goes from pikachu face to annoyed. She tells me to hurry up (even though I was the only one in line) so I offered her some and she just stared at me.
I ended up eating exactly a quarter of the 200g and lo and behlod the scale showed 23kg.
The woman gives me my ticket while glaring at me, and I tell her to have a good day.
TLDR: Lady tells me I need to pay because my luggage has 50g too many so I eat them (chocolate).I received an unsolicited call earlier this morning from a gentleman named Dan. Dan worked for Microsoft Security and was calling to let me know that my computer had been downloading malicious software, and because I was such a loyal customer he would be walking me through the steps to remove the software and fix my computer.

In case you didn't guess, Dan did not work for Microsoft, my computer was not infected, and he was not going to help me.

Our conversation began:
>Dan: Are you near your computer right now?

> Me: Yes, why?

> Dan: I'd like to help you check it for issues.

> Me: Okay, give me a minute.

At this point, I spend a couple minutes "finding" my laptop and getting it booted up. Really, it only took about 20 seconds, but Dan didn't need to know this. Once I was at my laptop, Dan continued...

> Dan: What do you see on your screen right now?

> Me: What was that? (I wanted to make sure I heard his question correctly)

> Dan: What do you see on your screen right now?

>Me: Well, I see my desktop...

At this point, Dan tried to continue with his script, but I had not told Dan everything that was on my screen, so I continued.

> Me: There's a clock in the bottom left corner, the time says 10:30AM, the date is December 3rd, 2017, there's a WiFi signal with full bars, there's a volume meter but I have it muted right now, there's a battery indicator showing my laptop is 27% charged.

Dan tried in vain to interrupt me, but there were still more things to tell him.

>Me: There's an icon called My Computer, an icon called Recycle Bin, and icon called Google Chrome...

You can see where this is going - I proceeded to read off to Dan each and every icon, shortcut, folder, and file that was currently displayed on my screen. Dan never got a chance to get a word in edgewise.

Finally after about 4 or 5 minutes of meticulously letting Dan know exactly what was on my screen, he asked me a question:

>Dan: Can you right click on My Computer?

>Me: Sure, no problem. Do you know where that would be located?

>Dan: It should be on your Desktop.

>Me: I know, but I can't find it. Do you remember what it was next to when I described everything to you.

>Dan: It should be next to Recycle Bin.

>Me: No, Google Chrome is next to the Recycle Bin.

After a few more minutes, Dan successfully navigated me into the Start Menu to open up a Run box.

>Dan: Okay, there should be a field in the Run box. Is it empty?

>Me: No, it has something written already.

>Dan: What does it say?

>Me: The first one says msinfo32, the second one says cmd, the third one says regedit...

After going through all the items in my Run box history (11-12), Dan let me know that he would need to call me back in a few minutes. Despite my pleas for help, Dan hung up. Apparently I wasn't supposed to follow his directions so well?


 Story happened a couple of years ago, but it's my favorite lawyer story and I hope you enjoy (none of the following is legal advice, don't take legal advice from randos on the internet). TL:DR - client gets to plant sunflowers.

Client walks into the office and asks us for a contract review. He then hands over an HOA contract. Before slogging through a whole HOA contract, I asked him what he was hoping to accomplish.

"They want me to dig up my sunflowers."

"Your... sunflowers?"

"Yes, I planted a row of sunflowers outside my house. They pranced by and said that sunflowers are not allowed per the contract I signed. So I want you to tell me if that is true or not."

"Sir, before anything else I need to tell you that this will likely be an hourly fee bill. HOAs are notorious for dragging things out. So these could quickly become expensive sunflowers."

"I don't care. This is America and I should be able to plant sunflowers god dammit."

Still thinking he wasn't *that* serious about sunflowers, I asked for a three hour retainer. He immediately pulled out a checkbook and paid for four hours. So I buckled down to review the alleged anti-sunflower clause. 

Just for reference, the sunflowers he wanted to plant were really big (5ft) and all along the front of the house. It was a very substantial amount of sunflowers.

The contract did indeed contain a clause, with a *very* thorough list, on which plants were and were not allowed to be planted. The list had just about every plant I could think of, in alphabetical order (think *apple, banana, cauliflower, dill...*). Sunflowers included. Corn was not included, which becomes very important later.

Quick legal point - if you write 'no dogs allowed' it is normally assumed that you are talking about all dogs generally. If you write 'no labs, golden retrievers, or poodles allowed' it is normally assumed that all other dogs are allowed. Sometimes a *not great* attorney will write a super long list to pad hours (read: charge more) instead of just writing 'no plants without prior approval' or something.

I called the client back in for the bad news. In explaining the above legal point, I let him know that the HOA got a raw deal from whoever drafted the contract. 

"No can do on the sunflowers. But if it makes you feel any better they were probably over billed by whoever wrote this contract. Pretty shoddy work too, they even forgot to write down 'corn' but they included nonsense like 'dragon fruit'."

"So yes to corn, no to sunflowers?"

"I didn't really check the contract for corn. But its not prohibited in the plant section, so probably?"

"Excellent. That'll work."

I thought he was oddly happy with bad news. Then two or three weeks later he came in with a picture of his house, surrounded by huge sunflowers.

What happened? This guy drove out to the country and bought obnoxiously large and ugly cornstalks. He promptly planted them where the sunflowers had been. When confronted by the HOA he told them (paraphrasing) to suck it the contract lets me plant corn. Then after some negotiation he agreed to take the corn down, in exchange for permission to plant sunflowers.

Now we are friends, he is still a great client, and he lives surrounded by a ridiculous moat of sunflowers.I worked at a pretty popular department store for years, and I have to say that the customers this store breeds are the worst of the worst. This store is probably 90% of the reason that so many customers feel as entitled as they do. ("The cashier had the hiccups, it was incredibly annoying, isn't there anything you can do for me?" Was an actual honest to God complaint one lady had for me when I was a supervisor.)

So anyway, I was covering a break up at the registers. I was a supervisor at the time and I had also already given my two weeks notice. I was beyond fed up. It was like spring of my senior year all over again. I had no more fucks left. 

So I'm up at the registers, and this lady who couldn't have been more than 40 comes up with a huge cart full. Anyone who has worked retail, you know this woman. She's got The Hair, she's smacking her gum at me while she talks on the phone, the entire transaction is delayed because I need her to pay and she starts to ignore me because apparently I'm the rude one for interrupting her phone call. 

She proceeds to tell the person on the other end "give me a second," and finally turns to me and says, as if I'm an impatient child testing her last bit of patience, "yes?" 

"Here's your total, ma'am. Do you have any coupons or rewards to use today?"

She nodded, and here is when she drops a few clippings on the counter in front of me, ignoring my outstretched hand, and turns her attention back to her phone. As soon as I look at the coupons, I see that none of them are usable. She has one that is $10 off your menswear purchase of $50 or more. She has all women's clothing. The next coupon expired two months ago. Another one doesn't start for another week, etc etc. 

So I try again to get her attention. She's just as lovely and accommodating as the last time. She rolls her eyes, tells the person on the phone that she will have to call them back, and gives me another sharp "Yes?" 

"Sorry ma'am, this coupon is expired, this one hasn't started, and this one is only for when you purchase $50 worth of menswear. Do you have any other coupons or rewards?"

She stares at me like I had just called her mother some unsavory name. "UH excuse me, WHAT?" 

What could I do but shrug helplessly? 

"You have GOT to be kidding me! That is the entire reason I came out here today, to use those coupons! I really can't use them?? Unbelievable. Some customer service here!" All the while she's packing her useless coupons back into her purse and glaring scorch marks into my soul. 

Remember I said I was done? My patience before Shopzilla here was already at 0. She tipped the scales. I was officially in the negatives. I had negative fucks and negative patience left. 

So when she said "you should be ashamed of yourself, being so rude to a customer." Something in me snapped. 

I smiled sweetly at her, mustered up a bright and cheery expression that i usually reserve as my "waitress" face, and said "I'm so sorry you feel that way, ma'am. But on the bright side, since it's Tuesday I can still apply your senior's discount! So at least you aren't losing that one, right?" 

I can't quite describe her expression. I think she was angry, but I think she was more shocked. And in that state of shock, she sputtered out "I'm not a senior!" 

I mimicked her shock, trying to appear horrified by my "accidental" faux pas, and then immediately said "let me take that off of there for you, then!" And promptly took the senior discount off, bumping her total up another $20. "I'm so sorry for the misunderstanding, ma'am." 

Oh boy, she was pissed, but like I said, I think she was more shocked. She seemed a little dumbfounded, she paid, she took her stuff, she left. 

I will take that petty moment of satisfaction at her horrified expression to my grave. (It was even worth the write up that I did end up getting after she called the store and gave my manager a piece of her mind.)

Edit: GOLD?! For my smart assery and pettiness? I told my mom it would pay off one day *wipes away a tear* Thank you, lovely anonymous redditor!

Edit 2: Okay wow I didn't expect this to blow up. I've been at work and there's no way I can keep up with all these comments Haha. But thanks to everyone who gilded me, and had nice words! You guys are great. I work at an amusement park and we have this ride called moby dick. This ride is 100% controlled by the operator. 

A couple of weeks ago this woman and her friend came up to my ride making fun of one of the kids that were on the ride.  She was saying so many hateful things  about how they look. Without even looking at her I told her to stop and this is how it went.

Me: you’re literally talking about a 7yearold like that you need to stop or you will not be allowed on the rides.

Karen: but it’s true look at them 

Me: don’t disrespect other guests please it’s not ok. 

Karen’s friend: stop karen before you get us in trouble again

Karen: what ever

When the ride was finished I start letting the next group of people in. 
I say “do not pull down on the bars pick any seat you’d like! “ to everyone as they walk in since pulling on the bars can break the seats over time. I let a group of young boys in before Karen’s group and they sat at the end seats. Karen marches over to the kids yelling at them to get out of her seat and that she paid to sit at the end. 

Me: miss please stop yelling at the kids or you will be removed from the ride with no refund in tickets. 

Karen: don’t tell me -

Karen’s friend: stop it  Karen just sit in the middle

She complained the whole time walking to the middle seats and then pulled down the bar. I was thinking it was time to get a manager over but I didn’t want to bother them with her. Once I got everyone seated I close all the seat bars.  When I was checking the seats Karen’s one was on the loose side so I pushed it in a little to make it tighter. 
Karen: you’re trying to kill me first you left my seat open now you’re making it so I can’t breathe 

I ignore her and keep checking seats. When I finally start the ride I slowly rock it and Karen is screaming to take her off so I make the ride go faster doing full circles now. Half way during the ride.
Karen screams:  stop the ride you fucking bitch. 
She wants me to stop it? Fine with me  I park the ride at the top of the ride like I do when closing but keeping the ride on. The 6 others on the ride weren’t scared the ride stopped. Karen started screaming bloody murder crying and begging to be let down. The parents watching know what she said before  their kids and know what’s going on and start laughing. After around 30 seconds she is screaming let me down still. So I do on the fastest setting I start the ride spinning  full speed. I made the ride a little e longer  since all the kids were having fun. Before I opened the seats I scream a warning.

Me: wait for the bars to be fully open and stay above your head before getting up! Stay seated!

Karen pushes it up and gets up having the bar fall back down and hit her in the head. Her friend laugh at her and get up walking her off the ride.




TLDR: Karen bullied kids, didn’t listen to rules so when she told me stop the ride I left her on top then made it go full speed making her cry. Then she hit her head on the seat bar. 


Sorry I’m not good at telling stories but Felt like  this belonged here and that at least  one of you would enjoy.Back in high school (around 2010) I used to work the closing shift at Dunkin Donuts on Sunday nights. Per company policy, I could box up two dozen donuts to bring home with me before throwing the rest out. One dozen went with my dad to work in the morning, one came with me to school - specifically my Spanish class, which was a pretty small and pretty tight knit group (tends to happen when a lot of course work is practicing conversations with each other).

This practice of bringing donuts every Monday sparked an idea in one of my classmates' heads (she's Anne in this story). Since it's so nice to have donuts once a week, we should do a weekly snack day where everyone can bring something in! They decided this would be on Thursday, and I said I'd just continue bringing in donuts every week on Monday as my contribution. Everyone was very OK with this, except for Anne.

No, no, no... this snack day was Thursday, and if you aren't going to bring in a snack on a Thursday then you aren't welcome to parcitipate. I was pretty pissed, but what can you do, it's only one snack one time.

Then I got to thinking about it. I was only required to bring a snack, not something sweet or delicious or even palatable. As long as it was edible then it counted.

My next closing shift I grabbed an extra empty dozen box. I went to the store on Wednesday night and got a five pound bag of potatoes. I washed them and put them right in the box, and dropped off the box early in the morning to my Spanish classroom so nobody would get wise to the actual contents. Apparently the earlier classes had seen the box sitting on a shelf and had told our class that we had donuts. Everyone was excited. I brought them up and put them on top of the Elmo projector, trying my best not to betray the extra heft.

They all scurried up excitedly and Anne herself was the one to open the box. A blank expression turned to raw frustration.

"You were supposed to bring a snack today!" she protested.

"I did!" I said, walking up to the box and grabbing a potato, biting into it while making direct eye contact with her. "You don't have to have any if you don't want."

Everyone shuffled back to their desks, and Anne tried desperately to grasp a new argument out of thin air but it was not coming. I finished my potato triumphantly and brought the rest home for my mom after school. The box was checked, and she could not try to exclude me from the weekly snack day anymore. Everyone else in class who thought she was a bit over the top thought the antic was hilarious after they got over the initial disappointment.

Edit: the story is real. If you can't fathom a teenager eating a potato raw out of spite then I don't know what to tell you except you should get out more.So I work in customer support for a mobile network provider. The way our company works is that after training, you enter a 1-month testing period where you answer phone calls under close supervision. At the end of the testing period, they either let you go or transfer you to a permanent position on one of the teams.

I was a few days away from the end of the testing period when I get one heck of a phone call. I spent more than an hour on that one, it hurt my final score at the end of the month.

The customer told a tall tale about how when she was trying to pay her debt to the company (she wracked hundreds of shekels worth of debt in unincluded uses), the sales representative was rude to her and refused to let her pay so she took a picture of him and left.

The reason the call took so long is because she kept telling the story out of order, adding and changing details and going on tangents and rants. It was very difficult to get the story straight. I felt like a detective trying to piece together the clues into what actually happened. Every time I read the story back to her chronologically she added or changed something in the middle or went on a tangent about how she's "a polite British woman" and we shouldn't hire people like that representative to represent our company. Eventually, I got her to settle down on a version of what happened.

I looked through the records and saw that according to the representative (who was a lot more concise than her), she was the one being rude, yelling at him in English (a language he barely spoke) and taking his picture without his consent.

I didn't tell her that, I just politely instructed her on how to pay her debt via the phone. She sounded nervous. I told her that until the debt is paid I cannot make the changes in the account including adding a report. So reluctantly she gave me her credit card details and the debt was paid in full. I reported on what she told me and moved it along to my superiors.

A few days later my testing period was over and despite that tragedy of a call I aced it and got transferred to the illustrious email department, which is what I wanted. It's much more chill here and I can work at my own pace, not having to rely on the customer or the supervisor to work faster. Also, I could take my breaks whenever I felt like it.

Everything is fine for a couple of weeks until I receive a new email telling a familiar tale. It was an enraged recounting of the same story I heard on the phone, except much more elaborate, with more details I never heard before, such as the involvement of another person, or that the representative assaulted the customer by trying to impede her exit from the store.

The customer complained that she's been cheated, and expected the representative to be fired, but she saw him again at the store and was outraged. She was under the impression that her paying her debt meant we will listen to her and fire the representative.

The email ends with the following demands:

-Fire the representative

-Reimburse her for the money we "stole from her under false pretenses"

-Apologize to her in the form of extra compensation and a personal phone call from a high-ranking manager

If we did not comply, the police will get involved.

So I complied with the second part, and we got the police involved.

You see, while reading the email I noticed that the address she emailed us from had a different surname than her account or the credit card information she provided. And lo and behold, the email was actually her real name, while the other details were fake.

Turns out she was indeed a "polite" British woman, a British woman overstaying her visa for over a year that was now using a fake identity in Israel.

How's that for false pretenses, bitch?

As we discovered later, she was also wanted for numerous accounts of fraud where she didn't pay for services or claimed compensation for stories that later turned out to be false. Just like she tried to do with us.

We called the police but they couldn't find her since the physical address she registered on our site was also fake.

So we called her back to the store to apologize personally. She gladly obliged. The police were waiting for her.

Neither I nor the representative she implicated were there that day, unfortunately, so we didn't get to see the look on her face.

She was fined a hefty amount and then deported back to the UK.

EDIT: Woah, that's a lot of positive feedback. Thank you very much, everyone. Especially to those who generously gave me medals. I used the coins to give medals to some of my favorite posts on this subreddit and others.

Also, please don't argue politics in the comments of this post.I used to work at a gas station in a pretty culturally diverse area, but overall was basically the border between a very rural area and a suburban area in Florida. The suburban area was more culturally diverse with the different businesses around and access to the highway. The rural area was what you would call redneck country and anyone who lived there would tell you the same.

I'm Filipina and those features kind of show. I have high cheek bones, dark hair, dark eyes, and somewhat tanned skin. I'm more light skinned because my mom is white, so it throws some people off, but I'm almost never identified as Filipina because I speak Spanish. In that particular area, we had a lot of Spanish customers so some would overhear me speak to them in Spanish and either look surprised that I knew how to speak it, or more commonly, mistaken me for being Hispanic. 

One morning, at around 4:30/5 o'clock, a Hispanic regular came in and got his usual coffee, water bottle, and a pastry of some kind that we sold. We'd usually talk while he made his coffee because we'd just opened up and it was dead around that time. He was on his way out to head to work when another, easily 6' middle aged, white gentleman swung open the door with an very annoyed expression. 

I was caught off guard not only because he swung open the door aggressively, but because there was no other car in the parking lot or at any pumps so I had no idea where he came from. My regular tells me 'adiós' so I naturally responded with 'pase un buen día'. I think my mistake was that I looked at my new customer before I was done speaking to the previous one and this made him VERY angry. He started yelling at me saying I was being racist and that I was racially profiling him (what he meant by that, I still don't know). 

I apologised and tried to explain that I was talking to the other man walking out of the door and he cut me off and told me to speak to him in his "native white language" (putting a heavy emphasis on white when he said it). I then began to say random phrases I could remember in various languages like French, German, Italian, threw a little Polish in there, and he went off.

"Stop! I can't understand what you're saying you fucking border rat bitch!" Honestly, that was a new one for me, but I stopped as requested. I looked at him with the biggest smile on my face and told him "I'm sorry, sir. I didn't know which white language you wanted me to use, so I was trying all of them to see which one it was."

He started calling me racist again, claiming he was going to call corporate on me for racially discriminating against him and not giving him service. I told him that I didn't know what he wanted me to do for him yet because he was too busy racially profiling ME and spitting racial slurs at me for me to ask him. He smiled smugly and said nobody is going to believe my "illegal ass" that he said any of that anyway. I politely pointed to the cameras around the store and told him that I had eight different angles of him saying all of it to me. His smile vanished. He told me to fuck off and go to hell and stormed out.

Honestly to this day, I have no idea where he came from or what he needed from the store, but that experience hasn't and probably won't ever leave me. Sir, where ever you are now, I hope you're a little more cultured and at the very least understand that not all white people speak English.

EDIT: Oh my gosh, I was not expecting this to blow up like it did. I posted this at 2 in morning, fell asleep, and woke up to find so many people had seen it already! Thank you so much for the awards and likes!!

EDIT #2: For all the people commenting it, yes, I do understand that Spanish is a "white language". I just went with languages that I knew he would associate with white people. Obviously, he didn't associate Spanish with being a "White" language or he wouldn't have emphasized the word white when basically telling me to not speak Spanish.Edit: Which

TLDR at the end

A few years ago I worked for a furniture stored in the back store. My job consisted of unloading and loading trucks, assembling furniture and placing it on the main floor of the store. After around 6 months there, my supervisor announced he resigned meaning his post was up for grabs. I had all the technical requirements so I applied, but they gave the job to another one of my colleague who had more experience, which was totally reasonable. 

After maybe 1 year my then supervisor just stopped coming into work for no reason he just decided he had enough and he just left, no 2 week notice or anything. So while the director tried to get to him I took over the role of supervisor. (I was the one with the most experience)  Which means that combined with my regular work, I  was now the one telling people what to do, when, doing the schedule, and all the paperwork for the shipment. 3 weeks later my colleague was officially "fired" by my director. In those 3 weeks I kept doing the job of supervisor, and doing it pretty well so I thought that the promotion would come to me, but my director did nothing. I went to see him, explained what I had been doing and asked if I got the promotion too which he answered that I was not qualified, nor smart enough to do this job. 


After some thinking I just decided, that if I was not Smart enough to do the Job, then I shouldn't do it, so I went back doing my regular job and I also started looking for something else. 4-5 days after I stopped filling in my director come see me in the back store Asking why the f*** the job isn't being done. After all without me to organize it, nothing was getting out of the store to be delivered to the client. I just reminded him of our previous meeting and he told me " yeah I remembered that, what I meant is your not qualified to get the pay bonus for the job,you still have to do the job you idiot" I have to admit I still wonder how he tough that would work... Still a bit dumbfounded I just told him that if I wasn't going to get paid for it I certainly won't do the job, and that considering we were already short staff with my old supervisor gone, he should be a bit more polite. Apparently this was an unreasonable request, a total lack of respect to him and worthy of firing me... Yep still don't get how that would fix anything, but hey he's the boss.

I packed everything and left knowing that the back store which needed 5 people to operate was now down to 3 with the most experienced worker having a total of 4 months, it only took my boss 1 day to call me back and telling me, maybe he went overboard and that perhaps we could arrange something for the promotion, too which I replied that I would not be coming back since I had a few interviews lined up. I hung up while he was still cussing at me. After a few months at my new job I heard some surprising news, the store had closed down after 2 other back store employe resigned. Gotta admit that it felt good to see my old boss finally get what he deserved.



TLDR; my old boss doesn't want to promote me but still want me to do the Job, fires me for not accepting too, and soon after I left for a better job, lost his shop.I originally posted this as a comment on [Car dealer shenanigans...](https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/lvqnsn/car_dealer_shenanigans/).

My wife and I have used a salesman's sexism against him, and it was so satisfying. It was when we bought our first new car. We were nervous that we didn't know what we were doing so we did a lot of research (it helps that my wife is a librarian).

When we got to the dealer, the salesman would only talk to me. I was all buddy buddy with the guy, too, but he completely ignored my wife. We went along.

The dealer was running a promotion where they would give you $X for your trade-in, no matter what condition. "If you can drive it on the lot..." kind of deal. Of course they just don't discount off of MSRP in those cases, so it's a gimmick. When we walked in the salesman asked which car was ours parked outside and then asked if we were trading it in. I said no, we weren't trading that car in. You can see where this was going.

As I said, we had done our research and knew what a fair price was for the car we wanted. At the time Edmunds had detailed dealer-level price information for many new cars, including all the various ways a dealer gets paid and what their true costs are (the "invoice price" is not their true cost). I negotiated the price (since he wouldn't talk to my wife) and we arrived at a number I thought was fair, actually. We got a good deal at that point. Everything was going smoothly as he wrote up our agreement, until he confirmed that we didn't have a trade in. I said, no, we were trading in a car, just not the one we drove into the dealer in. He literally froze for a few seconds looking down at the form, his hand hovering over the page.

He asked the make, model, and year of our trade-in, and when I told him he sputtered and balked. The car we were trading in was on its last legs. I'd had it all during college and it was old before I bought it. It was definitely past its prime. I said, I thought you were running a promotion where the quality of the trade-in doesn't matter. I asked him if he would have given us a higher price if he knew we had a trade in? My wife said under her breath "that's sleazy." He heard, as she intended him to.

He then tried to renegotiate the price. We knew from our research that if they gave us the price we had already agreed on, and they honored the trade-in deal, that they would be losing money. So we were willing to move a bit, but we wanted to take our time. He was visibly nervous. Every time he tried a new way of asking for a higher price I would say something like "I understand what you're saying" with a sympathetic look. Then I would look at my wife and she would look back at me and silently shake her head no. I'd then look back at the salesman and shrug and say "I don't think that's going to work."

He was stuck. She was the one standing in the way of him getting out of his predicament, but he hadn't talked to her at all. He had barely even acknowledged her presence. He just couldn't start talking to her now when we were negotiating. Oh, and I even got to use the classic car salesman line, "what do I have to do for you to put me this car today?"

We finally agreed to raise the price to an amount that, after figuring in the trade-in, was what we had thought was their break-even price. We hadn't expected to get that low of a price, and we also got them to install a nice after market sound system. It's the best deal we've ever gotten on a new car. Honestly, we're not the best negotiators individually, but that day we made one hell of a team.Years ago I had a thankless labour / service job with a pretty unappreciative boss, got lots of stories. 

One morning I roll into the office about 7:25, and get a dirty look from the boss as I head to the dispatcher's office to collect my day's work (supposed to be there for 7:15).  I'd actually been working until about 1:30 (c. 18 hour day) the night before, and was thinking that only being 10 minutes late wasn't bad.  When I got my stack of papers for the day, I let out one of those low groans, and said, "you've gotta be s#'#'[ng me!", it was going to be another long day.  Boss takes that as his chance to call me out in front of the rest of the office: "Hey, if you're going to show up late and then complain about work, we don't need you around here, you're fired". Dunno if he thought I would apologise for coming in late and ask to not be fired, but I knew that I could have a new, equally crappy job before the end of the day. So I called his bluff, and handed over my clipboard and walked away. He must have looked through my work for the day, and realised that he didn't have anyone that could do what I could do and with the labour market crunch, he just didn't have anybody. On my way out to my car, I stopped and started chatting with my buddy and the dispatcher, having a smoke.  Boss comes out and tells me to meet him in his office so we can discuss my attitude.  I said, I'm not going to your office, I just got fired, my buddy and the dispatch are shocked, buddy says: "you know he pulled 18 hours yesterday, and 15 the day before that", dispatch says: "why did you fire him, we've got no one to do his run today!".  Boss is taken a little aback and says: "I didn't say you're fired, I said you're FiHired", so here's your route for the day.  I say "well, if I just got hired, we should talk about my starting wage", and that's how I got a $2/hour raise.

Edit
Anyone complaining about it 'only being $2 /hour': starting pay was $9 /hour, plus $1 /hour bonus if you didn't skip a shift, didn't break anything etc, so $10 /hour as a swamper if you got your bonus.  Got bumped to $12 /hour ($11 + $1) when you started driving truck, and you could get more from there as you worked your way up, I think the top end was $16 or $17. So for me, as a young guy, getting bumped to $13 + $1 was a big increase.  Also, this was around 2003 - 2004, and minimum wage was like $6.00.A friend of mine lived in a pretty big neighborhood with a pretty strict HOA. He was the first house at the bottom of the hill that you saw when you drive in. He asked and was allowed to add a garage on to his house and did so, siding it with cedar planks. It looked great. His HOA disagreed and told him the by laws state all exposed walls must be painted. He tried to appeal but was shot down unanimously. So he checked the by laws further and found that while it was stated that all exposed walls must be painted, there was absolutely no mention of any color restrictions.

By the time he was done each plank was a different primary color and there was nothing they could do about it. They were furious with him and he laughed his ass off.

Edit: this blew up. I didn't think it was all that interesting, just a story of a guy I used to know. To answer a few questions/comments:

This was back in the early 90s. The HOA was created years after the neighborhood had been established. Maybe they assumed no one would use anything but tasteful colors. IDK and don't care. I also don't care if you believe the story or not.

Using a clear coat/wood-like finish would defeat the purpose of his giant fuck you to the whole neighborhood. I said he was a friend but that's not quite true. He was some guy I knew through a boyfriend and hung around a lot. He took great joy in being an equal opportunity dick.My husband (Chad) is naturally a better decorator than many professional designers that have their own shows.  Years ago, when he lived in an apartment complex, the rental office staff became aware of how beautiful he decorated his apartment.  It really was award-winning, literally.  Anyway, the apartment manager notified Chad that his apartment was to be the model going forward.  Chad was not happy with this development.  Strangers moving through his personal areas, going through his things, possibly stealing things?  Unacceptable.  The apartment manager was quick to mention that this was a part of Chad's lease.  Suddenly, an idea occurred to Chad.

"Are you allowed to move or cover up anything in my apartment?"

"No sir, we are not allowed to touch, move, rearrange or cover up anything."

"Thank you."

Chad put up every piece of male erotica he possessed, and he even bought some more.  Posters, figurines, serious art. even a pile of magazines fanned out on the coffee table, like some kind of doctor's office.  Chad called the rental office and warned them against  bringing anyone into his apartment that was a child or squeamish about such subject matter.  The rental office immediately sent over one of their maintenance men to confirm.

Check and mate.Hi reddit! Not 100% sure this story belongs here, but I really want to share it with you.

&#x200B;

Last summer I worked as an ice cream vendor on the beach of my hometown. Best job I ever had. People were nice to me, I got to work on my tan, it payed pretty well, but most importantly, we were allowed to eat the delicious ice cream in our breaks.

One day, I'm serving a man and his son. The man orders a cone with two scoops for him and a cone with one scoop for the little one. The kid wasn't happy about that, and said to his dad that he also wanted two scoops. The dad explains that the scoops are pretty big and that one will suffice for him. I confirm this to help the Dad, even offering to make it extra big. Still, the kid doesn't budge, instead he starts throwing a tantrum, nearly crying how he wanted two scoops. The dad, clearly not wanting to ruin his vacation mood, gives up and says to the kid he can have two scoops. "However", he adds, "if you can't finish your ice cream like I said you wouldn't, no more TV for you, for the rest of the vacation!"  The kid happily agrees, claiming he could eat a whole tub of ice cream.

&#x200B;

Big mistake kid.

&#x200B;

Me, being the petty person that I am, wanted to teach this brat a lesson. I proceed by scooping one of the most gigantic scoops I've ever scooped in my entire scooping carreer. I put it on the cone, the kids eyes widen in shock. My scoop goes back for more, I see the kid tremble in disbelief. I scoop the second most gigantic scoop a scooper could scoop, and graciously add it to the first one. I hand the monstrosity I've created to the kid, who by now realises he won't watch tv again this summer. The dad seemed pretty cool with it, he even tipped me a little which was very rare. All in all a pretty good day.

Thank you for reading!

&#x200B;

Edit: Can't believe I got gold, thank you kind stranger!Years ago one of my employer's clients decided to set up a new office in Fort Wayne, Indiana, and I got chosen to spend three weeks there getting the new space set up.

Also chosen for the job was a guy from another division's Chicago office, Dave.

I'd never worked with Dave before, but from the start I didn't like him much. He was never less than fifteen minutes late, he lumbered like a zombie, and I caught him dozing off more than a few times during the first week on site.

Still, he was the closest thing I had to a friend in Fort Wayne, so I invited him out to the bar on Friday for all the company-funded booze we could drink.

"I wish!", he says. "I'm going home and passing out until Monday, the commute has been killing me."

Wait, what?

It seems Dave's boss had been a dick, and, instead of paying for a plane ticket, hotel and rental car like my boss had, he'd instructed Dave to drive.

From Chicago, almost three hours away.

>Me: Dude.. That is like, totally no bueno. Six hours a day just driving?!?

>Dave: Yeah, it sucks.

>Me: Still, it'll be killer money. That puts you at what, like 70 hours this week? Jeez. Make sure you put in for your gas and tolls quick though, the last time I had to get reimbursed for expenses it took 'em over a month.

I could see what little light Dave's eyes held fade.

>Dave: They're not paying for any of that.

Hearing that I put in a call my boss, who was as puzzled as I was. If he'd worked for our division, he'd be paid for his drive time and expenses at least, and we were both pretty sure it was corporate edict and not something individual divisions could choose not to obey.

Unfortunately, neither I nor my boss had any say in the matter and neither of us were familiar with Illinois or Indiana labor law, so all we could do was advise Dave to save his receipts for the IRS and complain to HR. 

On Monday Dave was late again. After an hour I was worried and called his cell phone.

>Dave: I just passed Portage, making pretty good time all things considered. I should be there in about two hours.

Dave sounded perfectly happy about it, so I figured he'd been required to stop into his office before heading out for some reason.

>Me: Okay, Dave. I'll see you then.

When Dave arrived a little after eleven, the first thing he did was take a 15 minute break. Long drive, I understood. There was still most of the day ahead of us, and after the break Dave finally got down to business booting up his computer.

He had barely logged in when he stood up and announced he was taking his lunch.

Oooookay. Something was going on, but I hadn't the foggiest idea what.

After lunch Dave finally got around to some work, putting in a good twenty minutes reading email before stopping by to see me.

>Dave: I'm gonna take my second 15 now, then I'm heading home.

>Me: Uh, what?

>Dave, grinning like a nut: Don't worry, I spoke to HR over the weekend.

I didn't see Dave on Tuesday, his cellphone was going unanswered, and neither my boss or I had any luck finding out why. We didn't try hard; Not our zoo and not our monkey, after all. Ditto for Wednesday but whatever, he's probably just sick.

And then on Thursday, I see Dave. Before work. At the hotel breakfast buffet.

>Me: Dave! I was getting worried when you were no-show the last two days.

Dave laughed a little and after we'd piled our plates with bad scrambled eggs and burned sausage, told me a story.

On Monday the client had noticed him coming in late, doing no work, and leaving early and called our company to complain. Dave, in turn, was called into a disciplinary meeting with his boss and local HR who were prepared to terminate him over putting in for 32 hours of un-earned overtime the previous week and not working at all the day before.

Dave said they were serious, too. One of the guys from building security interrupted the meeting to deliver a box containing the personal effects from his desk.

Dave had an ace though. Well, three aces.

An email from his boss instructing him to drive to Fort Wayne every day at his own expense as a "change in work location"(1), an email from Corporate HR telling him he that while he wasn't required to work overtime, he was required to report any overtime worked, including driving to or from a client(2), and a page from his division's employee manual(3) which covered paid breaks off-site.

He then informed them that he was not working any more overtime and, after 3 hours driving in, 1.5 hours of breaks, and 3 hours home it left him with just a half an hour a day to do actual work. Less, actually, if the traffic was bad.

Oh, and that Corporate HR was willing to stand behind him on it. He'd just spoken to them before the meeting.

>Dave: It took them about three seconds to realize they were screwed, and well, here I am, back in action. And, since everything was booked last minute, I'm in a suite with a Jacuzzi and my rental is a damn Cadillac!When I was commissioned into the Air Force the officer who conducted the ceremony was a female 3-Star General. She looked like your typical short, fit, friendly middle aged soccer mom (Relevant to the story!). Extremely nice and personable, and an alumna of my university! At breakfast beforehand we were sharing a table, and she and my dad (A Lt Col at the time) we're talking. The general told a story of when she first showed up to a new base for her first posting as 3-Star. While running on the track a guy comes up and starts to run along side, asking if she had just got there, etc. It quickly becomes very obvious he's hitting on her, so she turns him down and mentions she has a husband.

&#x200B;

He is not deterred, and keeps on hitting on her. The man goes right on talking about how in shape she is, how good looking she is, how they should get together, etc. Also asking questions like, "Well is your husband at the base yet?"... "Are you staying by yourself in the TLF?" TLF being a fancy sort of hotel. He thinks she's a spouse, and figures she showed up to get the home in order before her husband arrives. He really wants to 'hang out', preferably at her hotel room. Nor will he leave her alone until she agrees to a date. Finally after about fifteen minutes of him refusing to stop badgering her she relents and agrees to meet up with him again. "Fine- I'll free up some time and we can talk. What's your name and number?"

&#x200B;

The harasser gives her his name and phone number. He's a Staff Sergeant many, many rungs down in the organization she's now Vice Commander of. Later that day he was ordered to report to her office, in service dress, at 0730 the next morning. Along with his supervisor, his First Sergeant, and his Commander. So basically his boss, his other boss, and his bosses bosses boss. She didn't say how the meeting went, but I doubt he enjoyed his date.So I live in S. Korea but I work for a US Company in S. Korea and because I work for an American company and I'm one of the few employees of my company that is American in S. Korea my company doesn't issue me this letter that basically says I'm employed in S. Korea. 

So this means I have restrictions on my Korean bank account. I can only withdraw 250,000 won (About $216 a day) from an ATM and if I go in person to a teller I can only withdraw 1 million won (about $870) a day. This normally doesn't present a problem for me. I also can't have a debit/credit card I get a "bank book" which is kinda like an electronic check book that's a physical thing you carry (FYI I use my American bank for most of my day to day spending)

But...It did once. I signed a lease for a new apartment and the deposit was 10 million won (about $8,700, yes this is normal for Korea) so I transferred the money from my American bank to my Korean bank and I went to the bank in person to transfer the money to my landlord.

I get there and the teller tells me I can only transfer 1 million per day. My first idea was to ask my landlord if she'd be cool with me transferring her 1 million won a day for 10 days, she doesn't like that idea.

So I'm sitting there arguing and the bank manager comes out, he's a nice enough man and speaks good english. Basically he says because of my type of my account there is no way I can transfer more then 1 million a day. So I need this money and I'm thinking and the light bulb goes off in my head.

Me: "If I close my account do I get my money?"

Manager: "Yes, we would give you the cash"

Me: "And if I close my account can I open a new one?"

Manager: "Of course"

Me: "Is there a waiting period after closing my account to open a new one"

Manager: "No"

Me: "Fantastic, please close my account"

Manager: "Sure, I will need your bank book and we will destroy it"

**Hands them my bank book and they destroy it**

**Signs some papers to close the account**

**Bank manager closes the account and gives me all the money in the account in an envelope**

Manager: "Anything else I can help you with today?"

**I smile, pull out my passport**

Me: Yes I'd like to open a new bank account

Bank manager looks at me, and it dawns on him what I just did, he laughs, shakes his head and goes "Sure not a problem"

**I opened a new account, deposited 10,000 won and left with my deposit in my pocket**

I believe this qualifies for malicious compliance because I followed the banks rules and it resulted in them having do more work.Edit: reddit doesn’t allow me to change the title of posts. I do not want to cast any slander towards the Home Depot. The title should probably read this: “Bob Doesn’t care about your allergies”

this happened about 5 years ago, and I haven't been to the home depot in question in a long time. Names have been changed for privacy.

In high school, I was working at the local home depot as a head cashier. I kept track of all the active registers and made sure things ran smoothly. I held this position for quite some time (1-2 years) and enjoyed it pretty well. Customers were nice, and my coworkers were mostly craftsmen and gardeners, all with interesting stories to share. 

before we go further, let me explain something. I am allergic to nearly every form of pollen. I mean EVERY form. I take allergy medication, but even then if I am in close proximity to flowers for too long (>30 minutes) I will begin to break out in hives and throwup most of the time. 

so after about three months working in the winter, the spring season was upon us (the worst season for my allergies). 

One day, about three of our garden section cashiers called off sick. They are pretty reliable people so I had no problem finding people to cover for them. As I come to my manager to inform them of the position changes, my manager looks at me and says "You can handle the garden section on your own, can't you?".

I inform my manager that I could cover it for at most 15 minutes before my allergies flare up and ill have to leave. 

he states "we don't have any documents on file that state you are not fit to work in the garden section, so unless you come to me with a doctor's note stating your allergies, I couldn't give less of a fuck."

I don't know who shit in his cheerios that morning, but I complied, saying "I want to be sure of what you are asking, you want me to work in a section which is hazardous to my health instead of placing equally capable employees in that section?"

"Did I stutter?" he said

"Ok, sure," I said

I make my way down to the garden section, and immediately my eyes are stinging. I decide that I am going to stick it out for my boss's sake, no matter how shitty my service becomes.

the first 10 minutes are pretty uneventful, but then a customer asks me about the rash on my arms

"The Home Depot does not care about allergies," I say "as I do not have official paperwork"

this customer looks extremely concerned, asking for my manager's name.

at this point, I was feeling nausea hit me, I throw up in the trash can at the register, turn back to smile (as well as I could) and say " I work under Bob \_\_\_\_\_\_".

The customer reassures me that I will be ok, and tells me I should head home. Turns out, this guy, Nick \_\_\_\_, was a higher-up at the home depot's regional management and was my boss's boss. So, naturally, I comply with the chain of command and head to the locker room to pack up.

As I am packing, Bob \_\_\_\_\_ comes in, fuming and cursing, telling me I have no right to leave yet and that my shift is not over for another 5 hours. 

I simply say "Nick \_\_\_\_\_ told me to go home"

Bob's face gets redder as he threatens to fire me, saying I was lying and tells me to go back out.

**I comply, knowing that I will see Nick on my way out.**

I pass nick, still in the orange apron, and he asks me where I am going. I say that Bob told me to go back to work. Nick's expression goes from concerned to furious, as he takes my apron from me and tells me I'll be paid for the full shift and to go home.

&#x200B;

I come into work the next day to see that Bob's nameplate has been removed from the office. I ask our HR rep what happened, and apparently, after I had left, Nick stormed Bob's office and proceeded to perform an audit on all of his past employee complaints. This guy had been throwing out complaints for the past **5 years**. Needless to say, there was an opening for the store management position, and I was given a week's vacation for my troubles. My satisfaction was huge.

Edit: I realize now that the title may look like I am putting down Home Depot. That wasn’t my intent, I just wanted to recount my experience.So my friend Talon's dad died about 5 years ago. They got him cremated, so Talon has an urn with his dad's ashes in it.

One of our teachers was mad at Talon about something (I'm not sure what) but the teacher demanded to meet Talon's father. He tried multiple times to tell our teacher that his dad, was in fact dead. But Mr. McCunt wouldn't listen to him.

So the next day, Talon shows up to school with his dads urn and plops it on the teachers desk and says "You wanted to meet my dad, so here." 

I have never seen a teacher so mortified in my life.


edit: it's not that Mr. McCunt didn't believe him, it's that he didn't give the kid an opportunity to explain. He just kept interrupting and sent him out.

edit 2: obligatory "wow this blew up" "thanks for the sliver/gold"Update at the bottom.  Thanks so much for the up votes and silver, gold and platinum. I really didn't think this would take off like this.

Some backstory; I was a general troubleshooter for my company. My job involved a lot of travelling to different clients we support. My area of work is Ontario, Canada (where I am based out of) and some of the nearby States in the United States (New York, massachusetts,  Vermont, Pennsylvania.) I did most of my travelling by car since my schedule can change quite quickly and flying can become very expensive. I had one colleague who is technically my subordinate but we have a very good working relationship and would often handle calls independently of each other only checking in by phone once a week and in person once a month / when necessary. 

A little over a year ago I get an email calling me to the head office in New York City for a meeting with the CEO and the board of directors regarding my job.  I check with my colleague and he got the same email. So we make our travel plans and meet in New York City the following week.  We have dinner together the night before our meeting and can't figure out between us what the issue is about (it's rare to get summoned to head office and more rare for things to be so vague).

When we go into the meeting the next day we are informed that the company is dividing our department between the US and Canada and that there would be a new person to deal with the US clients and we were to restrict ourselves to Canada. Both my colleague and I were a little shocked at this since neither of us has even heard this was being discussed. I asked who the new person for the US was and we then learned that it was a new hire that the CEO had taken a special interest in. 

Trying to be of good spirit I offered to train the new person. (There are many realities of the job that are not in the job description). CEO accepted and then brought in the new hire. In walks a young lady who looks about 23 years old and wears an expression that she knows everything.  She sits at the table and immediately makes it very clear that she wants nothing to do with us.

CEO - Bob, New Hire - Karen, My Colleague - Jim.

Bob: Welcome Karen, we have just informed OP and Jim about the change in structure and they are willing to give you the support you need to get yourself started. 

Karen and Bob both look at me.

Me: Glad to have you aboard Karen, I think both Jim and I have a lot of experience to share with you and we are happy to do so, perhaps it would be better in a separate meeting so we don't take the board's time. 

Karen: Thank you all. I have a lot of ideas about how I can streamline our department and new policies I can introduce that should save the company a lot of money in expenses. 

I'm very confused at this point. Karen is speaking as though she is my supervisor and that is distinctly not what Bob spoke to us about.  I can see some of the board members giving strange looks at this as well.

Me: Bob perhaps I misunderstood the new roles here. Would you please clarify?

Bob: Sure, Karen is the new head of your department and both you and Jim will answer directly to her.

Board member: That isn't what we discussed or approved as a board.  We weren't fully convinced of dividing the department but this is completely against what we discussed.

Karen: What did you discuss then?

Board Member: That your department would be divided between the US and Canada.  OP and Jim would remain north of the border and you would run the US.  

Karen: That's not what I was told but I can work with that.  As long as these two stay out of my way. (Indicating me and Jim)

Jim and I are both shocked and insulted to be spoken of in this manner. We are both very good at our jobs and before today have never seen this woman in our lives. 

Bob: That settles it, OP, effective immediately, you and Jim are to have nothing to do with Karen. Do not interfere with her work at all.  You are both to restrict yourselves to working within Canada only.

With that he ended the meeting and left the room with Karen close behind him.  Jim and I sat there stunned for a moment and some of the board members came up to us to express their shock and sympathies about this. I had enough presence of mind to ask if we would get a written directive of this change and was assured we would. Sure enough both Jim and I got emails with the new directive from Bob by the end of the day. 

So after sending an email to all our US based clients advising them of the change and giving them the contact information of Karen, Jim and I made our way back to Toronto and reorganized ourselves for working within Ontario only. This meant much less travelling for us so it gave us more room to breathe. 

Within a week I was getting complaints from our US based clients that Karen was not answering emails and missing appointments.  I forwarded these emails to Karen and copied the entire board including Bob. Another week later I get a phone call from Karen who sounds frantic but will not admit she needs help.  She makes pleasant conversation and then asks how I would handle a particular type of situation.  I tell her I'm really not interested in discussing work as that might be seen as interfering in her work.  Later that evening I get a call from Jim telling me he had the same conversation with Karen and handled it the same way.

By the end of that month I get a call from Bob asking if I will take over the entire department again. I politely tell him no since I didn't want to interfere with Karen and her role.  For the next 3 months I'm getting emails and phone calls from US clients asking if they can have me back as their contact. This confirms an idea that had been in my head. 

Jim and I had actually grown our client base in Ontario since restricting ourselves here. So I had lunch with Jim one day and asked him if he wanted to go into businesses with me as partners starting our own consulting firm. We couldn't provide everything our current company provided but we could provide a high degree of professionalism for our specific field and it seemed we had a ready made client base. By the end of the lunch he was on board and we started the necessary steps to get ourselves setup.

As soon as we were clear we both submitted our resignations with explanations of why. The next time clients contacted us we told them we no longer worked for the company.  When they asked if we still worked in the field we told them we had established our own firm and what services we offered.  A month later we had 60% of our US clients on board, and since the former company had no Canadian support at all, we had 80% of the Canadian clients. Within 2 months we had 80% of the US and 90% of the Canadian clients. 

In the year since that time our new company has grown enough that we have hired 7 new consultants. Jim and I find ourselves doing more office work than road work, and a lot of client courting. Our old company has had to stop offering the in person troubleshooting (what our department did) and Bob was fired by the board.  No idea what happened to Karen.



Updates:  

Because of interest expressed in the comments I made a phone call to one of the board members I remained on friendly terms with. Here are some answers to questions. 

How did Karen get the Job?  Apparently Bob had set up a business school scholarship out of his own money which had put something like 6 or 7 students through business school. Karen was the latest graduate and Bob wanted to give her a start in the business world.

Was Bob sleeping with Karen?  No clear answer was given. But Bob's wife divorced him shortly after he was fired from the company.  Make of that what you will.

What happened to Karen?  Apparently she got a job as middle management in a financial services company. Hopefully she can still build a life for herself and had learned some important lessons. 

What happened to Bob?  Last heard he was a regional director for a large hotel chain. Hopefully he also lands on his feet. Everyone deserves a chance  to make a life for themselves. 

Some questioned why the board was there for this meeting. I honestly don't know and neither did the board member I spoke with. It was one of their regularly scheduled meetings and Bob added things to the agenda. 

Some questioned my use of non competes saying its not nice. Its a normal reality in the business world. The oddity is that my old company did not have one.  The non compete I have my employees sign is not overly burdensome. It protects our intellectual property and professional contacts.  It does not in any way restrict the employees ability to work in the field. That said, Jim and I have both agreed that if an employee leaves us on good terms and reasonably asks to be released from the non compete we would oblige. 

Some inquired if we are still hiring. Unfortunately we are not. We are taking a pause from expansion right now as Jim's wife is dealing with cancer. I don't want Jim to worry about the office while taking care of his wife so we have decided to maintain our size (which I can do with minimal input from Jim) until his wife is in remission and he has a chance to rest and return his attention more fully to our company.  Jim and I treat each other like family. So this is a natural step for us. 

Thank you all so much for your interest and the great feedback and discussion in the comments. 

Edit. Replaced all the initials with names because a number of people commented the initials made it difficult to follow.Long time lurker, first time poster, english not first language, you guys know the drill.

This happened yesterday, as I was returning home from a two week trip to Germany.  The final leg of the flight departed from Paris, where I had this lovely interaction with the agents whom, despite me knowing are not TSA, I still refer to as TSA in my mind.  
While going through security in the airport, I know the drill, belts off, jacket off, take the laptop off my bag. So I submit to the x-ray four trays: one with my carry on, one with my laptop by itself, one with my belt, watch and jacket, and one with my personal item (think a fanny pack).  
I'm randomly selected for further screening (I have a lebanese last name and a beard. I'm ALWAYS randomly selected for further screening) and the agent berates me for putting all my electronics together. I point out that I took my laptop out of the bag, as per standard procedure, and the agent says (screaming at me, mind you) that that is not enough. I must take out EVERY electronic device from my carry on and put each of them in an individual tray, and I'm being sent to the back of the line to do so.

Here comes the malicious compliance: there are two things this French-TSA Agent is unaware of: the first thing is that I'm a videographer by trade and I was in Europe to cover an event (SPIEL) with video footage and interviews. The second thing is that Air France changed my flight times so my 2 hours layover became a 10 hours layover, which I'm not particularly happy about.

So I'm being sent back to the end of the line and I have to submit each electronic item individually? Sure, no complaints from me. Two camera bodies, one drone, one gopro, four lenses, nine batteries and two lavalier microphones later, there is no more space in the treadmill. People behind me are complaining they will miss their flight, because I'm taking so long. There's nothing I can do, I'm just following the orders I received. And at this point, I only unpacked my photography vest and fanny pack. The treadmill starts moving, some space clears up to put additional trays, and that's when I open my carry-on bag. Again, I'm in Europe for work. I didn't bring any nice clothes or shoes or anything. All my personal effects are in the checked-in luggage. The carry-on is filled EXCLUSIVELY with electronics. I still have four microphones, two recorders, lights, additional lenses, battery chargers, video monitors, audio monitors, drone controllers. Once I open my carry on, it's very clear for everyone within eyesight that I'm not even 1/3 of the way done. One electronic per tray? Sure thing, I'll just occupy this entire checkpoint by myself, then.

The people behind me in line are literally jumping and screaming about their missed flight to the point the security agents leave their posts to control the line. Someone in a non-uniform suit appears, and talks to the agent who sent me to the back of the line. That's when the unthinkable happened: the agent comes to me and says there would be no need for me to continue separating my electronics, and I could just submit my entire carry-on bag as a single item and they'd examine it further if it seemed necessary. "You sure?" I asked "Because it's no bother at all, I can keep unpacking here all day long" They insist it's not necessary, but I still have over twenty trays at this point occupying the treadmill. I go through the metal detector, I spend some minutes recovering and repacking everything, and based on the amount of fuming passengers, I like to think I contributed to Charles de Gaulle reviewing their stance on x-raying individual electronics.I used to work as an administrator in a secondary school in the US (Grades 9-12) around 10 years ago. We were a school that didn’t have a specific “zone” or neighborhood, so to speak. Some of our students lived 30 or 45 minutes from the school, which made it necessary for us to sometimes conduct business with parents or guardians over the phone as opposed to in person.

One day I met with a Senior (Grade 12) who was in a class that he and his father had deemed too hard for him, and since they didn’t want it impacting his ability to attend college, asked for him to be changed out of the class. It was early in the semester, and there was plenty of space available in other courses, so I had no problem doing it after a conversation over the phone with his father. The student was a good guy, and he was totally grateful to me for helping him out. He would now get to enjoy his last year a little more, with one less difficult class to worry about. 

The next day, I get a phone call in my office from mom, who is irate. She spends approximately five minutes berating me about changing his schedule. I indicated to her that dad was on the contact list for her son, and he was allowed to make these decisions if he chose to do so. She is the person who put dad on there several years before.

Evidently, mom put dad on the list before their divorce. She had raised the child over the last several years by herself (according to her), and she should make all of the decisions. I didn’t know this, and the records didn’t reflect it. Since she knew this argument wasn’t going to work, the next objection was against our policy of making decisions over the phone. The conversation went something like this:

Mom: “How do you know for sure it was his dad on the phone? There’s no way you can be sure. I can’t believe you would ever make a decision like this without a parent present. By doing business over the phone, you could be speaking to anyone.”

She continued on and I tried to explain that it is necessary at times to use the phone, since parents work in another town and may have to travel an hour or more to get to the school. Well, she wasn’t buying it.

So finally, I relented. “Ma’am, you are right. I will no longer make decisions like this over the phone. I am going to insist parents come in and meet with me in person.”

Mom: “Good. Now I need my son to be put back into the class he was in originally.”

Me: “Ma’am, I’m sorry. You are going to have to come in and meet with me. I’m no longer changing schedules over the phone. How do I know you are this student’s mother?”

Mom: “I can’t do that. I live 45 minutes from the school, and I work every day.”

It was at this point she dropped all of her objections.
Here's a simple and fun husband and wife MC from yesterday for you. On mobile, tldr etc.

My wonderful family of four are on a trip to visit family and friends. Four years ago, on a trip with the same itinerary as this one, I (husband) booked our hotel as I usually do. I am what you would describe as "thrifty," and I don't like spending a ton on hotels when we are basically just sleeping there.

The hotel I booked for this leg of the journey was probably not the most high class and sure...it was not in the safest area of town. This was definitely a hotel where some acts of questionable legality and morality occur. In my defense, it was a VERY last minute booking as we were supposed to be staying with family and there were very few options available under $150 a night.

The stay there ended up being fine but it has been a long running joke between us for the past four years.

We are now visiting for the first time in four years. I went to book the hotel, and my wife said "No way! It's my hometown, and I am doing it this time." So, she pulls up Ye Olde Priceline and starts looking at places...specifically looking for a place with a pool for the littles. She looks at one, reads the reviews and details, and says it looks good...especially for the lower price! She even calls to make sure the pool is open because of Covid. I look at the photos, and look back at her thinking she was making a joke. She was not. I just smiled and said "whatever you think, babe!"

Yep, you know what's coming. 

As we approach the hotel, I see a look of confusion slowly wash over her face. She says "Wait, is this..." and trails off. I reply with a resounding "Yep! It sure is!!!"  She booked us in the exact same hotel that she has been griefing me about for four years. I laughed and laughed and laughed. She cannot believe she did it, and also thinks it is hilarious. I am vindicated!

TLDR: wife gives me grief for four years for booking us at a shady hotel then proceeds to book us all herself at the same shady hotel.

EDIT: thanks for all the comments and awards! Glad this could bring you so much joy. Just finally told her that I posted it and people are loving it, and she wanted to thank you all for helping me revel in my rare opportunity of getting one over on her...because that is a rare occurrence with us. Pro tip: always marry someone smarter than you.About 20 years ago, my wife and I had just gotten married and we rented a condo where all the windows and sliding door faced the parking area.  My wife, to celebrate our first Christmas as a married couple put a white rope light on the railing on our 2 foot grilling area.    It, was nice little gesture.  

That night we went out to dinner and when we came home, found a letter under our door.  The letter read "All holiday lights must be removed immediately from the exterior portion of the condo.  Christmas or other religious lighting is against HOA policy and failure to remove can result in fines and other legal actions."  My wife felt horrible and I couldn't believe it.  The owner of the condo had left a copy of the HOA regulations and I found a nice little loophole.  Apparently, they could regulate lights on the exterior balcony/grilling area, but not lights inside the condo. Game on.

I took my wife immediately to the big box hardware store and picked up two fake Christmas trees, about 2,000 colored lights, a light ball and whatever holiday decoration I could find.  Our condo had 3 windows and the sliding glass door.  I filled up each one of those windows with lights, crisscrossing, around the inside of the perimeter of the window and one had the led ball hanging in the center.  The sliding door had the Christmas tree in full view completely covered in lights and ornaments.  Also the sliding doors were full of Christmas lights. My electric bill must have tripled.  When you came into the parking lot of the Condo complex, you saw a beacon of light full of Christmas spirit.  You probably could see the condo from orbit. And, nothing could be said by the HOA snitch.

Apparently at the next board meeting, a proposed rule change was brought up to limit the amount of "holiday lighting" being shown through windows.  It was quietly pointed out by another HOA board member that was an attorney that you probably could not regulate activities inside a person's dwelling.

I moved out before next year, but I never received another notice.My wife teaches a lovely group of kids in an area where parents are incredibly strict. The children are almost all operating within the 'A' grade range and their parents overwork them to ensure the A+.

Anyways, the new school year has some parents pestering my wife for extra credit assignments. She's insisted that it is optional for her to assign extra credit and they've raised the issue up through administration to force her hand. Another teacher (who teaches the same class), gives loads of extra credit and they want their children to be on an even level. With the news that she'd have to match the amount of given extra credit opportunities, she has decided to involve the children's parents.

Examples:

* 5 page handwritten and legible essays about a historic event they were a part of.
* 20 minute video interview of their opinions and experiences about certain political events while growing up.

Her extra credit is just many different little assignments that take lots of time from the parents day for an extra couple points on the next exam. While she continues to assign these extra credit assignments, the participation rate has been zero.So this happened years ago when I was in highschool, but I smile every time I think of it. My highschool had a policy that anyone who has missed less than a certain number of school days could pick one class they had an A in to skip the final. You could get a couple extra days for college visits, but otherwise it was very straight forward. Awesome policy, and we all loved it.
One year, we had this kid who was in eighth grade and had been diagnosed with cancer. He spent allot of his year sick, getting treatment, going to the hospital, running to the bathroom to throw up, etc. Despite all this he finished the year with an A in his Spanish class. It was his only highschool class, so it was the only final he would have been able to skip.
Administration was not going to let him skip the final because he had missed too much school. He and his parents asked them to make an exception, given the situation, but administration wouldn't budge. His teacher stood up for him, but was told this kid had to take the final no matter what. He had missed too many days and there would be no exception.
The teacher said ok, but told her class not to study for, worry about, or exempt her final. Then, the first day all her students showed up for the final she told them to take out a piece of paper and number it 1-3 leaving one line in between each number. 
She then asked three questions along the lines of, "What is your name?" "How do you say yes in Spanish?", and "How do you say hello in Spanish?" Then she collected the final. Everyone got an 100 that year, and she became a legend.
The kid has been cancer free for over five years now.I work as an emergency dispatcher and 911 operator. The other night we got a call about a pickup truck parked at a tire store, loading tires in the back. Deputies responded and found that, yes, a theft had obviously occurred and asked if I would call the owner to see if he wanted to come out and file a report.

The owner was obviously annoyed with the 1:30 phone call, as people tend to be, but once I explain the circumstances, they tend to react appreciatively. But as I began, "This is [County] communications. We have deputies out at your-" he snarled, "YOU DON'T CALL ME AT THIS TIME OF THE DAMN MORNING!" and hung up. Well. He obviously didn't care that much, then, did he?

*shrug*

I radioed the deputies. 
"Made contact with the owner and he advised we do not call him at this time of morning."
"[County], did you add that to the notes?"
"10-4. I did."
"Show us clear, then!"

A few days later, my supervisor told me the owner, after filing a report the next day for the stolen tires, complained that we should've contacted him when it happened. The complaint made it down to my supervisor, who kicked the notes and a recording of the 45-second phone call back up the chain. The owner was basically told where he could shove his complaint.My parents had this problem with a guy parking a tractor trailer on their land.  He lives right across from one of their pecan groves.  The grove has well spaced trees all in neat rows, the grass is mowed super short, the ground is really flat.  It looks like an ideal place to pull your rig if you don't know better.

The ground is so flat because they use mechanical harvesting.  Bumps and grooves can cause the machines to leave pecans laying on the ground.  A 2 inch deep groove from a big truck like that can hold thousands of dollars of pecans and will until it is fixed. Oh, and you have to get them up by hand.  It's a big deal when someone screws with your livelihood like that.  

So the guy parks there one time.  They get it, he probably doesn't understand he is causing so much trouble.  Dad goes down, explains the damage he has done, tells him the grove is private property and not to do it again.  Dude, we'll call him Dude, agrees, apologizes.  Dad goes home, fixes damage midweek.

Next Friday there is the truck again, same spot.  Dad, not about to put up with this, calls the sherrif dept.  Cop comes, truck moves.  Dad fixes damage midweek.  Next week, no truck.  One week later, truck is back.  Repeat complaint for trespassing to sheriff.  Dude claims he forgot.  He drives over the road and his home depot where his car is parked is 30 miles away.  It is convenient for Dude to forget because he saves his gas and time by driving his employers rig and parking it on my parents land.  (Also, he doesn't get nailed if his cab isn't clean, no other driver gets assigned 'his' truck.  There are plain motivations.)  Dude clearly does not forget every time he is home but this is what he claims to the deputies sent out on the complaints.  After 7 times the sherrif department is called, he FINALLY gets a trespassing citation.  No fine is levied.  Drives his car two weeks in a row.  Following week, truck is back.  At this point my dad has fixed this damage so often he is keeping a tractor and blade on the property so it gets done faster and easier.  

Calls the sherrif yet again.  The sheriff himself comes out this time.  Truck leaves, sheriff comes to see my dad.  Says the enforcement problem is that it is hard to explain to a court the harm when pictures hardly show any damage and Dude always apologizes and moves the truck when deputies come.  Says getting Dude for trespassing under those circumstances is going to be tough but he is on this and will see it through for my parents but his office us 30 miles away, not that many deputies to be out patrolling, etc.

And then the sheriff, bless his little elected heart, says, "But if there were something different like a theft of services going on..."

Cue Malicious Compliance.  

The next day, signs go up on 80 trees in a row (8000 feet, they are 100 feet apart).  "Semi parking.  $500/hour.  Prepay.  Violators will be towed."

Dude doesn't pay the signs any mind.  Dude does, however, pay the tow truck and deputy quite a bit of mind.  Comes running and screaming, waving his arms as they are hooking up.  

Well, before my dad called to have him towed, everything was documented, including having the sheriff himself drive by and take several pictures of the truck parked with the clearly visible signs.

Everything is put on hold while Dude's employer, who owns the truck drives out.  

After 3 hours, Dude's boss gives up and writes a check for $7800 to cover parking and tow truck fees.   That actually covered the tow truck, all the repairs, printing the signs, and beer for about a year for my dad's Tuesday poker gathering.  Salut.

Dude, who still lives there, does not park in the pecan grove.  His boss payroll deducted his checks for 2 years.

TLDR; trying to stop trespass parking is useless.  Charge for parking instead.

Edited for typos and clarity.  Thanks for the upvotes.  

Yes, my dad IS awesome.This happened only a month ago, so the memory of the incident is fresh.

I got accepted into college and had to quit my job of 2 years. I put up my resignation papers and had 2 months of notice period left. I had informed my manager and team, but didn't account for Mr. S who was technically on my team but worked from the client offices overseas, so I dont get to see him ever.

Background on Mr. S : He was hired as a mediator between the client and us, but had years of technical experience so he often helped us out with the technical work, but was always a snob about it. He made sure to cc every possible manager in every mail to show that he was doing a lot more than his role was required to do. Everyone hated how commanding and rude he was. Most meetings with him were just the entire team listening to him bitch and moan for 20min.He had no boundaries and would call up at odd hours of the night just to prove  his point. He would promise clients certain results with unreasonable timelines without consulting the team, leading to late delivery and terrible client ratings.

Since I had 2 months left to go at work, I wasn't quick to give up responsibilities and transfer knowledge to my colleagues. I handled an important client facing task and I've been doing it for the 2 years I worked there. I never taught it to anyone else cuz it was a relatively easy task and it hasn't been screwed up in two years.

We get info from the client that my task was undergoing major upgrades and needed to be done extra carefully and on priority for the next week. I know the drill and get to work as usual. Mr. S calls me up on Skype to reemphasise the importance of the task this week. I just reply to him that I've been following all protocols every week and will continue the same as usual, being careful of the upgrades. He considers my answer as "unprofessional and inconsiderate" and proceeds to tell me how I'm not that important to the team and my job was easily replaceable. 

He then cut the call, and proceeded to reassign all my tasks for the next 2 months to someone else, while also formally emailing everybody that no new tasks were to be assigned to me. 

There i sat, maliciously complying, watching my team mates struggle to run my task, unable to help. I sat around doing nothing for the last 2 months of my job. Luckily I was working from home so that meant 2 months of paid leave.I work as a supervisor at a manufacturing plant, and I was hired for an 8 hour shift as the night time supervisor. As soon as I started, they changed, and said they really considered the shift to be from 11 pm to 730, so they would need it to be 8 1/2 hours. I'm salaried, there wasn't much I could do, and it wasn't a big deal, so I said okay.

As I get into a groove working there, I find out that the 2nd shift supervisor is a train wreck. No one would describe him to me, just saying I had to meet him. He leaves an hour or two early from his shift 2-3 times a week. Friday nights he leaves the plant at 530, and tells them to call him if there are any problems. He calls out, at a minimum, once a week. Its psychotic. 

Every time he is out, I come in at around 8 pm to cover the last 3 hours of his shift and my full shift. At least once a week, I just do it. I figure the company is going to deal with it, but as time passes, they obviously aren't. Structurally, the company is just as bad as him. Infighting, rivalries, backstabbing, all of that, but I stay on nights so I don't see it much.

Then Sarah starts as my boss. I actually have 2 bosses, which is how every successful employee works. Sarah is a nightmare. Sarah wants me to work 11-11 on MTW, and 11-10 on Friday. I dig in my heels, document like crazy, and after a couple months of harassment, HR actually backs me up and she has to stop.

But now Sarah is angry, and she sees me leaving at 715 one morning after coming in 2 hours early. She sends an email clarifying our time expectations. 2nd shift train wreck calls in that night, so I come in at 8, and the next morning, Sarah sees me leave at 7:10. 

I get an email saying she is coming in early to talk to me, and when she shows up, I'm getting a formal warning for my early departures, going into my personnel file. I've never been written up in my life.

During the meeting, with HR in attendance, she said I am expected to be there for my 8 1/2 hour shift. I made sure that the expectation was on record for an 8 1/2 hour shift, which HR documented.

The next week, the 2nd shift supervisor is out two days. After the first day, Sarah asks me the next morning why I didn't come in early, as there were problems on his shift, and I said I fulfilled my 8 1/2 hour shift, and I'm not responsible for his.

They had to hire a contractor at $125 an hour to cover all of his missed time, which amounted to 19 weeks this past year. Eventually they hired a 4th supervisor at $85k per year to cover his gaps. Sarah got demoted, and I only ever work 8 1/2 hours.So I was working for a small private ambulance company that ended up getting bought out by a larger corporation. To folks that have done this kind of work, no it wasn't the company you're thinking of, but this new corporation wanted to be just like them.

So corporate sends out a directive that all employees must check their work email at least once every 24 hours. No exceptions! Now I'm a lowly part-timer, so it would occasionally be weeks in between my shifts. The fun part is, I usually played Field Supervisor on my shifts I did work.

So in order to be in compliance with the corporate directive, I set my work email to update every day at the same time on my phone. I would then log my 15 minutes of email checking on my paycheck so I would also be in compliance with state and federal payroll laws. I also made sure to inform as many employees to do the same.

Didn't check your email while you were on shift because you were too busy trying to figure out what made grandma's ambulance ride to the doctor medically necessary? That's ok. Just check it when you get home. Make sure you put it on your timesheet, though!

It took a couple pay cycles, but eventually I get a call (on my day off), asking why I'm logging 1.75 hours on weeks that I didn't even work. I explained that I was just following their corporate directive. I was told at that point that I no longer was able to log those hours. I told them to give me that in writing as that goes against labor laws. Needless to say, the directive to check email every day got revoked.

Oh, but I did put down 30 minutes on my timesheet for the call as it took 22 minutes.

Edit to say: Thank you everyone that's up voted and given awards. You guys are the true heroes!Long time reader, first time poster. I don't even know if it goes here, so please correct me if I'm wrong.

Back in 2006, I worked for one of those big box stores that had an IT desk (formally known as "Nerd Herd" LOL) where people could bring devices in to get serviced if there was a problem. We were located in Columbus GA, which is right over a bridge from Phoenix City, AL. This is important because, where our store was placed, we would normally get a lot of servicemen and women coming up from Fort Benning who were generally pretty cool. But we would also get folks, mostly from Alabama, who were... let's just say, slightly unfavourable to folks of a certain skin colour or gender. (no offence to those who live in AL who are totally awesome. You know who you are. <3)

Now, I'm a 5'1" girl who (at the time) weighed a total of 120lbs soaking wet. I was practically a hobbit. I was also one of the lead technicians in the department. I was the one the new hires went to if they were confused or couldn't troubleshoot certain problems. The team I worked with was AMAZING. The general manager of the store was great and the supervisor of my department was THE MAN. I would regularly go out for drinks with these people. One of the best places I've ever worked, even though it was retail.

One day, I'm working the counter to check customers in and do evaluations and diagnostics to give an estimate of what the repair price would be.

In comes... let's call him Joe. He's wore a cut-off t-shirt, worn denim jeans, and a baseball cap with a confederate flag on it that just barely covered his business in the front, party in the back hair cut. I am not one to judge on looks. I've had plenty of people come in looking exactly the same way tis guy did who have been an absolute *delight* to work with. Never judge a book by its cover, kids. But I still have my defenses up, just in case. I really hoped it wasn't going to go the not-so-friendly route. I was unfortunately wrong about dear Joe.

Joe walks up to the counter with his PC tower and practically *slams* the unit on the desk.

Joe: I need this fixed. It's broken.

Me: Okay, sir. Let me have a look and I'll see if I ca–

Joe cuts me off and stares at me with a disgusted look on his face.

Joe: Excuse me?

Me: If you give me a moment, sir, I'll be able to take a look at your computer and–

Joe: Aw HELL NO!

It was at this point that I realised where this was inevitably going to go wrong.

Me: Unfortunately, sir, I won't be able to give you an estimate if you don't let me diagnose your computer.

Joe: There is no way in HELL a *woman* knows about computers. I'm not letting *you* touch my computer. Get me the manager.

*Oh, yes.* I thought. This is going to be fucking awesome! I'm sure he wanted to talk to the general manager of the store, but I couldn't resist.

Cue malicious compliance.

I could have pulled the "I'm the manager" thing, because I was one of the senior staff, but my direct boss was actually out back working on repair projects and I couldn't help but get excited about how this was going to go down.

Me: (*as lovely as sweet tea)* Of course, sir. Right away, sir.

Mike, my superviser, the guy who ran our department (and NOT the general manager of the store,) was elbow deep in a motherboard replacement when I walked in and gave him the biggest, shit-eating grin.

Me: Hey, Mike. There's a guy out there asking for the manager.

He looks at me confused because he was just supervisor, but I then proceeded to tell him *exactly* what was waiting for him out front. His face split into the brightest smile. He then proceeded to walk out to the front.

Have I mentioned that Mike is a 6'3, 280lb black man who looked like he could eat a mack truck for lunch? He was such a big, loveable, teddy bear. We all adored him.

The *moment* Mike stepped out, the customer *freaked*.

Mike: Hello, sir. I hear there's a problem?

Joe *LOST IT*! It start with a "fuck no" before devolving into a racist tirade that I have never witnessed in my life. (I'm from Massachusetts, so this was awful, yet amazing to watch. Like a car crash. I just couldn't look away. Not that we have no racism in the north east, but DAMN.) Joe kept screaming, using the nastiest slur (you know the one) over and over again while staff and customers alike watched in blatant horror.

Security ended up having to come over to try to calm the man down. Our *entire* security team was black as well so, naturally, Joe went even MORE crazy.

Eventually, the police had to be called because the man was threatening me, calling me a cunt and a bitch, and threatening security and my boss, using that word that is *not* okay.

My general manager got called out of his office and immediately called the police to have the man removed. God bless whichever dispatcher who received the call was, because they dispatched *two black officers* to the scene. Me and my general manager were *literally* the only white people involved in this train-wreck (aside from bigoted Joe) and I watched with unbridled glee as Joe was cuffed and taken away by the police. Watching Joe foam at the mouth as he was dragged away made my whole week.

Thank you for the entertainment, Bigoted Joe.

EDIT: Thanks to all of you telling me about CHUCK. Now I’m up at 5AM binging this show. LOLCleaning out my home office today and stumbled across paper work I had saved for what ever reason from a shitty call center job I worked at 15 years ago. This was an outbound sales thing and it was non stop calls all day.

Needless to say the job sucked. With the constant talking though your voice would start cracking through out the day if you didn’t hydrate. So I would bring jugs of water to sip on all day long. 

This of course meant frequent trips to the restroom. I never abused these trips and they were always 3 minutes or less. But of course this wasn’t good enough for management. Oh no.

One day my manager demanded I get a doctors note if I wanted to pee at any time other than one of my two regularly scheduled breaks. I could tell she was convinced I would not do it.

I scheduled the appointment and filled the doctor in who thought it was hilarious that this manager either 1 didn’t understand biology or 2 was on a huge power trip. 

He provided me with the most condescending doctors note ever. https://i.imgur.com/aYzwHoS.jpg

Needless to say she was not happy. My coworkers though all made trips to the same doctor and got similar notes.

Pretty sure I wore a shit eating grin every time I walked to the bathroom after that.  

Ok I have been meaning to type this up for awhile, this happened at my last job back in 2018. To give some background, I was working as a Data Analyst at a company in the ed-tech sector. For one of my projects, I created a report that we could give to the sales team, that they could then use when asking clients to renew their contract. 

Clients were typically school systems or individual schools. The report was all graphs (even adults like pretty pictures) and it showed the clients data on how teachers/students were using the product. Then our sales guys could show hey X% of your students and teacher are using this X times a week, so you should sign a new contract with us. I developed this report for our biggest client, and had the top people in sales all put in input when developing it. The big client renewed which was great! They loved the report and wanted to use it for ALL renewals, and we had 5,000+ clients. I had to automated the process and everything seemed peachy until I hit a problem.... 

The data for the report was pulled from our database (MSSQL if you are curious). Now I was in the Research department and I did not have access to the database. Instead our IT team had access to the database. If I wanted data, I had to put in a ticket, name all the data points I wanted, and I could only name 1 client per ticket. Also IT did their work in sprints which are basically 2 week periods of work. The tickets were always added to the NEXT sprint, so I ended up having to wait 2-4 weeks for data. This was fine for the big client report, but now that I was running this report for all renewals the ticket system was not going to work. 

Now if you have worked with sales you know they don't typically plan out 2-4 weeks ahead (at least they didn't at this company). I reached out to IT and requested direct access to the database, so I could stop putting in tickets and just pull (query) the data myself. Well that was immediately denied, all data requests will be filled by ONLY IT, and as a Research person I needed to stay in my lane. You might see where this is going.... 

I wasn't happy and sales wasn't happy with the delay but there was nothing anyone could do. Soooo I reached out to one of the sales managers to discuss a solution. Since data was going to take 2-4 weeks to arrive could he please send me EVERYONE that has a renewal coming up in the next 2-4 weeks. With 5,000+ customers that averages about 100 renewals a week. He smiled and understood what was going on, and happily sent me a list of 400ish clients. 

Quick note, the IT team spends the day BEFORE a sprint planning the next sprint, and all tickets submitted BEFORE the sprint had to be completed during the NEXT sprint. The sprint planning time was always Friday afternoon because the least amount of tickets rolled in. During the planning session they would plan all the work for the next 2 weeks (for the next sprint). Any tickets that came in before 5pm Friday had to be finished over the next two weeks. 

Time for the MC! Armed with my list of 400+ clients, I figured out when the next sprint started and cleared my schedule for the day BEFORE the new IT sprint started (aka their sprint planning Friday). At about 1 ticket a minute, it was going to take about 6 hours and 40 minutes to submit all the tickets so that's what I spent my whole Friday doing. 

Lets not forget, they had to get the data for all the tickets during the next sprint as long as I submitted them before 5pm on Friday. That meant they had to take care of all 400 tickets in the next 2 weeks plus I submitted tickets throughout their spring planning meeting so they couldn't even plan for it all. 

If you are not tech savvy this might not make sense, but if you are let me add an extra twist to this. They used JIRA at the time and the entire IT team had the JIRA app on their laptops. Most of them had push notifications set up so they got pinged every time a ticket was submitted. I would have paid good money to be a fly on the wall during that meeting watching a new ticket pop up about every minute. 

Ok tech aside done,  I didn't hear a peep from them at all that Friday. To their credit, Monday I started getting data from my tickets. Now I had automated the reporting process on my end, so each report only took me a few minutes to run. I was churning out reports as quickly as I received the data without an issue and sales was loving it. I saw tickets coming in from every member of the IT team and during the second week many tickets came in after working hours, so obviously they were struggling to keep up. Again, I will give them full credit, they fulfilled every single ticket, but there was a lot of long days for them (everyone was salary so no overtime pay either). This is of course on top of all the other tickets they needed to complete, so it was quite a stressful sprint. 

Undeterred, I met with the sales manager again right before the next sprint and asked for the next set of clients with renewals. Then the day before the next sprint I began submitting tickets again....My work day started at 9am and by 10am the head of IT runs over to me. He is bug eyed and asked me how many tickets I was planning on submitting. I told him the same amount as last time (I only had 200 this time but he didn't know that), and I am pretty sure I saw him break on the inside. I did feel bad at this point so I said, "Alternatively you could just give me access to the database and I could query the data myself". I had the access before noon. 

tl;dr IT says I need to submit tickets for data instead of giving me direct access, I submit hundreds of tickets until they relent and give me access.Here’s a way I used malicious compliance to get paid for doing nothing for the next year, while dedicating my efforts to the success of the competitors of the people who are paying me. This one is EXCEPTIONALLY long, but I hope you consider it worth the time.  

**The Setting:**  

Office of a small plumbing company offering residential and commercial services, 6 days per week plus emergency service after hours and Sundays. 3 employees that handle dispatching technicians, invoicing, scheduling, parts ordering, etc. We all have the same skill set and cover each other’s backs. Technically, we’ve all been hired as Dispatchers, take note. Administrative stuff like payroll, Accounts Receivable, Accounts Payable, Marketing are all done at Head Office, which has another 2 locations just like ours.  

**The Cast:**  

OP:  30’s guy, single, no kids, very flexible schedule.  

Smashley: Late 20’s, single Mom raising 3 brats between 5 & 10 years old. Constantly leaving early and missing days due to Motherhood duties…doctor appointments, school meetings, etc.  

Howard: Older than dirt, I think he helped Noah build the Ark. Has even more elderly parents with dementia, and has an arrangement with his Sister. He lives with his parents on Fri-Sat-Sun, and works Mon-Thurs. Not available on the weekend under any circumstances. His Sister lives with the parents Mon-Thurs. Howard doesn’t need the job, but if he leaves, then his Sister will offload some of these days onto his plate, and he’s having none of that.  

SOB: you’ll meet him later.  

So the way this worked was Howard would come in at 6am and work until 2:30pm, Mon-Thurs. Smashley would come in and work 9am to 3pm, Mon-Fri, after getting her kids off to school, and leaving early to pick them up. She would cover the weekends remotely from home. She also came in at 6am on Fridays, since Howard wasn’t in. I would come in at 11am, work to 7:30pm, Mon-Fri, and cover on-call emergencies after hours. My hours were altered from the 8-4:30 in my contract by verbal mutual agreement. I didn’t mind, I like to sleep in.  

All went along fabulously for a couple of years, until Smashley fucked it all up. One of her duties was vetting and submitting timesheets for payroll, and Head Office noticed that one of the techs was consistently making more than the others. It turned out that Smashley was doing some horizontal dancing with one of the plumbers, and was inflating his hours on the payroll. It all came to light when a customer called for a warranty issue on some work that was done, and we could find no records in our system. The customer insisted that our tech was out, and “the lady on the phone” had told them that there was a 20% discount for cash. Emails were sent to Head Office, GPS records of the truck were examined, and their little scheme was discovered. She was puffing hours for the plumber, and they were making money on cash side jobs on the weekend. Both were fired for cause, and Smashley was stuck trying to raise 3 kids with no job and no unemployment.  

So now it’s just me and Howard. HR and Owner called us into a meeting and explained that Smashley was no longer employed. We worked out a “temporary” arrangement for scheduling until a 3rd person could be added to the team.  

Howard would work his usual Mon-Thurs, staying until 4pm on Mon & Tues. He would predispatch any late calls, which we would try to avoid. The Field Supervisor for the plumbers would take after hours calls directly on Mon & Tues.  

I would work Wed-Sun, and come in at 8am on Fri, and work until my regular close time. I would predispatch the plumber’s first calls on Thursday nights. I covered after hours calls Wed-Sun.  

We were assured that this was a temporary arrangement until a replacement for Smashley could be found. She was let go last May. With only 2 people covering the office, neither Howard nor I could take any time off, as there was nobody to cover.  

September 1, Enter SOB.  

SOB was brought into the picture to handle administrative stuff, which admittedly, had gotten a little loose when only Howard and I were covering. Things like missing PO’s on parts orders, missing packing slips, reports of revenue and expenses being incomplete, that sort of thing. We were far too busy just trying to keep things running shorthanded to deal with any of this stuff. Howard and I were also told that SOB would “cover the dispatch board” if required.  

He was an ass. He came into the shop claiming that he had been brought in to “whip us into shape”. I couldn’t stand him from the beginning. Abrupt, aggressive and with a vocabulary that used a lot of swear words. Just a dick.  

Whatever. Let him handle the outward-facing stuff, dealing with vendors, ordering parts, fleet maintenance, all that crap. He also handled timesheets for payroll and reporting to Head Office. Fine. I am good with that, and if I have to deal with his bullshit for a couple hours 3 days a week, fine. I only worked under the same roof with him Wed-Fri, from 11am until his departure around 5pm. It was endurable.  

I had requested time off twice after he arrived and had been denied both times. Worthy of note is that my contract specified 3 weeks holiday a year, and up until he arrived, I had only taken 2 days off in the spring.  

Fast forward to late November. If anything, SOB had gotten worse. He was really getting under my skin, and I had just about had enough. I have a teensy issue with anger, and it was becoming more and more difficult to reign in my rage and kick the shit out of him.  

Then came the straw that broke the camel’s back. I looked at my pay stub and saw that I was short 5 hours. I get paid, not only for the hours I am scheduled, but also for time I put in covering after-hours emergency calls. This routinely put me up around 46 to 48 hours a week, with overtime after 44 hours. So these 5 hours I was short were OVERTIME hours.  

I went to SOB on the Friday payday, and asked for an explanation. He replied that he had been directed to bring overtime down, and if I check my email, I will see a directive that states that under NO CIRCUMSTANCES is anyone to work overtime in this office. This was clearly directed at me and me only, as Howard only put in 36 hours a week, and didn’t cover on-call.  

“So why am I short 5 hours on this pay?”  

“I deducted 30 minutes each day for lunch.”  

“But I don’t take a lunch. I just eat a sandwich at my desk.”  

“Doesn’t matter. I can take 30 minutes off your pay each day as unpaid break time. It’s the letter of the law.”  

“But I actually worked these hours. Are you serious? You’re deducting time for breaks I didn’t take?”  

“It’s the letter of the law. You don’t like it, take it up with the labor board. I don’t have time for this shit. Get back to your fucking desk and do your fucking job.”  

All right, motherfucker. NOW it’s on. Piss me off all you like, be a dick all you like, but fuck with my money? You are going to pay. I will fuck you over HARD.  

I have a good friend, Eric,  that I have known since High School who is an associate at one of the better law firms in town. I invited him out for a few beers and some wings on Sunday night, and asked him if his firm handled stuff like this. You know, it’s amazing the amount of advice you can get for a few pieces of chicken and some beer.  

Monday, I drove across town to a store and bought one of [these]( https://www.amazon.ca/Monichamp-Recorder-Reduction-distance-Recording/dp/B07HQBZ1Q4/ref=sr_1_10?keywords=pen+audio&qid=1555899834&s=gateway&sr=8-10). They are pretty easy to get, just Google “spy shop” for your city or order one off Amazon. I fiddled around with it, and figured out how to get it to work.  

On Wednesday, I showed up for work at my usual 11am start time, and things in the office were business as usual…until 4pm on the dot. I took my sandwich, a Coke, and a paperback novel, and sat in my car.  

It didn’t take long. About 10 after 4 SOB comes storming into the parking lot and demands to know exactly what the fuck I am doing. “Taking my lunch break,” I replied.  

“The phones are ringing off the hook, Jeff needs to process a credit card payment, and Mike is just about to clear his call. I need you back in there, right now.”  

“Sorry, SOB, but if you’re not paying me for my break time, then I am not working through my break time. Either you handle it, or I’ll take care of it in (checks countdown timer on cell phone) 17 minutes”. And then I rolled the window back up.  

It was beautiful. SOB turned red and stomped back in to the office. When I returned, he demanded to know what the hell I thought I was up to.  

“I am entitled to a 30 minute unpaid break. You took that time off my time sheet, so now I am taking my break. I am entitled to it. It’s the letter of the law.” He sputtered, but had no response, so I went back to my desk.  

5 minutes later I get an email instructing me to take my break before 2pm, so I can be back at my desk before Howard leaves for the day.  

I replied to his email, BCC copying the owner of the company, and HR. I replied that I was unable to do so, because, as per labor law, I was not entitled to a lunch break until 5 hours into my shift. Therefore, I would continue to be away from my desk for 30 minutes beginning at 4pm. I even snipped and pasted a paragraph from the labor board website to support my position.  

He came into my office and chewed me out at length. I wouldn’t budge. I told him, “It’s the letter of the law, if you have a problem with it, take it up with the labor board.”  

On Thursday, just after SOB left for the day, I composed and sent him an email, again BCC copying in Owner and HR. I explained that I had agreed to changing my hours on a temporary basis until a third person could be added to the office. I also agreed to continue to work them until the transition was complete. As SOB was now firmly in the groove, I now withdraw my consent to the change of hours as contractually specified, and beginning Monday, would revert to the hours in my contract.  

Friday I show up at 11am, and SOB is waiting for me with a printout of the email. “HR and Owner have been calling me, what the fuck is this all about?”  

“Simple. When I was hired, my hours were in the contract. Monday to Friday, 8am to 4:30pm. They were changed by verbal agreement. Well, I withdraw my consent, and stand on the hours specified in my contract.”  

“Fuck that. You work the same hours until I tell you differently.”  

“The hours of service in the contract are the letter of the law, contract law. If you want to change the hours, we can always renegotiate the contract. You want to alter the hours, fine, then I want to alter my rate of pay.” There was a flurry of emails…he would sent them to me, and I would copy HR and Owner on my replies, since he wasn’t copying them in at all.  

So I worked Sunday, as usual, then showed up Monday at 8am. Howard asked me what the hell was going on, because SOB was badmouthing me all over the place, to him and to the techs.
One thing you should know is that a good dispatcher in the service industry is a rare thing. There are trucking dispatchers, and taxi dispatchers, and tow truck dispatchers, but finding one that knows how to balance plumbers and customers and solve problems is tough. I get along with all my plumbers and they are asking me what’s happening. I take the high road and basically reveal nothing. I get along with these guys quite well.  

Towards early afternoon I send SOB an email explaining that there are some late calls….how late do you need me to work? He replies, “Until the calls are run.” Perfect. So I end up working until 6:30. Same on Tuesday, but 7pm. Wednesday, too. Sent emails both days, and SOB told me to stay both times. He replied to me only, and I sent an “Okay” email reply copying the bosses in.  

By Thursday morning, I had racked up 39.5 hours. 38 were in the office, and 1.5 hours taking after-hours calls. About 10am I sent an email, again copying the bigwigs, and, detailing my hours for the week,  explaining that at 12:30pm I would have a total of 44 hours, and as per SOB’s directive of such-and-such a date prohibiting overtime, I was left with no choice but to go home. Just before I hit “send” I turned to Howard and said, “You might want to make some popcorn.”  

SOB comes storming in, and demands to know what the fuck. 
 
“Well, SOB, I am only following your directive. You said no overtime, right? Well, as of 12:30, I will be on OT. Unless you say different, then I have to go. So it’s either rescind the “no overtime”, or I head out. Your call.”  

SOB is now fucked. He’s been told to dial back on the overtime, and now he’s going to have to pay me OT for half of Thursday, all of Friday, and all of Saturday….or cover the dispatch board himself. 
“Work the fucking weekend, goddamn it, you miserable fuck. You’ll pay for this shit.”  

“Okay, I need that in writing. And I can’t work Sunday, you have to.”  

“Listen, you little shit, you don’t tell me when I have to work, I tell YOU when you have to work, and you’re working Sunday!!”  

“Nope. Labor law says specifically that I get one day off in seven. I can show you. Since I worked last Sunday, and I am working every other day this week, I get this coming Sunday off. It’s the letter of the law. Howard can’t work it, I can’t work it, so I guess you have to.”  

“But my kid has a tournament on Sunday. Can’t you bend the rules?”  

“Sorry, it’s the letter of the law”  

SOB was a real treat to be around for Thursday and Friday, I assure you. And my little spy pen recorded every word out of his mouth.  

Monday I come in, I think this was the 26th of November, and the Owner, and HR, and SOB are waiting for me. Owner and HR want to know what the hell is going on, they are getting reports that I am being insubordinate and threatening to abandon my job. SOB wants to can me, and up until 2 weeks ago I was a model employee.  

I explain everything, and refer them to the emails that I copied them in on. They ask what started this whole mess, and I told them that SOB had said he was told to reduce overtime, and took time off my check that I had actually worked. He demanded that I go back to work on my break, and that I schedule my break 3 hours into my shift. I laid it all out.  

Owner gave SOB the stink-eye and said, “I never told you to dial back OT”  

They asked me if I would be willing to go back to the hours I was working before. “We can discuss it, but since this would be a major change to my employment contract, we will need to renegotiate it. Including my rate of pay.”  

“Can you go back to those hours, and then we’ll schedule a meeting?”  

“No, thank you. If I revert to previous hours then you have no reason to schedule a meeting. We do the meeting first, then once we have a deal, you get the hours changed.”  

“Let us talk about it, we’ll get back to you.”  

“Okay, but you need to discuss this soon. I am taking the last three weeks of December as vacation time.”  

SOB explodes, with Owner and HR right there. “You cocksucker, you’re not taking any fucking vacation without my approval, and I’m not approving a god damned fucking minute of vacation for you.”  

I turn to Owner and HR. “By labor law, I am entitled to vacation time yearly. By contract law, I am entitled to three weeks. So far, I have taken 2 days this year. I have requested vacation twice, and SOB denied it both times. I couldn’t take it in between when you fired Smashley and hired SOB, because there were only two of us in the office.  

“I get three weeks a year, and we are coming up to the end of the year. Company policy is ‘use them or lose them’, so I am using them.”  

HR says, “We’ll pay you out the accrued vacation time.”  

I look at her and reply, “I don’t agree to your offer. I am entitled to the time. I want the time, not the money.”  

She thinks for a minute, and says, “We’ll roll it over into the new year.”  

“I don’t agree to your offer. I am entitled to the time this year, not next year.”  

SOB pipes up, “But Howard already has 2 weeks booked off. And I’m taking my family to Florida. You can’t take the time, there’s nobody to run the shop.”  

“What? You’re going to Florida? So you expect me to run the entire show, alone, work 7 days a week, and you send an email saying No Overtime? Are you fucking serious?”  

Back to Owner and HR, “Look, I had to work a full year before I was entitled to a vacation. All of the plumbers have to work a full year before they are entitled to a vacation. Labor law says you have to work a full year before you’re entitled to a vacation. And he’s telling me that I am not allowed to take my vacation because he’s going to Florida, and he’s only been here for 3 months? Is THAT what I am hearing here?  

“You guys told me to hold off on vacation time until we got a third person” Points at SOB. “Well there he is, right there, and I am taking the vacation I am entitled to. No payout. No rollover. And if you want to renegotiate my contract, it can wait until the new year.” And I stormed out of the office.  

I don’t know what the rest of the meeting was like, but about an hour later SOB starts chewing me out again, saying how he’s out thousands of dollars and now he has to tell his kids that they are going to Disney World. Calls me every name in the book.  

The next 2 weeks were hell. What an asshole. Calling me names, telling me he won’t rest until I am out on my ass, telling me I’m the worst piece of crap he ever worked with.  

So I took my vacation time, didn’t do a damn thing, didn’t travel, just kicked back and relaxed, and spent time with my parents over the holidays.  

I get back in January and there’s a new face sitting at my desk, and SOB is there with a shit-eating grin and my separation papers. HR put “laid off” rather than “fired”, so I had that going for me, which was nice.  

Now where I live, if someone calls a former employer for a reference, all the former employer is permitted to say is the timeframe the former employee worked there, and whether or not he would be eligible for rehire.  

So a few days into January, SOB gets a phone call.  

“Hi, SOB, my name is Eric, and we’re looking at OP’s resume, here. He says you were his most recent employer. You’re on speaker, what can you tell us about him?”  

SOB goes off like a stick of dynamite, calling me every name in the book, saying that I was a horrible worker, lying about missing time, telling all sorts of bullshit. I let him go on and on.  

“Hey, SOB. Recognize my voice?”  

He stops his ranting. “Yeah. You fucker. I know your voice.”  

“Ever hear of the law offices of Dewey, Screwem, Ober, and Howe? They’re lawyers. And this call is being placed from their conference room. Nice talking to you, SOB. The next call we’re making is to Owner, and getting his lawyer’s name.”  

It took a while, but a meeting got scheduled with Owner, HR, SOB, Owner’s Lawyer, me and Eric. Eric explained that I was starting a claim for wrongful dismissal, and this meeting was to explore the possibility of a settlement. We laid out everything. Every email, a timeline of events, and then the piece de la resistance….a supercut of the audio of SOB yelling, threatening, ranting, and just being SOB. It was beautiful.  

SOB went white. Owner stared at him the whole time like he wanted to erase him from the face of the Earth. They asked us to excuse them for a few minutes, so Eric and I went for a coffee and chuckled. They texted us within 20 minutes to return.  

Owner’s Lawyer explained that they were admitting no liability or wrongdoing, but that, as a gesture of goodwill, they were willing to offer me three months severance, if I would sign a waiver. Eric smiled, declined, and then played the tape from the conference room about the reference. He also mentioned that he was present at the time, and so were 2 of his colleagues, and all were willing to file affidavits to that effect.  Another break.  

We came back, and they upped the offer to 6 months. We countered with 2 years severance. Eventually we settled on 15 months, with me to collect a check every 2 weeks, as if I was employed, based on an average of my hours for the past 6 months of my employment. And I had racked a LOT of overtime in those 6 months. They even tried to stick a clause prohibiting me from working for anyone in the same industry while the deal was in effect, but Eric spotted it and had it struck out.  

My skill set is in demand, and it didn’t take long for me to find another job, doing the same thing, but for one of their competitors. It’s awesome. These guys pay me on one Friday, and my working job pays me on the next. I am racking up savings like you wouldn’t believe, and Eric was pretty gentle with his billing.  

SOB? He was canned in no time, and between me and Owner’s network of contacts, the rumor mill has basically made him untouchable. He’s still looking for a job, as far as I know. I did tell my new employer to shitcan his resume if they ever got one.  

But if I ever get a phone call asking me for a reference for SOB, all I can tell them is that I worked with him for 4 months in 2018.  

I can’t say more than that. It’s the letter of the law.Every once in awhile I think about this story while I’m idly playing sudoku on my phone and it makes me smile. I realized it’s perfect malicious compliance/petty revenge material. 

&#x200B;

I don’t want to go into too much detail here but some background is needed. A few years ago when I was in grad school, I dated a man who was several years older than me who had just finished his masters at the same school (completely different program but both in the realm of STEM) and started a company based on that work. He seemed to have a chip on his shoulder about the fact that he went back to school in his late 20s, and the fact that I was in a PhD program. I need to emphasize I did not think I was better or smarter than him in any way, and I thought and still think he is incredibly smart and his company does fascinating work. But, he still projected this inferiority complex on me and it was one of many things that soured our relationship. He was obsessed with feeling smarter than me and bringing me down a peg. The relationship ran its course within a year and the breakup was messy, but he insisted on remaining friends despite a lot of obvious tension between us. 

&#x200B;

One day he asked me to help him pick up a moving truck he needed for work and I agreed, but when I got in the car we were kind of quiet for a couple minutes so I pulled out my phone and finished the sudoku game I had up in my browser. For some context, I am incredibly good at sudoku relative to most people. This is because I obsessively solved sudoku puzzles as a kid and just had big books of them to solve on long bus rides to school, and it’s still my go to game to play while waiting in line, pooping, etc. I don’t really correlate this with intelligence; my brain is just trained to recognize the patterns and solving them is soothing. 

&#x200B;

He looked over and saw I was playing and asked what app I played on. I said I just play on a certain website I like and when he asked why I don’t use a sudoku app I tried to be as neutral as possible in my response and said that the website had a nice spread of difficulty and that every app I tried had either been all too easy or too hard (admittedly, it’s almost always too easy, but because of aforementioned inferiority complex I was hedging this on purpose) He had a kind of “oh really?” response and insisted I try the app he has on his phone because he was sure I would find it hard. So, I maliciously complied. 

&#x200B;

I opened up the hardest setting of puzzle in his app and solved it in about a minute, beating the record on his phone by at least a minute and a half. I showed it to him and he seemed alarmed and basically said I got lucky. So, I played several more times so that my times flooded the fastest times list until his were all gone. His shock and frustration at this was satisfying on its own, but MANY months later when I had long forgotten about it, he randomly sent me a screenshot of his puzzle in that app with a faster time—except it was for the easiest puzzle setting. So of course to be petty, I immediately downloaded the app, played on the easiest setting, beat his time by a significant margin again, and sent a screenshot. Was this mean? Maybe. Was it satisfying? Yes.I (24M) hosted a friend from college (also 24M) that I haven't seen since before the pandemic. Shortly after he arrives we head to a local bar and grill in our neighborhood. We decided to do the 15-20 minute walk instead of drive so we didn't have to worry about leaving the car. I was joined by my roommate (25M and also a good friend) and his new(ish) girlfriend (22F), who I don't know that well but I have always had friendly encounters with when we have hung out.

At the bar drinks flowed freely and my friend seemed to really hit it off with our crew. We stayed longer than expected and it was fully dark and we were well buzzed by the time we decided to walk home. It was still hot outside when we got to the apartment complex so my roommate suggested that we hit the community pool. The pool and hot tub were technically closed for the night but it isn't too close to any of the units and generally no one cares if you are responsible and don't break glass bottles or anything like that. After debating whether to head back to our place to change first my roommate insisted that "we're all friends here" and that we could all just go in the pool in our underwear. Everyone agreed on this although my roommate's girlfriend announced "you guys have fun with that" and proceeded to lounge next to the pool on one of the deck chairs and scroll Instagram.

We strip down and hop in the pool and are having a pretty good time just messing around. After some time had passed my roommate was chatting with his girlfriend and then quietly approached me afterwards. Apparently his girlfriend was very uncomfortable with me wearing just briefs in the pool (both my roommate and my friend were wearing boxer briefs) and she wanted me to go all the way back to the apartment and change into a swimsuit. I initially protested and said it was his idea in the first place and how everyone was in their underwear (and none of us cared) and what's the difference, it's not like my underwear was white/see through or anything like that. My roommate asked me to go change for him as a favor so that it didn't "turn into an issue" between him and her. I was pissed but decided to let it go for the time being.

When I got back to the apartment an idea popped into my head when it occurred to me that I still had a swimsuit from when I used to swim on the club team in college, so I put on my speedo and head back out armed with another 6 pack for the boys in only a t-shirt, towel wrapped around my waste, and flip flops. I get back to the pool, announced I had changed into my swimsuit (as requested!), drop the towel and ditch the T, and launch into a wicked cannonball into the pool. I can see a wry smile on my roommate's face but nothing else was said about my choice of attire. We go on in the pool and a few minutes later she announces that she's tired and is going to bed. We stay out late including more beers and laughs in the hot tub while the girlfriend was asleep at our place.I (M19) work as a cashier in a gas station in Miami Gardens, Florida. Naturally, the people that come into the store tend to be on the crazier side. 

The store had a line of maybe 7 people. Now, at this point, i had the “register closed” sign up and i was stocking the vaporizers and accessories on the shelves behind the counter. 

My coworker was handling the customers in line. I turn when i hear the door opening. Another lady walks in without a mask on. I politely ask, “Excuse me, miss, do you have a mask that you could put on?” She scoffed at me and rolled her eyes as she dug in her purse for a minute or two. Finally she pulls out a ratty little mask with only one functional strap and holds it to her face while she’s waiting in the line. 

Well, apparently she couldn’t do that for very long. She comes to the front of the line ranting and raving about how the line is too long and that we shouldn’t be keeping a valued regular customer waiting. (I’ve been working here for 4 months and i’ve never seen her, i’m fairly confident i know all the regulars) I tell her that there are other things that my manager left for me to do before the end of closing and that i have to get them done. 

She didn’t seem to like that all. “I DEMAND that you open your register RIGHT NOW” Okay, you got it, lady. I moved the sign and then i turned back to her. “Do me a favor and stand a little bit to your right” Surprisingly, she complied, albeit with her arms crossed and what i can only assume was an angry gaze firing through her mask.

Cue the malicious compliance.

“Next customer” i yell out into the store. It dawns on her what i’m doing but the next customer shoots up in front of the counter before she can even fully process it. I go about this transaction as normal, despite the fact that this lady is yelling at me at the top of her lungs (no longer holding the mask to her face, mind you). 

I finish up with the other customer and I turn to her. She tries to yell over me so i raise my voice a bit and try to be as stern as possible. I tell her “Just because my register is open now, doesn’t entitle you to skip all the other people in this line who also have lives, and jobs and other responsibilities. Get to the back of the line, and be respectful or i have no choice but to have you removed from the store. (We don’t have security but we’re 2 blocks away from a police station and one of the cool ass officers who comes into the store gave me their personal number to use just in case we have any issues.)

The lady harrumphs loudly and walks dejectedly to the spot in the line she had before she left. In the amount of time it took for the rest of the story to occur, more people had gotten in the line. “I said the back of the line” i told her pointedly. She dropped her shoulders and walked to the back like a toddler. 

People, man.I worked for his small company for 6 weeks at the end of 2020 (it was landscape architecture). He sacked me with no real explanation when I was off sick with covid. I have undiagnosed (highly suspected) ADHD so I wasn't massively suprised (it affects my performance). But I was suprised by the timing and the fact it was via email. I asked for more clarity. I was never rude to him. I just told him I wish he'd called me so I could get some feedback.

He got really mad and proceeded to write a long list of my (over-exaggerated and some false) shortcomings e.g. too slow, distracted (stuff he never mentioned at the time). He then said 'if you want to take legal action against me, let me know'. I didn't. I left it and moved on.

Fast forward to today. He just called my mobile from a private number asking how I was. I was taken aback as we have had no communication since. He said 'someone has put in a report I'm using unlicensed software, was it you? Because I know we left on bad terms'. I said I've no idea what you're talking about. He made it seem I was devastated he sacked me (lol) and would have good reason to report him. No matter what I said he was convinced it was me. He even accused my dad who works in IT.

I didn't even know he was using unlicensed software. I said 'I feel like you're unfairly accusing me here' he raised his voice and shouted 'WHY DO YOU ALWAYS PLAY THE VICTIM, STOP PLAYING THE VICTIM! (probably in reference to the fact I questioned the way he sacked me). It sounded so rehearsed I honestly had to hold back laughter. Then he  said 'I'm not *accusing* you, but did you do it?' (Lmao).


Looking back I believe it was unlicensed. We only ever used the student version of autodesk (which is illegal when you're running a business). This combined with his accusation tells me he is infact breaking the law..

I was so pissed off by his accusation I reported him to both autodesk and the BSA. He'll have to run an audit and likely face a huge fine. He thinks I did it either way so what harm can one more report do? ;)

EDIT: for all you sad trolls, I didn't complain *because* he sacked me. I just questioned the *way* he did it. A simple phone call would have been better than an email. When you're fired you have a right to ask why and that's easier to do in conversation (best in person). I literally didn't have a problem when he sent a list of my shortcomings. I just accepted it and moved on. I also take full accountability for it, the ADHD played a part but I'm still to blame for losing the job. Not the ADHD.

At no point did I ever say I shouldn't have been sacked. If you actually bothered to read the whole story you wouldn't be making that assumption. I was just pissed he pointed the finger at me for the report. Also I love this mentality that because I'm a graduate I'm a little bitch and bosses can never be in the wrong. You've clearly never had a job to not know that. Now fuck off.

Also, my dad does not work there. Like I already said he is a software engineer, not a landscape architect. So stop telling me I'm 'happy to put him out of work'.

In regards to the ADHD, I didn't know I had it until recently. But it makes sense in hindsight. Especially considering the reasons he fired me are all ADHD symptoms. Although I haven't been officially diagnosed (awaiting) my doctor highly suspects I have it. Thank you to everyone who has offered me advice :)So, this is a little one, but it still fullfilled me with satisfaction.

During my last semester of my bachelor degree I already applied for the masters degree at the same university. So I go through the normal application process and get accepted (yay!), but as I didn't have my bachelor degree at that point, I had to produce a certified copy of my degree as soon as I could. Yes, I had to give a certified copy of my bachelors degree to the university who issued that degree in the first place. And no, these were not different deparments. It was all done by one (!) lady in the examination office!

But whatever, weird bureaucracy is weird. And BOY was it annoying at that university. Because all students of my faculty had to got through one lady. And I think she just hated to do anything. Like, seriously, she was so annoyed when you showed up at her office to just do anything. When I turned in my bachelor thesis, she straight up said that she is so fucking annoyed that all the students turn their thesis in at her office. Well, we don't have another choice?? There is seriously not other way to turn your thesis in. And don't ever think about asking her anything...

So, I am already looking forward to picking up my bachelors degree (no we don't have a fancy celebration). Normally you would get an e-mail when your degree is ready, but as she fucking hates our guts, you just have to guess when it is ready. We don't get an e-mail. Two weeks after your last grade is put in the system, it is probably ready. So, I did just that. I show up at her office and horay my degreen is ready.

Lady: "Here." (without even looking at me)

Me: "Thank you, I need a certified copy of that."

Lady: (really annoyed): "Excuse me, WHAT?"

Me: "I need a certified copy. Could you please copy it and certify that it is a copy of the original?"

Lady: "I know what a certified copy is! You can get that at the town hall."

Me: "I know, but I can also get it here. I know for a fact that you have to give me one if I request it."

(5-second staring contest ensues)

Lady: "\*sigh\* FINE!"

She takes my degree back, turns around, copies it and signs that it is a certified copy.

Lady: (hands me the degree and copy) "HERE!"

Me: "Thank you. Now I would like to give you a certified copy of my bachelor degree for my application for the masters degree. (I hand her back the certified copy)."

Lady: "ARE YOU SERIOUS?"

Me: "Yes, I thought if I am already here, I could turn that in as well. So I don't have to come back again."

(Another 5-second staring contest)

Lady just takes the copy out of my hand and turns around. And with that, I lef with the biggest grin on my face.

&#x200B;

What did she expect? That I got to the town hall (15 Minute ride), wait there for probably 1-2 hours, get a certified copy that would cost me 13 Euros (at uni one was for free) and then come  back another day? HELL NO! Especially because she had the weirdest office hours ever. It was something like 2 days a week for 1,5 hours in the morning and one day for 1,5 hours in the afternonn. So I probably would have waited days to turn that in.

But her face when I asked for a certified copy was just glorious.

&#x200B;

EDIT: Ok, this blew up way more than I thought. I am glad to hear that I am not the only one experiencing it. And yes, this happened in Germany. But I can't tell the university without maybe getting in trouble. Also, thank you for the Gold, Stranger! :)I've worked in bars for years and this has to be one of the best "f\*\*\* yeah!" moments of my time.

I worked with this guy who was always on it. Super smart, never lost for words, very funny and genuinely one of the most professional bartenders I've worked with.  This was an exceptional night.  We worked 2 to a station on really busy nights (like 3/4 deep kinda night) so I had a front row seat to this gem:

Greasy douchebag is waiting in front of our station with his elbow on the bar not facing us.  Getting a little annoyed that he is blocking people getting served, Sam taps him on the arm, "Hey, man!  You want anything?" 

"In a sec, mate." as he shoos him off and continues greasing on this drunk girl.

Starting to change his attitude, Sam quips back  "You are blocking people from the bar, man.  Shit or get off the pot!"  (oooo...  I start to slow down.  Where's this going??)

Greasy douche face screws up and looks Sam up and down.   
"Gimme a Coke" he barks with no manners.

Sam whips a glass behind his back and catches it in his left hand, ice in the glass, glass on the bar and throws a straw in the air as he pours Coke from the soda gun.  

"$2.50 thanks" as Sam spins around an enters it into the till.

Douche is staring at the drink.....   "What is this?"

"A Coke... as you asked." Sam said with impatience and vex.

"That is not what I asked for..."  he responded.   "... If I wanted ice, I would have asked for ice!" pushing the glass back at Sam.

Sam picks up the glass  with both hands and did something that I was not expecting.  **He apologised!** 

"You are so right!  I am so sorry!  How stupid of me!  Let me fix that for you."

Sam grabs the soda gun, pours Coke all over the bar counter.  The douche jerks his arm away, not because he notices it, but because his shirt getting wet.  His anger, palpable.

"If you wanted a fucking glass, you would have asked for one!"  Sam spouts as he throws a straw in the puddle, turns his back, walks off and flips the bird.

&#x200B;

My hero\[Edits at the bottom.\]

This happened to me, circa 2004. Warning: This story is NOT funny. Malicious Compliance of a different color. Changed my life for the better. Still gives me chills.

\-\-\-

Working McDonalds Drive\-Thru. No speaker. Two order windows and a third pickup window. Charles is working Window 1. I'm working Window 2. Charles is black, ripped, tall, huge, has prison tats all down his arms, somewhere between half an ounce or two of fat on his body. Picture Terry Crews with darker skin and black tats to the wrists. Charles is equal parts charming, soft\-spoken, humble, and ambitious. He knew where he had been and was determined to change his life. Probably one of the best men I'll have ever met.

Enter Green Minivan...

We had both taken orders at the same time and mine was long gone. Charles' order was taking FOREVER. Probably 4 minutes just taking the order before payment. I come over to check on Charles. Before I get close I notice he's blocking the frame of the window so I can't hear anything. It's an awkward position for him and blatantly obvious. He moves his hand out to me out of sight of the van and gives me the stop sign. "Back off." Got it. Time passes. Manager on duty comes out to check the issue. He waves her off. She protests, I tell her to wait and see. Something is deeply wrong.

Suddenly, Charles points the van down to the other window and LEAPS into action. Slams the window, shoves past us without a word, and races to the third window. Manager and I look at each other, check for other cars \(none\), then follow at a distance. Manager had been running the order but Charles took over and personally handled every part of the order with the speed of a madman and quality of a 5\-star restaurant. He grabs a new batch of fries. He has the cook triple check each burger. He breaks a cardinal rule of the store and shows the van all the kids' meal toys we have for personal preference. Drinks and condiments are handed out and Charles gives them a genuine smile and enthusiastically thanks them for being customers. "Have a great night. We'll see you soon."

\-\-\-

Charles waits until they are out of sight before returning from the window and visibly shaken, walks back to his register. Manager starts to fuss about an explanation she's owed but Charles just says he can't yet. His legendary zen calm is severely damaged. After a few minutes to get a drink, wipe the sweat off his face and compose himself he opens up. Van had rolled up. Charles had greeted them with the usual: "Welcome to McDonalds, what can I get for you this evening?" and his winning smile. White father driving waits for Charles to finish and with a loud sneer had turned to the wife and for all to hear said: "You order, Hun. I don't talk to N\*\*\*\*\*s!"

Wife turns to the two young kids, probably 8 and 10. Impressionable. Learning. Watching. They had locked eyes on Charles. They'd seen his tats. They'd listened to the hateful otherizing of 'those people' from birth. Charles decided that he had it within him to reach for something better. Father be damned, he's long gone. Charles decided that he had a message for those boys. The wife patiently and sheepishly took the excrutiatingly and needlessly complicated order from the father and then had to speak past him to Charles. Same for the kids. Light mustard. Three pickles. Etc. Perfectionism.

Charles reached down inside himself for something that neither I nor the manager possessed and he gave the wife a genuine smile as he whipped out the order. The father knew he had been served a dish he thought impossible to serve. It was served with kindness and compassion and a compliance that defied everything he'd told them about 'those people.'

\-\-\-

The kids both waved to Charles from the back of the van as the father pulled away. They liked their new friend.

\-\-\-

\[Edit: \-Wow. I'm deeply honored at the responses this got. I was thinking a few hundred might see it and say it was neat.

\-Thank you for the gold. I'm honored to be a witness to what Charles did and to honor his story.

\-It really happened sometime between 2002 and 2004 in Arlington, Texas. The dates are fuzzy because I was a dorky college kid \(17\-18ish\) and was dealing with lots of other issues at the time.

\-Here's a Google StreetView from 2008 that shows the store as it was. The layout was weird. Window 1, Charles' register for ordering, was facing West. Window 2, dorky college me's register, further down the curve of the building facing SouthWest. Window 3, pickup food and drinks facing South. [https://goo.gl/maps/pA4aGK8oW272](https://goo.gl/maps/pA4aGK8oW272)

\-For those that have asked what makes this MaliciousCompliance, I've had \~15 years to think through it all:

1. The stated intent was for Charles to be forced to serve them in a degrading and humiliating manner. The spirit of the order was goading and baiting Charles with an impossible task. Racist, Asshole Father \(RAF\) wanted Charles to slam the window in his face. Simply DOING HIS JOB was a slap in the face of the request. Ergo, Malicious Compliance.
2. RAF had thought he was clever by making his reprehensible statement, but what he'd also done was write a check that his wife was forced to cash. RAF wouldn't dare sully himself by deigning to speak with one of Them, but he'd ordered his wife to do his dirty work. By taking the order, Charles was humiliating RAF and allowing RAF's demand to debase his own wife in front of him. By dragging the order out 'to make sure we get it right' he made the wife add insult to injury by repeating things from RAF to her to Charles and then back again.
3. In my mind's eye, I can picture Charles staring very intently at a sweaty, greasy RAF as Charles holds his hands out waiting for payment. I can imagine Charles gently holding her hand mere inches from RAF's face and then placing the change back in hers. You won't talk to me, therefore you'll have to watch as I touch your wife with my hands, right in front of your children.
4. The last part of the order was also the most crucial. If any part of it had been less than perfect, the magic would've been lost. Charles made sure that nobody else handled anything for them. He was responsible for EVERYTHING being perfect. That's why he hustled. The order was made excellent by Charles doing all the work. You hate black people, yet every bite of this meal is going to be the best meal you've ever had here because I MADE IT BETTER.
5. The RAF drove off with his tail so tucked it must've hurt. His wife had been dragged through the mud by his own demands, some black guy had made friends of his own children, and the coals from Charles' fire had been heaped onto his head, again, all in front of his own family because of his idea of being snarky or funny and racist.

\-I wish I knew where Charles was or what happened to him. I love the idea of seeing where those boys went and what impact he had on their terrible childhoods. This is Reddit though. Arlington, Texas, 2002\-2004, Charles from McDonalds on Matlock and Sublett.\]

\[Edit 2: I mentioned Charles explaining to the Manager, Payal, what had actually happened in a comment and included it here for closure. \-I left out the manager's reaction afterwards. She freaked out on him and demanded to know why he did that when she was supposed to slam the window in the dad's face. He was still cooling off with a drink but stood up to his full height and stared her down. He's like 6'3, she was 4'11 and suddenly felt her size. That's when he explained that what he did wasn't for Charles, her, me, the dad, or even 'that poor woman he's got speaking for him." It was for the boys in the back and ending ignorance with him. "If I had responded with anger, I'd have proved him right and he could turn to them and say 'see? They're nothing but angry N\*\*\*\*s.' I gave them a message. I might be the first black man to ever show them something better." \(Severely paraphrased from 14\-15 years ago but that whole thing is seared into me.\)\]I have a sweet snowblower and I love to help out my neighbors by doing the whole block. I'm that guy.

After a moderate snow a few years (6") my neighbor told me that he's 'very sensitive to noise' and not to snowblow in front of his house.

So, later that same winter we got 17". I got every house on the block front and back except for his. Even better he was out of town, the weather warmed slightly for an afternoon then dropped again so his 17" of snow became a wall to wall glacier.

I live in Wisconsin. This is how we entertain ourselves in the winter.

EDIT: Wow. Thought I was just sharing a little story. Thanks for all the interest. Heres a little more.

1) He was not medically sensitive to sound. If he was he would have said so and I would have respected that. I often saw him outside listening to the brewers on a loud radio as he did yard work (with municipal trucks and ambulances etc rolling by.) Also, it was late morning


This is a guy who returned a plate of cookies because he was upset that we didnt know that he thinks sugar is evil. He yelled at kids for chalk drawings on the sidewalk. Total dick.

2) We didnt speak often and he never mentioned the ice wall. I do not have any photos ... unfortunately. It was hilarious. Even sat on the edge of it and had a beer with my other neighbor!

3) He moved to Iowa a year or so later. Hows this for passive aggressive? Thank god he moved because Iowa might be just nice enough to handle him.

Is it malicious compliance, just malicious, or just compliance? I guess that's up to you.

xoxoAnother post on here reminded me of this story, that actually happened to my sister. We’ll call her Amanda. 
A few years ago, there was a big sporting event my family all wanted to get together and watch. We decided to all get together in my sister’s house to watch it. She needed to upgrade her TV package to include more sports channels, which she was able to do online, on the TV providers website. Great.
We had a great day, watched the big event and ate and drank far too much. The issues started when my sister went to cancel the subscription, so as to not keep paying the higher rate for future months. Apparently, while you can upgrade your package and give the company more money online, removing the package was much more difficult, of course. They said the only way to cancel the package was over the phone.

My sister is deaf.

So needless to say, this was an issue. My sister had been emailing and complaining to no avail. At the time this happened, my brother was temporarily staying with my sister, and he called the company for her. The exchange apparently went like this (I am relaying what my sister and brother told me)

Brother: ‘Hi, I need to cancel the subscription to ExtraSports for Amanda Secondname.

Woman: ‘I will need to speak with Amanda.’

Brother: ‘My sister is deaf, she can’t speak with you over the phone.’

Woman: ‘There’s nothing I can do, I have to speak with the account holder if you want to cancel your subscription.’ 

Brother: ‘You need to speak with a deaf person on the phone.’

Woman: ‘Yes.’

Brother: ‘... and you don’t see anything wrong with your current system?’

Woman: ‘All changes have to be done by the account holder.’

Brother: ‘Yes exactly, and the only reason this was set up was because she was able to make changes online. You’re saying she can’t *reverse* the changes.’

Woman: ‘All I can tell you is I have to speak with Amanda.’

At this point my brother was telling my sister what was being said, and they came up with the perfect solution.

Brother: ‘Ok, one second................. This is Amanda’

My brother continued speaking, and it’s worth noting he has quite a deep, husky voice. 

Woman: ‘...’

Brother: ‘I need to cancel my sports subscription’

Woman: ‘I think you’re the person I was just speaking to’

Brother: ‘No, I’m Amanda. You said you needed to speak with me?’

Woman: ‘I thought you were deaf’

Brother: ‘And yet you insisted on speaking with me on the phone. So here I am. Please cancel my subscription, I have all the information you need to verify my identity.’

The subscription got cancelled.My first job was waitressing at a 50s diner style burger-joint. I think I was about 16? It was a sweet gig. My coworkers were generally nice, the customers were a mixed bag. Though we did have one homeless guy that would come in and do our food challenge weekly for a free meal. He was cool.
 
Anyways, to the story at hand, I had a family come in. If I remember correctly it was the tradition dad, mom, two kids. It was lunch rush and basically all the tables and the bar were filled. So, I’m taking their order and the dad asks for a burger. 
 
> Me: “What would you like on that burger?” 
 
> Dad: “everything” 
 
> Me: “Well we have a lot of options”  
 
I gesture to the menu section containing the topping choices. The dad does a once over (clearly not long enough to read) looks back at me and states. 
 
> Dad: “Everything.”  
 
At this point, I should note we had a bunch of choices. Looking at the restaurants menu they currently have;

- Mustard   
 

-  Onions 
 

- Slaw 
 

- Chili 
 

- Mayo 
 

- Ketchup 
 

- Lettuce 
 

- Tomatoes 
 

- Pickles 
 

- Grilled Jalapeños 
 

- Grilled Mushrooms 
 

- Grilled Onions 
 

- Grilled Bell Peppers 
 



I feel like there was even more choices when I worked there. The place also had 4-5 cheese options. 
 
I ask the dad a few more times if he’s sure. Even tried to list the toppings. His wife even tried to explain the situation. I could tell he was getting agitated but I also knew he’s didnt know what “everything” meant. Eventually, I take his word for it and attempt to get the rest of his order.
 
> Me: “do you want cheese?”  
 
> Dad: “I said everything!” 
 
> Me: “Well we have 4-“ 
 
> Dad: “everything!” 
 
Yikes.  
 
*I want to point out he’s literally yelling here. Those exclamation points are not for emphasis*
 
Well I finish taking the tables order. On the ticket I remember specifically taking the time to meticulously write out every ingredient as clearly as I could. The tickets were small and each ingredient was denoted by an acronym so it was a challenge to fit “everything”. I also made sure to include every possible cheese.
 
I knew this monstrosity was going to be sent back. I knew it was an abomination. But I was determined to give that man what he asked for. The line cooks looked at me like “you sure?” With a simple nod, I pulled the trigger.  
 
I walked that burger out to the man with the biggest shit eating grin. It had to have been 2 pounds of sloppy, wet burger. The annoyance on his face would have been reward enough, but as predicted the father called my manager over and complained. 

My manager came to me fuming. Clearly had been chewed out by the man.
 
> “You know you have to ask the customers what they want on their burgers?!” 
 
> “I did. I-“ 
 
> “Well the man at table 11 said he didn’t ask for that.” 
 
Mind you I was still 16 at this point and timid. Still, I explained the situation. My managers demeanor change and he had a little smirk on his face. My manager asked me to follow him back to the table and grabbed a menu on the way.
 
> Manager: “Hi sir, I need some clarity. What exactly did you ask for on your burger?”
 
> Customer: “uh, everything but-“ 
 
My manager opened the menu on the table pointing to the topping options. 
 
> Manager: “Sir, this is everything. This is what’s on your burger. I’ll be happy to remake the burger to your specifications **if you can give them this time**, but we are very busy and it could take a while. Classiestrobin please take his order.” 
 
So I did. I can’t remember his actual order anymore, but it was definitely a more traditional burger. Probably took about 10 minutes to come out so his family was mostly done with their meal while he was beginning. We could’ve taken another burger off the line to make his, but why make a chill table wait?

  
 
______ 
 
Edit: thanks for the gold/silver guys! 
 
Also some people have been saying “why didn’t you give him the standard option?”  
 
1. This is /r/MaliciousCompliance I was maliciously complying 
 
B. My job didn’t have a standard. The menu is set up so the customer first chose the kind of burger they want, then the cheese they want, then the toppings.  
 
This is a newer menu that what was there when I worked there but it kinda explains it 
https://www.tripadvisor.com/LocationPhotoDirectLink-g59175-d12096365-i242780312-Hwy_55-Huntington_West_Virginia.html 
 
- if I were to guess what he wanted I probably would’ve given him lettuce tomato mayo ketchup mustard pickles ... someone commented saying mustard is basically a sin. Other people have commented that if they asked for an everything burger they’d want what I gave the dad. “Everything” doesn’t mean the same thing to everyone 
 
-The guy was yelling at a 16 year oldThe car accident was of the side impact variety and it was brutal. This was in the days before airbags and seatbelt laws. One second I'm driving and the next I'm halfway out the passenger window watching blood run off my head to pool in the glass of a previously closed window. Another second ticks by and I'm in the ER receiving thirteen crude stitches for eleven inches of wide open scalp. I lost more than two pints of blood and a large patch of hair. I also lost my favorite white fishnet t-shirt, but that's a separate tragedy.

That Friday of a Labor Day weekend was how my name shows up in the newspaper list of "Labor Day Weekend Accidents." Tuesday comes and I go to class at the local college. Being a teenager gave me the gift of immortality. There I was, fully ambulatory, just four days after a serious car accident. For the sake of propriety, I'm wearing a hat to cover the fresh injury. It was a whitePanama hat with a bright 80s style hatband. As this was 1983, everything was 80s style, but that's a separate tragedy.

Hobbling along, I make it to Sociology just as class was beginning. I take a seat at the back of class and settle in. 

The conversation went something like this:

"Excuse me? Could you remove your hat please?" The teacher had her own sense of propriety. My hat didn't fit with proper classroom attire. 

"I was in a car accident," I replied. 

Did she hear my words or was one of her rude students muttering another in a career-long list of excuses? Likely the latter was the case.

"Take the hat off. You cannot wear that in my class," indicated she was not happy with my hat. Not at all.

Well, okay then. 

Off comes my hat. Roughly a third of my hair had been shaved off. The wound was pink and puckered. The seam had a line of dried blood in it. The wound began an inch beyond my missing hairline and continued back, branching into a 'Y' shape. The surgeon's instructions were to keep the wound clean, dry, and unbandaged. Lucky for all in attendance, my mother had washed my scalp the previous day. She used the word "gore" at some point to describe what was washing off.

Imagine you're one of my classmates.  Whatever you would say at that point would be something I heard from my classmates and friends. 

"Ahhh, you can put your hat back on," said the teacher.

Not before a little malicious compliance, I won't.

"But I can't wear hats in class," I replied. "I mean, I can do it, but not if I'm breaking the rules."

"Please put your hat on." 

"Okay. If you insist," and the hat went back on my head.

My advice is not to engage in malicious compliance on the first day of class. Not in a course where the teacher gives essay questions. That was the only 'C' I received that semester, but that's a separate tragedy.A few years ago, I worked in an office with some pretty strange and crappy rules. One such rule was that while we could apply personal PTO (paid time off) for any reason, management needed a detailed summary of the reason before they would approve. This resulted in several instances of coworkers applying for PTO for things like funerals and birthdays and being told "the current project deadline is more important than your neices birthday" or "do you really need to attend your mother's cousin's funeral? That doesn't sound pressing." It was a really toxic system that resulted in some turnover from coworkers who were sick of being held hostage over PTO. 

Furthermore, both the department manager and the HR manager needed to sign off on the PTO request, which resulted in some frustrating situations where one approved, but the other did not. It did not help that the HR manager was a dick. Pretty much the only time you could expect to be approved was for court dates and important medical appointments. But you still needed to provide details-- even if it happened to be a very personal medical or legal situation. (This does not strike me as legal but, sadly, this isn't the first time I've run into this working in Texas.)

One more bit of context-- my department manager was also a jerk. Without going into too much detail, he was a power tripping sloth who liked to harass women (like me). Let's call him Jerk, and the HR manager Dick. We all hated both of them.

On to the MC...

I had an important appointment with my psychiatrist coming up. My meds for anxiety and PTSD were not cutting the mustard anymore and I was in a bad place mentally. I *needed* a med adjustment, so I took the soonest appointment available. Work would have to cope with a couple of hours without me.

I submitted my PTO request to Jerk and Dick for approval. Given the intensely personal nature the appointment, I left the details sparse. It was rejected. Both Jerk and Dick said in an email that I needed to give details about my appointment "in accordance with company policy." Jerk had the nerve to call me into his office and chide me over my "unacceptably terse" PTO request. "You know the rules, why would you waste my time with such a brief request, you know I can't approve this," etc. 

I was pissed. But as I stewed in my cubicle, it dawned on me that I could get back at Jerk and Dick merely by complying with their own rules. I formulated a plan...

I sent an email to Dick and cc'ed Jerk (always CYA folks.) I said are you SURE you need the details of my appointment? Are you POSITIVE? It's really personal. Both Dick and Jerk said yes, we need the details of your PTO circumstances, you know the rules. I replied that it's very private, are you SURE I need to talk about it? We sent some emails back and forth until I was sure I had a solid paper trail.

Then I decided, welp, if they really need my personal medical details, which I still think is illegal, but whatever, then I suppose I better give it to them!

I submitted a new PTO request with all the relevant information. That I was going to see my psychiatrist for an urgent appointment. I needed to be seen at the earliest possible time because I was having thoughts of hurting myself, because I have PTSD from being raped in foster care. I threw in some details about what my foster father did to me, how I went numb and used drugs to cope, how I was hospitalized as a teenager for a suicide attempt.

I also screenshotted and emailed my request to a few of the higher ups, saying my previous request was insufficient so I wanted to make sure I got it right this time. 

I submitted it. 

There were no snippy emails this time. Only "approved" appearing in green text to my request in the system maybe four minutes after I submitted it. 

I blissfully went about my day, happy to have my PTO. Curiously, neither Jerk nor Dick emerged from their offices.

The fallout:

When I showed up for work at 8 the following day, I was immediately called into the VP's office. One of the higher managers and a woman that I recognized from legal were also present. 

VP politely asked me to sit and kindly explain the "grotesque" email I had sent out yesterday. (He was a polite but rather... out of touch older gentleman.) So I made myself clear-- I needed PTO for a very personal doctors appointment, and my previous request was denied by both Jerk and Dick for being too brief, and Jerk even called me in his office to complain about my wasting his time. I didn't want to be rejected again so I made sure my request was as detailed as possible. I also passed it on to management to verify that the level of detail was up to snuff when it came to corporate guidelines. And yes, I do have PTSD, it's all true, and they can reference my ADA paperwork in HR for more information.

VP asked me a couple more brief questions. He then apologized for the hassle, said I was being credited some extra PTO for my trouble, and that the company would be "reviewing its approach" to the PTO approval process. I was then dismissed back to my desk.

I received written apologies from Jerk and Dick that very morning, hand delivered by a tense and rather petrified Jerk. I think legal put him up to it.

Both Jerk and Dick went out of their way to avoid me for the remainder of my time at the company, which was a blessing. The few times we were forced to interact, they spoke very quickly and looked desperate to end the conversation. I guess my PTO request was a little too intense for them. Whatever the case, it was the end of Jerks little power trips, at least with me personally.

Also that same morning-- we received a company wide email marked as important. There was a change in the PTO policy. Requests with regards to medical and other "sensitive" reasons no longer required detailed explanations, effective immediately.

Bonus: one of my friends in HR-- well not really a friend, but a woman who liked to discuss crocheting with me at the water cooler-- showed me an internal email from Dick to all HR staff: every PTO request from me personally was to be approved immediately and without question. I tested this later that summer by requesting a day off to watch Netflix. That's specifically what I put in the request field. (I planned on quitting soon so I was in a flippant mood.) It was approved immediately. I think they had me flagged in their system. Truth be told I could have probably taken a whole month off and gotten paid for it, but I didn't push my luck.

I left the company for a much more tolerable, less toxic, higher paying job about six months later.

And yes, my appointment went well and I'm doing better now. I started attending a trauma support group, met my SO, and I've even been able to reduce the dose of one of my meds. :)Not sure if it fits in here or there is a more suitable sub, but here goes.

I’m in the UK and was with friends at one of the main coffee shop brands. I won’t say which one but it’s similar to Costalot. It was a few days after Christmas last year (important for later).

When I was served by the barista, it was obvious i was going to have an ‘experience’. This guy acted haughtily and spoke to people with a sneer, and came across like he considered himself a prince amongst men. He had a long floppy fringe that he kept brushing out of his contempt-filled eyes every few seconds. He clearly didn’t want to be there or deal with the likes of me. Awkward for both of us. It was a two man team so a barista would take the order and make the drink. So he had to make whatever anyone ordered.

It was very early January, and the shop still has advertisements up for Christmas seasonal drinks. I’m a fan of uncommon flavoured coffee or hot chocolate and said shop was advertising a Black Forest Hot Chocolate. Black Forest is basically dark chocolate, black cherry and cream. I ordered one and the barista looked me up and down and sneered “that’s a Christmas drink”

Me - “Yes”

Barista - “It’s after Christmas”

Me - “Yes”

Barista, smirking - “So I can’t make you a Christmas drink”

Me - “But you’re advertising it and you’ve still got the ingredients open behind the counter”

This drink is basically a shot of the flavoured sauce, hot chocolate, and cream on top. It’s not that onerous or taxing to make compared to a normal hot chocolate. It’s literally a normal hot chocolate with a flavour syrup put in.

Barista, sighing and rolling his eyes “it’s not available right now”

I wondered if he was being a tool for some unknown superiority complex, was being lazy and didn’t want to make this beverage, or if there really was some directive. So I threw up a weather balloon question

Me - “ok fine. In that case, would i be able to buy a single shot of a flavoured syrup please? It says they are 35p on the board”

Barista, dismissively - “I don’t see why not”

Me - “can I order a shot of the black cherry syrup there, but in a medium sized takeaway cup?”

Barista tuts and silently turns, gets a shot of said syrup in a cup for me and contemptuously places it in front of me. “Anything else?” he sneers.

Cue my malicious compliance...

I slide cup back to him and say “can you make a medium hot chocolate in this cup for me please, and stir it well before you put the whipped cream on top?”

Barista grimaces and realises that I’ve followed his Instructions completely and still got myself a Black Forest hot chocolate.

I stand and watch him make it, which he does with the most reluctant and bitter energy imaginable.

For the record, it was pretty good.Many years ago (it's a joke leave me alone), I was a student studying computer science in the midwest. While most of my professors were okay, there was one that was notorious, let’s call him Dr J. Dr J was an old, effete, lazy professor with a thick south asian accent whom had been “teaching” for the better part of 30 years, and had fully embraced the typical semi retired lifestyle of the tenured professor. Showing up to office hours? Maybe. Showing up to help in a lab? Once, the whole semester. I estimated out of the 3.5 hours per week of lecture time, he was actually in the classroom for maybe half of it, and the time that he did spend in the classroom was a complete waste. He would just pass out packets at the beginning of class that contained numerous diagrams and handwritten notes that were indecipherable, and meander around the class pointing at various parts to groups of people working on them and mumble incoherently about how to solve it… I think. I never understood a word he said. He never followed his course syllabus or even answered emails. 

For anyone who’s taken an engineering course, especially an upper level one, this won’t sound too crazy. But here’s the kicker: he would fail, regularly, HALF the class, for a required upper level computer architecture course. This is exceptionally rare and completely unfair for a class at this level, especially at a State school that isn’t a research uni. Typically the interlopers have been weeded out by junior year, so while the rest of the classes are by no means a cakewalk, if you put forth an honest effort to learn the material you should be able to pass the class with flying colors. Not so with Dr J. Failing a class at the level of this course could be devastating to your degree path since it was a required course, Dr J was the only one to teach it, and it was only taught in fall. But Dr J couldn’t be bothered, despite the class average for his exams being something like 2/15, not that scores mattered because you could get the same score as someone on all the assignments and exams, but you’d fail the class for who the fuck knows why.

Here’s the malicious compliance: 

Lo and behold, I’m one of the 16 out of 31 students in the class that he failed that semester, and I failed having gotten very similar scores to a couple other students, but they passed. I went to Dr J’s office after the scores had been applied to our transcripts online to discuss the matter. Dr J wouldn’t have any of it, doesn’t matter that I had similar scores to other students that had passed, there’s **“many ways I grade my students and you failed. If you don’t like it, you’re free to appeal the grade but you won’t get it.”** The fact that the little shit was sitting there in his chair trying to bullshit me pissed me off so damn much I decided right then and there to fuck his shit up.  

My school has a very well laid out and reasonable grade appeal policy, with many avenues toward getting the appeal approved. I knew that through some of the snide jokes they made, my other professors did not take kindly to Dr J at all, so it wasn’t just the students that strongly disliked him. Well when you appeal a grade, the other profs in the department are the ones who get to decide whether or not you actually passed, given certain evidence. “It’s practically criminal, what he gets away with”, were the words of my faculty advisor.

Now my original plan was for me to just file an appeal and move on, because I knew I’d get it. But Dr J had poked the bear and now I was mad. So I reached out to everyone in the class, very easy since we all were on a Slack channel together, and set a meeting in a conference room in the library. I guess I underestimated how much everyone hated Dr J because everyone from the class showed up! I laid out my plan: EVERYONE file a grade appeal, even if you passed, if it’ll help your GPA. At my school, a grade appeal will replace your letter grade with a “satisfactory”, which means you get credit for the course without a grade that affects your GPA. I had enough appeal forms pre printed before the meeting so that everyone could fill it out together. It was the happiest I’d ever seen that group of people the entire semester.  

I think the final count of appeals was something like 22, everyone who’s GPA could be improved with a “satisfactory” applied for one. You should’ve seen the look on the department chair’s face when we showed up with a stack of appeals. No department in the history of the school had ever had that many appeals/complaints for a single course, let alone for a single professor. I know this because the dean sat us all down and said so. There were so many appeals they had to bring us into the faculty panel in groups of 3-4, not that it mattered, the whole thing was a formality as the die was cast.  

Two weeks later we heard the news: everyone, literally everyone, had gotten their appeal approved. Dr J was given a formal warning by the uni and had most of his courses taken away and are now taught by other people. He still holds onto the computer architecture course and some freshman intro classes, but from what I’ve heard he hasn’t failed anyone for a looooong time. So if you’re a lazy prick of a professor, be warned: you might get someone like me for a student, who foments an insurrection in your class and turns your job upside down.

Tl;Dr - Prof gave me a bullshit grade. Made me mad, got the whole class to appeal their grades. All get approved, prof gets formally reprimanded and most of his classes taken away, no longer fails students arbitrarily.TL:DR neighbor/Karen takes advantage of our company with outrageous claims, then uses us as a reference.  We get our point across with creative wording.   Karen continues to use us a reference and was clueless we protected fellow business owners

&#x200B;

Let's call her Karen, just because it fits.   She came in and applied for a job and when I looked at her resume and application, I realized she knew some of my old neighborhood friends and schoolmates.   She interviewed well, so I gave her a job.  Told her to be in Monday at 9:00 a.m.

Monday morning, she is not in, she no calls, no shows.  Tuesday, no call no show, I had now written her off.  Wednesday, she shows up about noon.   Claims she was in her basement Sunday night and her brother was working out and he accidentally knocked her out during his intense workout.  She claimed her doctor told her she had a concussion and she should stay home for a couple days.  She had no doctor's note, no marks on her head, but thinking her story was so off the wall it could almost be true, I  let her come to work the next day.

She worked Thursday and Friday.  We paid at the end of every week and I gave her a check Friday,  I also did NOT deduct the days she missed.   She came to me and asked about the full paycheck.  I told her we were a family business and realized people had lives outside work.  He tried to make sure people knew they were appreciated and tried to take care of our people.   She teared up and thanked me and said we could count on her.

She worked the full next week, did OK.  She seemed to fit in.  Seemed.

The third week, she showed up Monday, but Tuesday was another no show no call.  We did not hear from her for over TWO WEEKS!   When she finally showed up, her story was the stuff of legends.  She claimed her husband had forged divorce papers a couple years previous.  Thinking she was divorced, she moved back into her parent's house.  She claimed her "ex-husband" was at her parents' house when she got home the last night she worked.   

He told her he made up the divorce and the paperwork was phony so they were still married and he wanted to get back together.  She claims she refused and he kidnapped her.  She said it took her until a couple days ago to get away from him.  She wanted to come into work the next day.

She did not call the police and he wasn't arrested.   There was nothing in the papers or on the news about any of this.  She was not hurt (thank God!)   She asked if I believed her.  I did not, but told her that I really needed someone I could count on coming in reliably everyday.   I gave her a paycheck for one week (she had worked 1 day) and told her I wished her good luck.

I had already replaced her, and her replacement was one of the best employees we ever had.

Here's the malicious compliance. 

The next month, I come in to a phone message that someone from XXX Company called for a reference for Karen.  As my secretary is handing me the message, she's laughing at the look on my face.   I asked if she was kidding, she said she was not.   She said she got a call from a man saying he was the owner of a company in the area and he asked about Karen.  Then my secretary asked if she could listen in on the call.   (she was a pistol)   She then goes and gets my partner and tells him I am going to call and give Karen a reference.  Now he is in my office laughing too!

I call the guy and we make some small talk.   I tell him what we do and he tells me what he wants Karen to do for him.   I tactfully avoided answering any of his questions about Karen directly.   I think he was beginning to suspect something.

Remember folks, employers can get in a ton of trouble for bad references.

He finally asked my opinion of Karen, and what I said was, "IF you can get Karen to work for you, you will be VERY lucky".    He heard what I said and how I said it.   He repeated that back to me exactly as I said it.   All my words were the right ones, it was my tone and intonation that got my point across.   He thanked me and hung up.  


Karen comes into the office a couple days later, she looks mad but is trying to be pleasant.   She told me she is having trouble finding a job and mentioned she has used me as a reference.  She wanted to know if anyone from XXX Company has called me (she knew they did).  She told me she really want the job at XXX Company.    I told her I had been called and that I told the guy he'd lucky to get her to work for him.

My secretary confirmed that's what I told him, she told him she was right next during the whole conversation.

Karen smiled and thanked me and headed to the door,  She said she wondered why she was having so much trouble getting a job.   She asked if she could continue to use me for a reference and I told her absolutely!   I also told her I'd tell everyone the same thing, that "any employer would be lucky if they can get you to work for them."

She walked away smiling, happy and clueless.http://imgur.com/a/m7gxQBd

My roommate and I attend a university where we are given 250 pages *per semester* to print as part of our attendance. Well, we hardly used it since we have our own printer, so we went over to the print room and asked them if we could have our ~500 pages. They said that the pages were only for printing and not a quantity of letter paper we were entitled to. So we said okay.

We then went to 2 of the computers in the print room, opened word to a blank document, and printed our pages out. We then walked out with that thick stack of paper without being noticed. There has not been, and there will likely not be any fallout.

Edit: My roommate is u/jpbthehuman
Edit 2: added *per semester*Back in my ware house days there were occasions where the customer service Manager (who is still a great friend of mine even to this day ) would ask for myself and a few ware house workers to help him re-deliver and re-install a repaired / re ordered sofa for a customer.

The day of the re delivery the Customer Service Manager (CSM) pulls me aside and warns me that this lady is extremely difficult and aggressive.

In this instance she ordered a leather sofa in a high quality leather, paid top dollar , waited for 22 weeks and on delivery decided she didn’t like the colour.

Now normally the company doesn’t do re orders for change of mind when it comes to choosing the wrong colour... but this lady made such a fuss and complained so much that the General Manager made an exception.

We get to the home and our contract driver is just unloading.

The customer has chosen a MASSIVE three seater recliner with a metal frame and bracket on the bottom.

Normally with the metal bracket comes special plastic stoppers that go on each foot of the frame and each edge of the metal bracket so that no damage will occur to a customers floor.

As we carefully navigate the sofa into this ladies lounge room she starts bitching loudly that us warehouse workers are-

- dirty
- idiots
- lazy
- too slow

We begin to unwrap the lounge and this lady is getting impatient. She’s bitching to the CSM

“How much longer is this going to take?”

CSM re-assures her that we are taking our time to ensure that the sofa is unwrapped and in perfect condition.

What we also note is this lady has light wooden floor boards... so I immediately move to start placing the stoppers on the floor.

This woman starts shrieking -

“Why is he touching my lounge? Is he BREAKING IT?”

Me - “ no miss I’m just—“

Woman “don’t talk to me... get your filthy hands away from my lounge “

Me “I just need a few seconds to put these rubber —“

Woman “ put my lounge down... NOW!! Or I’m calling the manager “

I shoot a look to the CSM and he just shrugs. 

We place the sofa directly onto the floor boards and we can already hear a scrape.

CSM hands the lady his paper work . She signs off on a successful redelivery, and signs off that we have assembled the lounge as required and placed it where she wants.

This lady smirks at us and plonks herself down onto the lounge. There’s a scraping sound as the metal frame digs into the wooden floor boards.

We grab all the plastic packaging and make our way back
To the store.

Guess what was waiting for us??

A customer complaint... according to this lady we damaged her very expensive floor boards .

CSM shows where this customer signed off on a successful re-delivery and that we assembled and placed the lounge to her satisfaction.

She got exactly what she asked for 
 This happened to me about two years ago but a former coworker just reminded me about it and I'm pretty sure it counts as MC. I'll try and keep it short but it is a little long.

I used to be a service manager at one of the biggest locations of a popular Mexican grill. I won't say which but guac was $1.95 extra and we were required to ask everyone if they were okay paying that price.
One Sunday morning (our second busiest shift of the week) two of my line people called out so we were struggling to get all of our prep done before opening at 11.

We are just wrapping up when in comes Karen 10 minutes before opening through the side door marked EMPLOYEES ONLY with 15 preteen girls in tow. My cook recognizes her as she regularly comes in during the dinner shift and is extremely abusive and cruel to all the Latino workers. Karen tells me they can order whatever they want, THROWS her credit card at me and goes to sit down at a table and diddle on her phone. Now I can't ring up her order without her standing there because of the company rules and I am 30 weeks pregnant and just want to take my break. I prego waddled over to Karen's table to try and inform her of that when she literally flicks her hand at me to dismiss me. Not only have I been at the store since 7 and done two different people's jobs on top of my own, I have my son's head grinding against my pelvic bones and kicking me like crazy. I am in no mood. 

When I try to tell her again, she looks at me with what I can only describe as seething contempt and says "What part of they can get whatever they want did you not understand? I don't care what you charge me as long as I get a receipt. Don't interrupt me again or I'll get your fat ass fired." Now I never cry but that almost got me. Motherhood is awesome but pregnancy suuucks. I finally manage to pick my jaw off the ground and stammer "alright, ma'am, I'll ring up whatever they want and bring you a receipt." 

The girls were really nice and most of them ordered double meat and they all got a bottled water and chips and guac. Every. Last. One. My cashier and I are just vibrating with glee as we ring them up and watch the bill climb to like $250. I brought the bill to Karen and was pretty excited when she didn't immediately check it. I made my own food and told the cook to come get me when the show starts. 

I'm halfway done eating when I see him waving to the camera, howling with laughter so I head up. Karen is foaming at the mouth SCREAMING for the manager and when she sees that that manager is me, she literally grinds her teeth and slaps her receipt on the table. She manages to choke out the word "refund." The girls have all pretty much finished their food so I inform her that I won't be doing that because I would lose my job for giving away that much critical inventory (meat, guac, cheese) for free. Then I gently remind her that she told me twice that the could get anything as long as she got a receipt. She just keeps demanding a refund and calling me stupid and fat (again, pregnant). At this point, her screaming is holding up the very long line and customers are shouting at her to just leave. That's when she pushed me. F*cking hard.

My cashier caught me so I didn't fall down but two of our regulars, who are police, see it and immediately cuff her. In this state, any use of physical force against a pregnant woman is classified as aggravated battery or something like that. I felt bad for the kids and I was fine so I kept telling them I didn't want to press charges but they said that at that point it didn't matter because the woman had done it in front of on duty officers so she getting arrested. They had to call the kids parents to come get them because she was their CHURCH'S YOUTH LEADER and get statements. My GM came in and let me go home with a full day's pay. She tried to take the case to trial but they had video and like twenty witness statement so she ended up taking a couple years probation or something. All because I did exactly what she told me to.

Edit: TLDR; Entitled Karen gets a bill she didn't want, gets arrested for pushing a pregnant woman.I don’t know if this is necessarily an MC, but it happened to my Dad. He was one of the three partners at one of his former companies (about medium sized). One day, he and his company went to a company drinks. I don’t think it was exactly a company party, but it was more than an after-work drink at the pub. 

Anyway, the bar was serving aperitifs, and my dad asked for his without ice, as he hates ice tainting his drink. The landlord, who was behind the bar, refused, and said the ice was mandatory. So he served my Dad’s with ice. Dad accepted it, took the ice out, and laid it on the drain rack that goes under the beer draughts.

The landlord ordered him to leave.

My Dad was half expecting it, but asked him to repeat himself. The landlord once again told him to leave.

My Dad said “Okay,” and started to leave.

And his company all started to file out after him.

The landlord protested “No no, you don’t all have to leave. Only he has to leave.”

One of the other staffers said something along the lines of “Sorry mate. He’s the big boss. We all go where he goes.”

So they all left and went to another bar. 

They had made a reservation at the bar they were leaving, but they hadn’t put down any deposit for it, and hadn’t bought any drinks yet. The aperitifs had been complimentary, so the Landlord didn’t even get paid for those.

Edit: this is something that keeps getting flagged up, which is a valid point I didn’t explain properly. The drain racks my father put the ice on were on the counter between the bar and the customer. He didn’t reach across the bar.

Also, for clarity, “landlord” is what we call the guy who runs the establishment in the UK. Another word might be “publican,” although it wasn’t a pub in this case, it was a bar.The Background: This happened a few hours ago. I work at a large chain of pizza restaurants. Let's call it Pominos Dizza. Like most places, we get a few prank calls a week from pre teens. Usually it doesn't bother me and I'll go along with it because it gives me something to do when it's slow. But being a Friday night, we were busy and I wasn't having it. Me will be me, and K will be kid.

The events:

Me: Hi thanks for calling Pominos Dizza, how can I help you tonight?

K: *trying but not succeeding in holding in his laughter* Hey is Mr Wall there?

Me: Um no sir there isn't one that work here.

K: What about Mrs. Wall?

Me: Nope none of those either

K: Then how is your building standing up?!

K: *laughter from him and background*

This went on a couple more times with classics such as "can I place an order to your sisters house?" And the CLASSIC "is your refrigerator running? Then you better go get it!!!"

Finally I had had enough. I let the kids know I was done playing games.

Me: alright look it says here that your dad's name is *dads name* (we keep names and addresses of past customers and their orders in the computer for future orders just to speed up the process) If you don't stop this I'll give him a call and let him know what's been going on.

Usually this would stop the kids. I knew it did back in my earlier days of being a dumb kid. But some people just can't be bothered and have to push the envelope a bit too far.

K: I know you won't. Go ahead and call him.

Oh boy he didn't have to ask me twice. I hang up the phone and get back to work for a little bit, knowing that the kid will be camped at the phone to answer it for the next 15 minutes or so.

The compliance: I get back to work, free of prank calls from the kid. I should of left it there, having solved the problem, but hey the customer is always right and at Pominos Dizza we always give the customer what they want.

After the supper rush is done, around 45 minutes to an hour later I fulfill the request. I'm still me, D is dad.

Me: Hello this is u/kushlord666 from pominos, how are you doing tonight.

D: not too bad, what's the reason for the call?

Me: unfortunately, we've been getting a number of calls from this number. We're really busy and its pushing customers away because of the wait times. Can you please have a talk with who I assume is your son and ask him to knock it off?

D: Oh goodness I'm so sorry I'll have a chat with him and his buddies.

Me: Thank you so much and thanks for choosing pominos!

At this point I think the story is done. Kid will get a talking to, won't do it again and that'll be the end of it. Boy was I mistaken.

Around 30 minutes later a man and a chubby kid around 12 years old come into the store. I don't think much of it, thinking they're just getting a few slices for a snack. They come up to the counter and ask for u/kushlord666. 

Me: Yes I'm u/kushlord666

D: I think my son has something to say to you.

The kid is visibly nervous. He keeps looking around the store, won't look me in the eye.

K: I'm very sorry for calling you, I know you're busy and it won't happen again.

Then to further the awkward suffering of the kid who I kind of feel bad for at this point, the dad places an order for carry out, and sits in our small eatery section where the kid has to try and avoid eye contact with me for the next 20 minutes. Left me a good tip too.

At pominos dizza, the customer always gets what they want.

Tl;Dr: Kid prank calls my store while I'm busy, dares me to call his parents. I give him what he wants. Gets forced by angry father to come in and apologize and brood in awkward suffering as I make them their pizza, while I got the last laugh and a 50% tip.
 
I broke the dress code at my last firm because of shoes. 

I got called to the carpet for wearing black Sketchers to work, so I started coming in every day dressed to the nines. We're talking cuff links, high quality silk ties, gold face metal band watch, pocket squares, some of the finest bourbon wingtips you ever laid eyes on. I got tailored dress shirts and custom suits cut for fuck sake. It wasn't cheap.

I did this every day, while making sure to casually point out that the very managers who complained about me were wearing Keds in the office. 

This went on for a few months. The interns and staff started dressing like me. We started comparing notes on tie knots and pocket square folds. We got high and tight haircuts with straight razor shaves. We bought badger hair shaving brushes and eucalyptus shaving soap.

The partners started getting embarrassed as we were dressing considerably nicer than they cared to.

They had a big meeting and declared the entire dress code dead. Jeans, tshirts, flip flops. All fair game unless you had a client meeting.When I was in the fire academy, the women’s dress code said that hair had to be worn in a neat bun. I had layered, shoulder length hair so it was was difficult to keep it up neatly all day long. The shorter pieces would stick out of the bun, or fall out around my face, and my bangs weren’t long enough to pin back without using an entire bottle of hairspray. 

Most of my instructors were understanding, and said that as long as my hair was up and my mask could seal to my face they would consider me to be in dress code. But there was one instructor who said there was no excuse. “We’re a paramilitary type school, so dress code is extremely important.” She acknowledged that it wasn’t a safety issue, but told me I had to follow it anyway, and that doing my best wasn’t good enough. She wrote me up three times, and then called me in for a meeting to inform me that another write up for the same issue would get me expelled from the program. 

I looked into the dress code and saw that the men’s hair code was much more lenient. It just said that hair must not touch the collar of the shirt or the tops of the ears. 

So the night after that meeting I went to a hair place and told the stylist to do whatever she wanted to my hair as long as it fit those requirements. She was stoked and gave me a really cute pixie cut. 

The next day the same instructor tried to write me up, but since I was technically in dress code she couldn’t. 

The next semester there was a man with long hair who wore it in a bun instead of cutting it, and the following semester the dress code was rewritten to be gender neutral.When I was a senior in high school, I started working as a cashier at a grocery store. While this was not my first job, it was my first one where I was part of a union and learned about some of the pros and cons of unions (mostly pros like regular raises, breaks, holiday pay, etc.). We had a woman there who was basically our human resources person and we did not get along from even before I worked there. I will call her Sally.

I came in for my interview and Sally was not there and had left work for the day. I remember apologizing and saying, "I must have mixed up the days. Is there anyway you can find out which is the correct day for my interview?" but the manager on duty advised me that I was correct as they had checked the calendar in her office and she had written it down and so he, the front end supervisor, and the other manager who came in to start his shift all interviewed and hired me instead. I later heard from the group vine that she was working two locations and really wanted to be hired full time at a larger store which would have been a promotion for her but instead she was placed full time at our location only and didn't get promoted and that her missing my interview was the final nail in the coffin for her as this was just one of a long list of mistakes she made. She was always making excuses for why I couldn't put in to be transferred to another department when they were hiring people for those departments like bakery or deli and kept me as cashier even though it was lower pay. Even so, I came back to work there over my winter break for college (I had gone away to college instead of commuting) and also summer break.

Here is where my malicious compliance comes in: our union states that after a waiting period (I believe it was 3 months) we get "holiday pay" for working Sundays and holidays. (It was time and half). We also are entitled to a raise every 6 months and being away at college is not suppose to effect that since we join the union before leaving and come back on our breaks and still owe our dues during those times when are still part of the union but away at school. I got my first pay check stub for the summer and noticed I did not get my holiday for working that Sunday nor my raise! I spoke with a coworker who advised me to speak with the store manager (He was one of the ones that interviewed me and always looked after his staff) since we were between union reps at the time. He was a born problem solver and told me right away he can fix the payroll error for me and make sure that I got not only the proper wage from now on but that I would get the back for the time I should have gotten the raise but didn't. As far as the holiday pay though that had to be taken care of by Sally since she was in HR and he suggested we go see if she was free and speak with her.

She just spoke to the both of us in a condescending tone about how this was union policy that I had to start all over again with seniority and that I had to earn that holiday pay again by being there for 3 months. He pointed out, as did I, that I was getting this holiday before leaving for college and even over the winter break that I had worked but she just kept saying to me, "It's union policy."  My manager calmly tried to negotiate with her and get her to correct and even stated that other employees had not had to go through this. I finally just raised my hand to silence them both.

"Okay so you are saying that I can't get my holiday pay even though I was before I left to go back to college at the end of January, due to union policy, correct?" I asked.

"Yes," she said with a long dramatic sigh that was meant to say, "Like I have been telling you."

I nodded, grinned and stated, "But union policy also states that I don't have to work holidays or Sundays and that I can't be penalized for refusing to do so, correct?"

My manager grinned at me like he was very proud of me as he saw exactly where this was going.

"Well, um yes that is true," Sally said looking a bit nervous.

"Okay well then, here is the compromise: since union policy states that I can't get the holiday pay for working Sundays and holidays, for the rest of the summer, I will not work any Sundays or holidays and per union policy, I am allowed to do this," I said with a shrug.

She immediately starting laying on the charm about how I am such a "great worker" and that they "really need me to be there to help out with Sundays and holidays" but I pointed out that they had plenty of other employees who were getting the holiday pay that they count on and I would be glad to return to working holidays and Sundays once I got my holiday for doing so.

My manager commented that he and I needed to change the schedule and casually mentioned how this was going to be hard as he now had to take me off for next Sunday and Monday (as that Monday was Memorial day) and it was a Thursday but that the store would just have to make it work if they couldn't find anyone willing to come in.

Once she had left for the day he called me upstairs to his office to help with the schedule since I had to work so many days each week. I walked in to find him and another manager there grinning ear to ear and telling me how proud they were of me for how  I handled that situation.

On Memorial day and the Fourth of July,  I got a call asking if I can come in because they had other people call out sick who were scheduled. I just calmly explained that I was no longer working Sundays or holidays and that Sally could explain why. Before the end of the summer she found a new position and quit and the new hr person was much nicer. One of the first things she did was make sure I and a few other college students who had similar issues with the holiday got our holiday pay reinstated and when I requested about a transfer to another department she gladly asked around and had me put in the health and beauty aides department that same week.

Update: Wow now over 4k likes and all kinds of awards! Thanks!

&#x200B;Hey guys! I hope you all enjoy another lawyer story. Same disclaimer - I'm not your lawyer and none of this is legal advice (don't take legal advice from internet randos).

Client comes in with a seemingly simple auto collision. Client was hit, other driver got out and said something like "Ohmygod are you ok? I'm so sorry, I dropped my phone and reached to get it...". Client had a dashcam which recorded the whole thing including the admission of guilt. Easy client right? 

Turns out the admission was really important, because the type of accident didn't make a 'determination of fault' easy (imagine a rear end collision at a red light as an easy determination, but a collision at a four way stop sign as a hard determination). When the cops showed up, the police report found both drivers at fault *AND* did not mention any statements from the other driver.

But we have our admission and my client's damages were above the other guy's policy limit. So I send a demand to the insurance company for policy limits. Note that the insurance company has an obligation to negotiate in good faith, which becomes important later.

Lawyer from insurance reaches out and says (basically) - "Look, my client says they were driving safely, and the police report says shared fault." The initial offer is like 10 grand. I replied "Yeah but my client had a dashcam and it recorded your client admitting fault."

Its important to understand that this was before dashcams were common. It wasn't my first case with a dashcam, but it might have been my third or fourth. No mention of the dashcam was made on the police report.

Insurance attorney says (I *imagine* while twirling a dumb mustache) "Interesting, can you send me a copy of the video?" I say sure and send it over. He replies "I can't open this!" So I send him a link to vlc media player "It's a weird extension, and windows media player won't play it. But VLC will, just follow the installer instructions and it should play no problem."

He says "I'm not installing something to watch your alleged dash cam video. Send me a file I can play if you want me to consider it."

This makes me unhappy, but I tried again "It will take less than a few minutes to install, you can watch the video and listen to your client admit fault." He say "We are done here until you send something I can play."

*Cue malicious compliance music - Country Grammar*

*Start super cool montage of me going through other client files*

*Stop montage as I open a file and my face is bathed in a golden light radiating from an old memorex CD*

So I found a DIFFERENT dashcam video (which did not contain any sound) BUT it could be played with windows media player AND it was close enough to my current client's facts that if you weren't paying attention it could pass. Other attorney just asked for *a file* he could play, right?

I sent it over. He says "Wow no sound. Guess you're done buddy." So I sued. During discovery I sent a CD over which included the ORIGINAL video AND a copy of VLC. He must have ignored it because he didn't say anything about it.

During a pretrial motion hearing, I played the video for the judge. The judge might have heard the other lawyer's jaw hit his desk. The insurance attorney says "Your honor this is not the video he sent to me!" In my mind's eye I see the malicious compliance death star preparing to fire.

"Judge I thought he might say that. Here is a copy of our emails where I described the video, provided the video, and sent instructions on how to play it. Here is a copy of the CD I sent with discovery which ALSO has the video and a copy of VLC. Finally, here is a copy of the unrelated video which I sent to fulfill his request of *something he could play*".

Other attorney asks for a recess. Because he refused the initial demand of policy limits I told him I would argue he did not negotiate in good faith. We settled for well above policy limits. Client was very happy.

P.S. don't go to law school #notworth.So recently a customer at my work told us that they were no longer going to use us to manufacture their products for them - we felt this was quite out of the blue, as they had used us for 40 years without any problems. We got over this, however they then asked us to give them the recipe for their product so they could take it to a competitor to make. 

Now for context, when they started using us in the 70/80’s the provided us with their recipe to make their product the right texture, firmness, and look just how they wanted it. Over the years we’ve spent time and money finding new chemicals when certain ones have been discontinued, altering the mix of chemicals so that the products are still how they want them, and developing the recipe further to make it more efficient and provide better results. The way we were making their products now is completely different to how we were at the start. 

Because of this, my boss was unhappy with what they were asking of us. But, complying with their request, he gave them the recipe to their products… the original recipe that is. It’s fair to say they’re not that happy that they’re going to have to spend their time and money to update it as we have over the last 40 years.

Edit: it’s not food lol (but I’m loving the guesses)

Edit: man you guys really like your dildos don’t you…

Edit to be clearer: 
We make X. We’ve made X for over 100 years and, expect for small orders, it’s always to customers specification. For example, a matt blue colour, with a soft texture. We don’t have contracts to supply X to customers, they just order it like you would order something online. This, ex, customer had come to us 40 years ago and asked to get X from us, and had given a recipe for how they had gotten it previously from someone else. 

Over the years they kept coming back to us for X, but this recipe was no longer used. We still made X to their specification, but with different chemicals, dyes, pigments, and processes. Everyone was happy. 

Now that they’re going to another business, they wanted to know exactly how we make X for them. We didn’t want to give this up, and instead gave them back the recipe they gave us 40 years ago and said that was all they’d get, as everything after was us. Because X is our main product, if we’d told the ex customer how we made X for them they could give it to a competitor who could figure out how we make all of our X, and run us out of business.

Edit: I did not know X meant MDMA lolBefore we begin dear readers, a brief bit of backstory.

I have found that every company has a Todd. You will know who your Todd is, because he is who you call when you don't know who to call. When the unthinkable happens and everything is on fire and there is no hope of salvation, Todd steps in to fix it. Todd spends his entire time just fixing the unfixable. He has been with the company since the dawn of time, knows the true names of several demons, and was in the room when the old magic was written. 

Our Todd has an elite team to be on call when stuff breaks. Each team member is the highest authority in the company for one specific thing or another. They are the elite. Their word is law and to question them is to question Todd.

Our story begins shortly after I had accomplish greatest goal, and became the newest member of Todd's team. 

Now my company works with point of sale. We sell computers, software, printers, card readers, and pretty much anything you need to take money from someone else. 

After years working in the call center, I proved myself worthy of Todd's attention. I interviewed, tested, and became the specialist of Third Party Integration. My focus is the connection between our product, and whatever wierd stuff your company wants to use.

Examples of this include getting smart lights to change on command from ordering kiosks, letting the staff control the new jukebox you bought with their employee ID cards, or getting the sales data for the day to report to your canadian counterparts in both French and English, but only if someone buys the poutine-saurus surprise that day. And other fun conundrums that only the client can fathom. 

It is important to note that during my time in the call center, I was paid hourly. As a specialist, I would be made a salaried employee, and would be on call. After accepting the position,  I was told that I would have a trial period of one month to prove myself. I would remain hourly, but would have a pay increase to more closely match my expected rate as a salaried employee. I would have the title change and new responsibilities of my job, but I had this month to prove I was worth the extra denaro. 

The first day of my new job. We get a call from one of our more needy clients. They lay out a series of demands

1) all of their stores must be upgraded to Windows 10.
2) as each store makes about $10k a day, taking them down for a remodel is not acceptable. 
3) All of these upgrades must be done overnight while the store is closed.
4) if the upgrade fails, the store must be rolled back that night so thet can open hourly.
5) the window of time to do one of these upgrades is eight hours
6) the fastest they have been able to do one is ten hours.

All of this means one thing. They need a specialist to do the upgrades. One that knows their integration. I give Todd the "Put me in Coach" nod and a deal is struck. Todd is about to leave on vacation, which leaves me under the control of Steve, the director of The Support Center, who used to be my boss before i worked for Todd.

I am now on overnights. Four nights a week I upgrade these stores. I supervise two to three technicians who are on site in seperate stores. I do all the software. They do the hardware. 

This process is staggered based on timezones, so I generally am pulling twelve hour shifts. The OT is amazing, especially paired with the raise I got.

Fast forward a week or two. The initial batch does not go the best. I have a 40% failure rate. This is due to scripts provided to both the client and me by the various third party companies used by the stores, including their music, food delivery, and credit card processors. Everyone on their side knows who is the bad guy here. Talks are in place and we are moving forward. 

A meeting between the client and us is schedualed near the end of the week, right in the middle of my off time. As I said I am working twelve hours a day. I live a full hour from work, and for security reasons can't do these upgrades outside the office. I have ten hours to eat, sleep, get up, and eat again before work. Once I get to work, there are no breaks on the upgrade train. No lunch, no stopping. So i get home around 11 am each day. The meeting is set for 4 PM. I can't get any reasonable sleep, before the meeting or after. Steve demands that I be there to account for my failures. I already have another specialist designed as my proxy for these sort of meetings, because sleep is a thing. I also explain that I am still hourly, but he wont hear it. He insists that I need to be there to explain why the project is going so poorly, and that my explanation better not just be throwing other people under the bus. He tries to explain that i am salaried and therefore need to be there when the company needs me. Especially when I am the one who is screwing up. Again I try to remind him of my probationary period but he won't listen. 

And there my friends, begins the malicious compliance.

I clock in at 10pm the day before the meeting. I do my upgrades, all three of which are successes, due to what I assume is a change in the third party back end. The scripts I am provided with work perfectly this time, and all goes well. The corporate contact I report to in the morning tells me the meeting is just to go over the new changes to procedure we went through that might, and I will get the cliffsnotes in my email. No need to attend the meeting. I thank them and sign out. Then I sit. For six hours I twiddle my thumbs, take a lunch break, (and a car nap) and wait for the meeting. When its time, I walk ipstairs to the top floor and the conference room, where everyone but Steve is shocked to see me. I calmly take my place and wait for the meeting to start, stating that I was asked to be here. 

The meeting lasts 30 minutes, and consists of the new procedure, praise for my dillagence, and a quick overview of how the time table will change because of the past failures. It is noted that my performance has prevented a lot of the sites from failing when they would have otherwise, and the client is pleased with my work. Steve, who had previously blamed me for the failures, sheepishly agrees that I was a good fit for the project. Then the meeting ends with the best part. The person giving the talk states that she knows I am asleep right now, so she will go over the changes with me personally when I get in tonight. Meanwhile, the guy I asked to sit in on the meeting for me will work with them to set up the changes to be deployed, (about three hours of work) so that it's all ready when I get in at ten. The meeting ends. Steve makes a comment about the changes being done by someone with more experience and hints that it should be my responsibility. I cheerfully say that rather than waste my co-workers time, I will just do the changes myself. I have my third or fourth wind by now, and am ready to go. 

At the end of day two, I have spent 36 hours at work. Caffeine is my only salvation, and we are almost done. Near the end, I am basically waiting for a technician at my last store to finish testing, so I tell him to call me, and shut my eyes for about half an hour, just to rest a bit. All is well. I get called, everything is green. The vigil is over. Two of my friends insist on driving me home, where I promptly pass out into the most heavenly sleep I have had in ages. 

I wake up to an email, asking me to head into work for a meeting with HR. It is my day off, so I am kind of perplexed. I head on in, and apologize for being fashionably late. The meeting is with the head of HR, who has a report that I was sleeping on the job. There is camera footage of my 30 minute power nap.

I calmly explain that Steve had asked me to show up to the meeting, and then asked me to stay later to set up the changes, and by the time I took my nap (during what I called my paid 30 minute break) I had been in the building for 35 hours. I politely remind the HR head that I am on my trial period, and will be expecting overtime pay for that time. It came out to about 33 hours and change, due to my extended lunch break. 

Todd returned from his vacation and tore Steve a new definition of duties. From then on he would not be given control over Todd's team when he was away, and we would report directly to the CEO. The project completed without much incident. And I passed my probation with flying colors.

Edit: a bit more info, since people are asking. Steve would later be fired several months later due to a similar situation where he threw someone so hard under the bus that everyone stopped and saw how uncool that was. He was replaced with new Steve, who is a superior Steve in every way.Last week I was working from home one day, and got up to use the bathroom and make a cup of coffee. Took 10 minutes, tops. I get back to my computer to a bunch messages from my boss, getting increasingly nasty about something and why I wasn't answering quick enough for her. I send a message back with whatever it was she needed to know, and "apologizing" for not getting back to her soon enough.

When she finally answered me (about half an hour later) she said if I'm not going to be at my computer for any amount of time, I need to send an email to everyone in my office (including high level executives)  that I'll be unavailable for X amount of time and why.

So that's what I've been doing. My normal phrasing for the message is "Hi! I'll be unavailable from this time to this time as I'm going to use the bathroom/make some coffee/etc." Every single person in my office has told me it's fine and I don't need to tell them when I'm going to be gone for a few minutes, where I then forward them the original exchange between me and my boss and apologize but say this is what my direct report has told me to do, and this is the result if I don't. 

They all hate her as much as I do now.

Edit: Hi All,

Apologies for forgetting to let you all know I'd be unavailable due to sleeping. But I will be unavailable for the next about 15 minutes as I'm going to be making breakfast. I will send note when I'm back at my desk!

Well damn, this got much more attention than I thought it would. I live off this shit so I might have to start posting some more. I love all of your suggestions and I'm going to try and start doing at least a good number of them! 

To answer a few questions I saw, my boss is about 43, and the rest of the office is women aged about 40 and up. I 100% don't have to worry about getting fired, I've only been there a couple weeks and have established myself as one of the better assets to the office (I'm a recent college grad who studied in a tech field, no one in my office knows how to use excel, PowerPoint, etc.) I already showed everyone besides my boss how to make rules in their email so they don't get spammed with my messages, and they all love me and see that I have no problem riding this one out to piss boss lady off, and since they're not getting spammed with my emails they're fine with it.  Unfortunately she's very much a micromanager, and just a massive bitch on top of that, but I can't afford to quit so this will have to just do.

Thank you kind stranger for my very first gold!Reading another malicious compliance about phone companies reminded me of this. This was a good many years ago now. My husband's phone bill had a spelling mistake. Never really paid any attention to it. Never really caused any issues. Until it did of course. 

The mistake was simple. Think 'Rod William' instead of 'Rod Williams' type simple. 

One day we moved states and put in for mail redirection. Now, where I am from, mail redirections have to be EXACT, so the bill never got forwarded. And in all that goes along with moving, it didn't even cross our minds that the bill hadn't arrived or been paid. And then inevitably the phone got cut off. Once we realised, we were all set to fix it up. Pay the bill. Change our address etc. But no, can't be that simple. You see, to change the spelling mistake, we needed to provide proof of my husbands correct name. But for any name change, they need name change documents such as a wedding certificate or other official name change document, which he doesn't have as it is not a name change - just a spelling mistake. For some reason, his licence or passport was not good enough evidence. We ask what we can do to get this fixed up and they offer no help or resolution. Just stonewalling that there is no possible way to fix the incorrect spelling. 

Ok, cool. At this point we were cranky. Not going to help us with what should be a simple fix? We won't pay the bill we told them. 

They respond with details of the contract and our obligations, debt collectors etc. We simply replied, but who are you going to go after? They replied, 'you of course'. My husband, looking comically confused, said 'But my name is not Rod William and I am not going to pay HIS bill. Good luck finding him. If you happen to send me my own bill though, I would be happy to pay that.' 

Shocked face and oh look, spelling mistake gets corrected immediately.I have about 20 can lights in my house, they were all incandescent.    About 5 years ago, Home Depot  had a sale on Cree LED bulbs.  Dumb luck,  I was on their website at work and saw the deal.   I figured It was time to get into the modern day and save some money on my electric bill.   Ok I'll swing by on my way home.  I did not order them online, but the web site said the store had them in stock.

I printed out the sale price and SKU from the web.  Went to the store and loaded up my cart.  Went to check out.  Rung up at the wrong price.  I showed them the online advert.  They said no dice.  I said,  but you match prices.  This is a home deport store,  this is from a home depot website.  manager said  sorry, but the online store is different from the brick and mortar store, we don't match online prices.

OK fine... So I put the light bulbs back on the shelf.  Go to the contractor desk and hop on their computer.  go to the website,  make an online purchase. have the pro desk print out my receipt.  I head out the car, hang out for about 30 minutes.

Come back in to  pick up my light bulbs.  Manager comes over and I show them the receipt for the pick up of the bulbs?

Manager:  Wheres is the cart that you had them in.

Me:  I put them back on the shelf since you weren't going to sell them to me

So he gets someone to go get the bulbs off the shelf for me.

Manager says: you know you could have just left them in the cart.

I say: And you could have honored the price when I first got here....

Its not much,  but it made me happy...My parents had a loud argument about public spaces in a residential meeting with their landlord. He lived in and owned five apartments in that building.

The landlord later made some excuse to terminate the contract, and made a Power-Play to make my parents repaint the apartment before leaving.

My dad got pissed off and my mom got clever, so she thought "the contract doesn't say which color" and the entire apartment was painted pitch black, ceilings and all.

I remember sitting there as a kid not really understanding what was going on, but I have to say it was really cool to be there with just one light on that final night as we were clearing out.

I don't know much about the fallout, but that day they showed my brother and me how to properly give a one final "fuck you" to a person.

Edit: Hey, thanks for the gold and the other fantastic gifts. Told my mom about the gold - she didn't get it but "as long as I'm happy she's happy."I figured someone here might get a kick out of this.  Last year, for like the 6th time since we bought our house, our mortgage was sold to yet another company.  I've never been late paying it, have occasionally made extra payments, never had any issues.

But this new company wants to charge me a $14.95 "convenience" fee to take a payment online.  This is absolutely stupid.  I can make a payment over the phone and pay another fee, or I can mail a check/money order for no fee.  Also, I can set up auto-pay, giving them access to my bank account, but that's a hard no from me.

So, I went online and my bank has a neat bill pay service where you can set it to repeat weekly, monthly, etc.

Took the montly payment, rounded it up a bit, then set my bank to cut them a check every week for a bit over 1/4th the amount.  Doesn't cost me a dime - I don't even pay postage.  I'm sure the money comes out of the account a little earlier than the mortgage company actually gets it, losing me a tiny bit of interest or something, but man, it makes me feel better that for trying to charge me $15 for what is essentially an automated process for them, they now get to process 4-5 checks a month.  And, sure, I'm sure they have that whole process down to an art for minimal human interaction... but it's not zero.

I really wanted to press my luck and send 1/30th of the payment every day, but I figured my bank might cut me off at that point.

*edit* Wow.  I did not expect this to blow up like it did.  Thanks for the likes, rewards, and comments everyone.So I work at a small garden centre and we have a system where if the queue is getting too long, the person on tills calls on the radio to open another till. Basically means that staff can be doing other things when there aren't enough customers to justify having 2/3/4 tills open. I'm sure you can guess where this is going already.

Over the last week or so, it's been absolutely baking by UK standards and to top it off, our till area is what used to be the main greenhouse before the site got expanded. Old greenhouse, little air flow, scorching weather, it was hot as balls in there. This was causing a combination of angry customers and exausted staff and to top it off, our uniform is more what you'd call "guidelines" than an actual uniform. Navy polo, toe capped boots and you're good to go. So when I get the call for a second till, there's about 3 or 4 groups in the queue and I go to walk past the queue with some sweets (to keep me sweet) and my water bottle, to go to the tills. Until a 6' rugby player looking type at the back of the queue puts his arm to stop me. What follows went something a little like this:

Him: "Oi mate! Don't you know what a queue is?"

Me: "But I'm..."

Him: "No buts! You don't get to skip!"

Me: "I'm just going..."

Him: "I don't care! You wait like the rest of us!"

At this point, with this guy getting pretty angry and turning a very deep shade of crimson, I look at the till with an exasperated look, catch my colleague's eye and just go "fine then!" and wait. It was too hot to argue over this and I wasn't going to risk this getting physical. My colleague with a knowing smile picks up her radio and says "Can I have another till please? I don't think Caridor can make it". No one arrives, probably due to a combination of radio issues, breaks colliding and "not my problem". So we wait. Only takes about 5 minutes to get to the front but angry dude is getting redder by the second. So he goes up to be served with a loud "Finally!". I'm now in the front of the queue, go up to my till, log in and call out "Can I help anyone on this side?". There was a loud "Are you fucking with me?!" from angry dude but my colleague was quick to loudly point out that I did try and explain several times, that he got very aggressive with me for doing so and was honestly lucky we were serving him at all. He decided to just leave rather than embarress himself any further. Left his purchases on the desk and just left. 

I'm glad I didn't get in trouble for that one but it was a fun bit of MC.When I was a senior back in high school in Middle Tennessee, we had a smoking area for the students.  This was 1990, so yeah, I'm old.  My daughters actually just asked me to post this story here.

Anyway, so I was a good student and had a great reputation among the faculty at this school of about 2000 students.

During class, I am running an errand for a teacher when I walk by the smoking area.  It is outside of course, but it is against one of the buildings and has a roof over it like a carport.  There is a large metal trash can in the middle.  And it is on FIRE.  Not a rip-roaring fire, but is on fire nonetheless.  We have flames starting to work there way out of there and plenty of smoke.

I decide I don't need to pull a fire alarm, but clearly I need to get a staff member to put this fire out.  There's no one around, so I make a fast trot up to the Main Office.  As I quickly enter, I see the Secretary talking to another student, so with a loud voice I say, "Ms. Knight Ms. Knight there's a..." 

And that's when the Assistant Principal rounds the corner behind Ms. Knight while ripping into me about how we wait our turn in here and how I am being disrespectful and loud and I need to stand there and wait until I am called forward.

"Okay"  And then I just stood there while Ms. Knight kept helping the other student as Mr. Evil Assistant Principal stood overwatch in the corner like a bouncer.

Finally after a few minutes, it was my turn.  I calmly walked up to the counter and said, "Ms. Knight, the large trash can in the smoking area is on fire".

The Asst. Principal yells out "WHAT?!?" and then burst out of the room while Ms. Knight just gasped.  I calmly turned around and walked out, and went back to class.Do not share without permission, please, especially outside of Reddit.

Many years ago I worked in back-office support in a large office with lots of departments. Generally speaking, we had core hours, especially for lunch. Core lunch hours were between 12-2, meaning you had to take your lunch sometime between 12-2.

Different departments had different rules for lunch depending on their needs. For example, the call centre had a strict rota for when people could take their lunch since they needed constant phone cover. However, I was in back-office support. Things were a lot more relaxed because we rarely took phone calls. Most of our work came in the form of tickets and tasks logged through our system, and emails from other departments with general queries. The only requirement was that at least one manager and 2 members of staff had to be there at all times in case a colleague from another department needed to see us, or in an emergency, call us.

So, generally, we could take our lunch anytime we wanted as long as it was between 12-2. There was no policy telling us when to take our lunch aside from the one I already mentioned. I would always take my lunch at 12:28. The reason was I actually wanted to take it at 12:30, but one of our call centres was the floor above us and they stampeded down the stairs at 12:30. I had been in an accident some years ago that gave me issues with my back and hips, so I could be a little unsteady on the stairs so I left at 12:28 so I could avoid the call centre stampede. I suppose I could have gone at 12, but the staff canteen was never set up and never had food ready at 12, hence why I left at 12:28.

Now, I always restarted work at exactly 1:28, sometimes a few minutes earlier. An hour was far too long for me so I was often back at my desk nursing a coffee while scrolling through my phone (which we were allowed to do as long as we were on break) by around 1pm as well. However, if a colleague came to me and asked for help, I always helped and just added the time I was helping them to my lunch. So if I spent 10 minutes helping a colleague, I'd come back at 1:38. All this would be logged in our timesheet. I wasn't doing anything outside of policy - we were allowed to do this.

Anyway, one of my colleagues had obviously noticed. Let's call her Mindy. Mindy considered herself the queen bee of the office. Everything had to be done her way, she was perfect, and she always tattled on people for petty stuff. Like that one of our colleagues used too many staples, or that colleagues were literally a few minutes late, or took too many pee breaks (she literally had a tally of how many drinks and pee breaks everyone took so she could tattle). She even once tried to tattle and say one of my colleagues came in drunk and she could smell it on her breath. What she could smell was Lemsip and cold meds - the colleague she was tattling on had a cold. Unfortunately, Mindy was also our manager's favourite employee, so she got away with a lot.

So she tattles to our manager about how I'm always leaving for lunch 2 minutes early and yet often come back late. My manager tears me a new one for this. I explain to him that the times I come back late are when I've helped a colleague and he should see it logged on the sheet. I also explain why I leave at 12:28. He then says 'Yes, well, whether it's two minutes or not, we have core hours in this office'. I say, yeah, 12-2. I can take my lunch any time between 12-2. 12:28 is within those core hours. So he then tried to say no, in our department, we have a policy of 12:30-1:30 to make sure enough people are in the department.

I say I've never heard of this policy, this has never been the case, but he brushes me off and says, 'You take your lunch at 12:30, and come back at 1:30. You don't deal with any queries or anything that will delay you. Just take your lunch on time, and come back on time. No exceptions.'

Okay, then. That's exactly what I'll do. No matter what I am doing, even if I'm in the middle of a task, I get up and go to lunch. Even if I am at my desk and a colleague comes to me, I tell them I am on lunch and to come back later. Then surprise, surprise, Mindy comes along with an 'urgent' query at 1:10.

I look her dead in the eye and say 'Sorry, I'm on lunch.'

She storms off to our manager to tattle on me. I get called into his office because she had lodged a complaint against me for 'bullying' her and being 'uncooperative'. Mindy is in the office, with my manager acting as a mediator. He asks why I refused to help her. She's grinning maliciously with her trademark 'You're going to get it' face.

'She spoke to me at 1:10. I had 20 minutes left of lunch. You said the policy is lunch 12:30-1:30, no exceptions." I said, smiling.

Mindy looked like she wanted to slap me and my manager was furious but knew he couldn't do or say anything because that was what he said.

Eventually, the manager ended up being promoted and moved to another department. Our new manager had no patience for Mindy's excessive tattling and at one point shouted at her 'This isn't primary school and I'm not your teacher, go back to your desk and focus on your own work instead of everyone else!'

The new manager also rescinded the 'no exceptions' bs policy my manager had made on the spot and as long as we came back on time and didn't leave the department understaffed, she couldn't care less when we took our lunch.

Edited: For clarity as there was a sentence that was poorly worded and confusing! Sorry guys.Recently quit my job at a convenience store. My two weeks were in, and it was my last day, minutes before the end of my shift. I notice a long line and jump on register to help. Two customers come to the register together, and one asks for cigars. Company policy, and state law, requires that I id both customers. I turn to grab the cigars after asking to see id from both, and one of the customers leaves the store.

Unfortunately, in this scenario, I cannot finalize the sale until I see id from both customers, regardless of if one leaves. I tell the customer this, and he argues with me. The manager is on the register right next to me, so I explain that no, I need to see the id, or I cannot sell either customer age restricted items.

It’s now 10:02. My shift officially ended at 10, though we are allowed to and encouraged to stay on the clock while there is a rush. The customer claims he doesn’t know the other guy, even though it was clear they were together. Annoyed but just wanting to get out of this interaction, I say “whatever” and set up the terminal to take his card. He puts his card in, and the reader asks “is this amount correct?” or something of that nature. Customer hits no.

A lot of customers do this, they don’t read and think the screen is asking if they want cash back, but if they hit no, it cancels the transaction. Usually, we would then reset it, walking them through to make sure they hit the right button. But then I think, what’s going to happen? It’s my last day, I’m supposed to be clocked out, I don’t care about this job, and company policy prohibits managers from giving references anyways. I say “okay, you hit no, so good night,” I put the cigars back, and I clock out.

After clocking out, I mention it to the manager, who says the customer looked confused for a minute and then just gave up and left, dumbfounded.Tldr; basically the title.

Brief backstory: A couple years ago, I was in an apartment with my friend and younger sister. My sister was violent towards my friend and I, and I ended up having to get a restraining order against her. She brought in a dog without permission, which caused some damage to the unit. I informed my landlord of the incidences of violence and the damage and sent him pictures. He basically told me to deal with it myself, which I did by getting the protective order. After this, my roommate questioned the legality of holding us responsible for her portion of rent (I told her it was, but she asked our landlord for a copy of the lease to show her uncle anyway, which admittedly was pretty stupid). Up until this point, our landlord had not asked us to leave due to my sister's actions, but he did after the lease was brought into it. We were out by the date he specified on the notice to quit (the first step in the eviction process before the eviction actually occurs). My roommate was there until midnight making sure the place was spotless.

We moved to an apartment across the street. Two weeks had passed since he was informed that we had vacated the unit, and we had not gotten anything regarding our security deposit. In our state, a landlord is required by law to either return the remainder of a security deposit within two weeks, or provide a letter itemizing what the deposit was used for. If they don't, the tenant is owed the entire deposit. If the withholding is willful, the tenant is owed double the original deposit. The landlord had actually told me that he would be going on vacation immediately after we vacated, so I returned our keys to him and waited to see if he would send anything. He never did. After consulting with a tenant's rights group to be sure I was in the right, I sent a pre-formatted letter 16 days after we vacated, which stated the specific laws regarding security deposits, and gave him our current address to send either the deposit or receipt to.

The day after I sent this letter, I see him across the street, frantically running into the apartment for the first time since we moved out. I receive a text from him saying that he would return what's left of our deposit "if he could get the apartment rented by the first of next month." I respond by telling him that, as the letter I sent explained, he forfeits the right to keep any of the deposit after the two weeks is up. He responded saying that he would "see us in court" and that we were "nightmare tenants," and that "this will be fun." He said he would also be taking us to court for the costs to re-list and rent the apartment, which he claimed exceeded the amount of our deposit.

After about a month or two of hearing nothing back, we decided to say "fuck it" and file a small claims suit against him, as he clearly wasn't going to follow through on his threats. As the person who had almost all communication with him, I was the plaintiff in the case. He brought a "letter" that was dated for the day he texted me, where he arbitrarily wrote in what he used the deposit on, and claimed he sent us the letter. That obviously didn't add up (which I thoroughly explained to the judge), as he had texted me that day saying that we would get some of the deposit returned, and that he had no proof that he actually sent that letter. He clearly just wrote it and printed it out for the court hearing. During the court hearing he also said a lot of false and victim-blaming shit, such as implying that I participated in the violence that occurred, saying we caused damages that were definitely there when we moved in, and just attacking my character in general.

The judge ruled that the withholding of the security deposit was willful and awarded us double the deposit. But of course that wasn't the end of it, and a few days before his deadline to pay us the money, he sends me a text just "letting me know that the decision has been appealed." I didn't answer and showed up to court again, and lo and behold, it's more mud-slinging and arguing about things that we already established in the first hearing.

The judge upheld the original decision, and he eventually mailed me the check for double the deposit. In the memo line on the check where you can write the reason for the payment, he wrote, "for gaining twenty pounds." But hey, I cashed that check and spent my half on a new gaming laptop, so I'd say I got the last laugh. I desperately wanted to text him and ask him if it was as fun as he thought it would be, but resisted the urge.

Edit: Apparently I didn't make this clear enough, but yes, violence occurred towards me as well. I could do without the victim-blaming. And the dog that she brought in without permission chewed a tiny chunk off of the window sill. In court, the falsified deposit receipt letter was mostly comprised of "cleaning fees" and damages that were there when we moved in.

Edit 2: I'd encourage you to refrain from passing negative judgement unless you have all of the details of what was said and done by the landlord in this case, which are too lengthy for me to provide here. If you would like more details regarding the landlord's behavior leading up to the case, PM me and I'd be happy to provide these details as well as screenshots of our correspondence. If you are unwilling to know the whole story, the dirty details, and the trauma and re-victimization I was subjected to, your opinion is meaningless and I will not defend my actions to you. When I was in high school, I got a part time job as a hostess at an Italian restaurant with a friend of mine. The restaurant was only open 5 days a week for dinner. The restaurant was fairly new but was already filling every table every night because the food was amazing. In addition to my friend and I being the only two hostesses, the bus boys were friends, half of the waiters were friends and the dishwasher was a friend. 

The owners son was the floor manager and with the success of the restaurant started to implement new changes. Everyone must look presentable and in uniform at all times. No dirty uniforms. Even for the bus boy. He was rather rude to all employees and would hover and take over our jobs right in front of customer apologizing for our inability to do our jobs correctly. However, everyone there was fantastic at their jobs. The dish washer even found creative ways to stay clean and tidy. 

The straw broke one night when my friend and I were both working the hostess stand on a packed Saturday night. The manager walked up to us and declared our hair was not compliant with dress code. Both of us had our hair pulled back in the requisite buns. However, we both had a few stray wisps. You know, those tiny little new hairs around your face. Never mind that is was August and it was hot and we were all working as a team like crazy to make sure the night ran smoothly sharing duties such as bussing tables and running foot and drinks (underage). He loudly fired both of us on the spot in front of the entire restaurant and front staff. He then said we were required to continue to work for two weeks and train our replacements. 

I asked, are we fired? He said yes. And I said firing means every don’t work for you anymore. We walked out, punched our cards and went to change out of our uniforms. When we got out of the dressing room, there was a line of people waiting to change including the bus boys, half the wait staff, and the dishwasher. All were so mad about what had happened that they quit on the spot. No one liked the job anyway. 

We all went to iHop to eat and we’re soon joined by the rest of the wait staff and the line cooks. So all that was left of the entire restaurant staff was the bartender, the owner/cook and the manager. 

I later heard that the owner just decided to shut down the restaurant because the only reason he started it was to provide his son a legacy from the family businesses in Italy and he decided his son couldn’t handle it.So, the day after Christmas about 10 years ago, my brother called me up and asked me for some assistance setting up some of his new computer equipment.  He lived down the road from a store that specialized in discount china, so naturally it was extremely busy.  Busy as in, cars were parked everywhere, including on the grass in front of the store, and it was impossible to see around the corner if someone wanted to pull out of the furthest exit.  Unfortunately, the speed limit, 50 mph, is also extremely high on the road as well, even if you have to really try to accelerate to get to 50 mph by the time you pass the store.  So, I decided to play it safe and was doing roughly half the speed limit, perhaps 30 mph, while going around the corner of this store.    


Even at this speed, of course some guy decided to pull out without checking, and I couldn't stop in time to avoid hitting him.  Now, I was driving an older Mitsubishi that already had some damage, and he had a small dent in his fender.  And, come on, it's still Christmas, right?  So, I get out of the car, take a look at the damage, and turn around to see a furious, older, red faced gentleman in front of me.  Right after I tell him that it doesn't really look like much damage, so there's no need to contact the police, he proceeds to scream in my face about how I was speeding and this is all my fault.    


Oh, oh no honey.  A young woman driving by herself may appear to be easily intimidated, but I was trying to be nice.  If you want the police involved, let's do it buddy.  I call the non-emergency line, explain there was a very minor car accident, and that the other driver was insisting that it was my fault, so I would feel better if the police were involved.  The dispatcher got my information, stopped for a moment, and then quietly thanked me for calling the appropriate number (911 was hardly necessary), and told me that she also felt it would be safer for me if the police were dispatched.    


After a 30 minute wait, an officer showed up to the scene.  I, not being a total moron, sat quietly in my car and waited for him to come over to me.  The other driver felt it was necessary to leap out of his vehicle and run over to the officer and start screaming and gesturing wildly.  I didn't catch what was said, but I did see the look on the cop's face, and I was getting more and more amused.  After being clearly told to get back into his car, the cop came over to me, and asked me what happened.  I told him what was going on, and that not only had I not deliberately sped up to go the speed limit, I had actually slowed down because of how busy the business was.  He nodded, and went back to measure the skid marks on the road, and confirmed he believed I was actually doing about 25 and complimented my thinking on safe driving in this specific situation.    


He then proceeded to write the other driver a ticket, and the other driver pulled out of the parking lot a second time, with his window down, flipping me off.  At this point, the cop came over to me, explained that he wrote it up as the other driver's fault for more than 1000 dollars due to the damage on his fender.  He also stated that, "Darlin', I don't say this often, but I believe you should take that man's insurance company for every dime you can get."    


Thanks for insisting we call the police!I'm not sure if this quite counts as malicious compliance but I was just doing what they wanted me to so I guess it fits.

In the mid 00's I worked for a small printing company, our commercial work was on large lithographic machines but we still had office printers and a number of staff who knew a lot about them.

I don't think a single one of our office printers had been purchased new or even working, the owner just bought job lots of broken office printers for not a lot of money and then frankensteined them into working ones. We didn't often buy printer paper because we'd just cut leftovers from the factory to suitable sizes for the office. Overall our office printing costs were extremely low despite the fact that we printed tens of thousands of pages a year.

I was a general office dogsbody, among my duties was fielding calls for the director, he would never take calls from cold callers and I was allowed to describe myself as whatever job title they wanted to hear to deal with them.

An office printing management service had got our number. They were offering a completely managed service where they loaned the machines, supplied the consumables, took care of everything and you just paid per print - great for some companies, expensive and unnecessary for us.

When they first started ringing I kept telling them "sorry, we aren't interested, please remove us from your list" or "we're a printing company, we don't need managed printing services, please take us off your list", this must have gone on for months and I was getting annoyed that they wouldn't take us off the call list and started spending more time trying to explain to them why it was pointless and a waste of both our time to keep ringing, I explained the information above but the caller was convinced he could save us money regardless of all that, I guaranteed him he couldn't, as I doubted we paid more than a penny a page. Naturally he didn't believe me, as far as he was concerned if I was answering the phone I was the office junior (no-one important answers the phone) who had no idea how much printing actually cost, and just too stubborn and/or stupid to put him through to someone that mattered and if he persisted eventually he'd get through to the right person who would reward him with a juicy contract.

This same conversation was had at least once a week for the next month or two, he's desperate to let me set up a meeting, besides he says can take us off the list once he's set up a meeting with a decision maker.

"Right, fine, sure, you can book a meeting for your reps but I guarantee it will be a complete waste of their time". I scheduled them a meeting with the "office manager" (me) on a Friday afternoon when I'm the only one in the office so I won't be too busy and it'll be a diversion.

The reps arrive, I show them into the office, they are clearly thinking we spend a lot on printing because we have so many damn printers and I gave a rough idea of how much we get through in the office, they give me their enthusiastic spiel about all the advantages, focusing on the costs, they want to sit down with the figures and see what they can save us, do I know what we spend at the moment?

Paraphrased conversation:

Me: Not completely sure, think it's around £100-200 a year.

Rep: Nah it'll be a lot more than that with the amount of printing you do, is that just the paper?

Me: No, that's just ink and toner.

Rep: (looks sceptical) Well there's the paper too

Me: To be honest we mostly cut down leftover paper from the factory or sometimes suppliers give us a few cases for free

Rep: OK, right, so what about the initial costs of the machines, if you average it out over the lifetime of prints rather than considering it just as capital expenditure it can make up a significant portion of your printing costs - this photocopier for example, it's a few years old now and you're looking at about £12,000 to replace it with a similar spec machine, so with our service you can avoid that capital expense.

Me: The owner buys them broken and repairs them, most of the printers only cost a few quid, except the photocopier which I think cost us £700 (as even broken they are expensive and it took 3 broken ones to make that one working one).

Rep: Right so when you need to replace it...

Me: I hazard to guess he'll do exactly the same again.

Rep: ...and the ongoing maintenance costs

Me:  :|

Rep: .... then there's the costs and lost productivity of downtime to consider....

He is trailing off at this point, it's clearly part of his rehearsed spiel but he can also see downtime isn't an issue when we bizarrely have more printers than computers.

Rep: There's absolutely no point us being here is there?

Me: No, I'm afraid not. That was repeatedly explained to the guy who set up the meeting, but he said your company won't stop cold calling until we agreed to a meeting so here you are  ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯

The reps agree it is a complete waste of time, have a bit of a frustrated laugh about the call centre and say it's not the first time they've been sent to completely pointless meetings because the call centre folks get their commission based on the quantity not quality of the meetings they set up. They don't bother giving me their quote. I never heard from the company again.The background- 

I used to be an Armorer in the US Army. (I was the person in charge of securing and maintaining all the weapons)

I was stationed overseas at a base that only had one arms room, and I was the guy who ran it, so instead of just being responsible for the weapons in my unit, I was responsible for all the weapons in the entire post. 

On paper, that's a job that's supposed to be done by an E6 with a two person support staff. In reality the position was chronically short staffed. It was just me, as an E4, doing the job of three people.

Because the position was critical to the operations of a bunch of different units (including things like PsiOps and Special Forces where everything about them is classified by default, and joint operations with the navy and air force, and a few foreign militaries who were working with the US), I had to get a security clearance that was higher than everyone else in my own unit. As far as I knew, there were only 4 other people on the post with clearance high enough to do what I did, and they were all officers. (This led to some amusing situations where I was accidentally called for security briefings that were *way* above my pay grade.)

That sucked because I was on call all the time, and had to go to work anytime anyone needed a weapon. Being on call was supposed to be a duty rotation, but I was the only one who could do it. So I slept in the arms room a lot. 

I wanted to make sure I had as little to do as possible so I got *very* good at my job. How good? During an army wide review of the entire supply chain, my post was found to be the best run arms room in the entire army. I won a medal and everything.

Then we had a change in command, and the new captain *hated* that I didn't have to go on training exercises because I wasn't allowed to be more than 30 minutes away from the arms room, ever. 

The Compliance-

The new Captain was absolutely determined to take me on a training mission. She'd somehow gotten it into her head that I was a slacker (which I absolutely was, but only because I was efficient and pissed off that I never got to leave the base).

So she drew up a bunch of paperwork to sign the arms room over to the supply sergeant. 

I refused to sign, because the person with all the ammo and the person with all the guns are supposed to be *different people*

Next she tried to sign the arms room over to the PsiOps company commander. I refused to sign because that commander had become a friend of mine so I knew he was required to leave the base weekly for security briefings. 

Finally she tried to sign the arms room over to our company's supply lieutenant. I tried to explain that the lieutenant didn't have high enough security clearance, but she cut me off. She said she was tired of my excuses.

Then she *ordered* me to sign, and threatened me with an Article 15. 

I wrote "Under Duress" on the paperwork. 

She didn't even look at the signature. 

So I sent an email to the Warrant Officer who was in charge of logistics for the area (he was the guy who'd given me the award I mentioned earlier, so he was pissed when he found out what was going on) and went on the shitty little weekend training exercise and basically enjoyed my vacation.

That sequence of events happened on a Friday afternoon. The Chief didn't get my email until Monday morning. 

On Monday afternoon my Captain was relieved of command. 

I eventually had to testify at her disciplinary hearing. 

My second favorite part of the whole experience was the supply lieutenant (who got a slap on the wrist for inadvertantly obeying illegal orders because he hadn't learned the regulations before signing) saying "Is it like that for you all the time? This has to change."

My favorite part was the full bird Colonel in charge of the hearing asking my former commander "Your soldier was awarded for being the best at his job in the entire army. After he refused your orders the first few times, why didn't you start asking questions?"

Edit: Some clarity about a bunch of questions I've been getting.

This was at Camp Hialeah. It doesn't exist anymore, but you can look it up to see all the different units that were there. They all used the same arms room, and yes that's weird and it sucked.

I had a TS clearance. It was explained to me that knowing the weapons logistics of the whole post was a big deal. I had the training and deployment schedules of two dozen units, including foreign militaries, other branches, and an SF group. That's a lot of important information, and it was definitely above my pay grade. I absolutely *should not* have been the person doing that job, but I was. I knew I needed to cover my ass, which is why I was so careful about record keeping. 

There were probably more than 4 people with TS clearance on the base. I only knew of four. Unsurprisingly, none of them wanted to do my job and had the clout to say no when asked. 

I didn't actually go to any fancy security briefings. I was mistakenly called twice, and promptly told to leave. (I think the person scheduling the briefings just sent a shotgun email to everyone who had a TS clearance. After the second time I stopped getting them, so someone must have sorted it out)

At the disciplinary hearing, I was called to answer questions. I showed up, answered, and was dismissed. It was a long drive to another base for 30 minutes of standing and talking. I don't know anything about the results. The captain didn't come back. That's all I know. 

The award I won is called an ARCOM. It's not uncommon. I wasn't some kind of indispensable prodigy. I was just in a job above my pay grade and scared of fucking up, so I took very meticulous records. Because I was the only one doing anything, I had to really know the system. So I got an award for being good at passing an audit.

I'd like to thank the people who introduced me to Zach Hazard. I've been binging his stuff on YouTube since last night. It's hilarious and vindicating.

And yes I know it's PsyOps. That was me having a moment of stupid and I'm not going to fix it because the jokes in the comments are pretty funny.I've  worked at many retail chains... have had MANY terrible bosses... here's one story I think I can give up without any repercussions.

At a small specific retail store, 5-6 years ago at this point, I was confronted by my old boss on a specific event that I was late by two minutes.

Previous day, he had asked me to come in on my day off - and at an earlier time than I normally do. I agreed to come in on my day off and work a shift I am not normally used to -but it's retail, it cannot be that difficult.

My old boss asked me to work 7AM to 4PM, and I showed up at 7:02AM. Which, in my state, there is a 5 minute window for everyone, and this was 100% not a habit of mine at all. I am normally one to show up 5 minutes early everyday and wait aside the time clock. I clocked on, and walked to my department with a drink I had already purchased the previous day.

As I walked into the department, the manager greeted me then said, "When I schedule you at 7AM, I expect you to be IN department by 7AM. Not a minute later. We can't pay you to clock on, buy something, and then start working.. over the course of a year that adds up to hundreds of dollars of lost labor for one individual." I told my old boss that my drink was from the previous day, and that I just clocked on 2 minutes late. My old boss replied with, "That's not my problem, you need to plan better. You were scheduled at 7 and we are losing cost of labor each minute you are not here. Be in department AT scheduled time!"

Which is not true. I spoke regularly with a payroll employee - and she explained to me quite some time prior, that the company does not pay you 3 minutes before or after your scheduled time. So if you clock on at 7AM, you are not getting paid until 7:03AM. If you clock on at 6:57AM, you are not getting paid until 7AM. Same for when you return from lunch. However, if you clock on at 7:04, after that 3 minute window - you begin getting paid immediately that minute.

My boss was right, I NEED to plan better.

I asked for a print out of my time stamps going back as far as they had record of... and I tallied up EACH day that I had arrived 3 minutes early - and did not get paid for it. I counted well over 330 minutes within a three month span that I was not getting paid for - which ended up being a little over $110.

I gave my old boss a copy and said, "You can pay me for these dates where I was in department, on the dot, without getting paid for it."

My old boss then replied, "That's not how our company policy works." He then went into detail, to explain to me, exactly what I had already known - and gave him a copy of... yet my old boss is now recognizing that he's contradicted himself and willingly lied to me. When everything clicked in his head that he's contradicted himself - it was far too obvious because his face went bright red and he started smiling... imo, like he had been caught.

My old boss: Well  you know the policy, we can't pay you for that. :)

Me: Then I will begin my shift when I am getting paid, not the minute you schedule me. It's not like you're losing labor if you're not even paying the employees that window of time. Schedule me at 7, if you like but I will not be clocking on until 4 minutes after the scheduled time, as you will not be losing any cost of labor for it, and I will not be losing pay over your personal policy.

For about three weeks, I clocked on 4 minutes late everyday, no matter how early I arrived. I eventually got a warning from the building's HR that it's riding the line and very close to getting a write-up, and down the discipline road. I explained to her the entire story, as she seemingly did not like this manager of mine either, she laughed pretty hard at the whole thing and offered me a department transfer, with a higher pay. She reminded me that my behavior was listed under a category that could get me terminated, and thought the transfer would be a fresh start. Instead, I put in my two weeks notice and thanked her for the wonderful opportunity.

The funniest part of all of this, years later I saw my old manager working at a new chain, in a similar position to what he was doing when I worked for him. He smiled, waved. I smiled, waved, continued on.

As time went on, I also bumped into the old HR manager, who was working in an entirely different field... I asked her why my old boss left that company... she laughed and said, "He didn't leave, we fired him for time theft!" Apparently my old boss would take a lunch, leave the building, and never clock out for it.

&#x200B;

edit:grammarThis is both malicious compliance and petty revenge so let me know if it fits better over there.

Bit of a backstory before we jump in - I've been in India for the last two weeks on a course with my university. Just a day before I flew out I must've eaten something dodgy because I got the infamous "Delhi Belly" (diarrhoea).

 As someone who likes to think ahead, I decided to book aisle seats for all my flights, knowing I'd probably be taking multiple trips to the bathroom. The compliance begins on a 4h connecting flight:

As I made my way to my seat, I realised an older woman had taken it for herself. I pointed at the number above but instead of moving to her middle seat, she got up and motioned for me to sit in it. At this point I thought about telling her what the deal was with my colonic calamity but decided to just let my actions speak for me.

As soon as the seatbelt sign went off after takeoff I got up to take the first of many dumps. She had actually fallen asleep at this point so I had to wake her up so she could get up (grumpily). 

20 minutes later I had to go again.

A total of 4 shits later and we're still 1.5 hours from landing, she's getting irate. Finally, after my 5th and final defecation she offers to swap seats. 
Cherry on the top - I didn't even get up again until we landed.

TL;DR Rude woman takes my seat, pays the price in poop trips.

Edit: to everyone who is saying I was being an asshole - hell yeah I was being an asshole! Why should I have to explain myself because she can't follow the rules? It was clear she knew what she was doing from the beginning.So not so fun story, but I've always wanted to share this one. 

I'm not going to drag this out too long, but to get right to the point. My father is very religious to the point we couldn't do a lot of things that would be considered normal. Christmas, dating, ect.

I didn't hate my dad by any means, he taught me a lot. However, he was very abusive. As a black man, he seemed to think the only way to discipline a child was to knock that sense into them. 
He would constantly get angry at minor things and punch my brother in the soft part of his stomach. 

I suppose we both just normalized that abuse. And as I got older, I learned to not take the punches and actually block. The first time I did it, shocked my dad. It was so satisfying not to cry when my dad hit me and just look at him with this blank expression.

Doing this definitely made him more angry as he would try to make me cry. I feel like it gave him some sick satisfaction. 

You'd think all of this would make me hate him? Nope. 
My idiotic self just didn't seem to register how bad this was. I'd try to justify it as him teaching me a lesson. But eventually, the last straw would come. 

So I was 16 at the time, and my father gave me this ultimatum. Continue school or get a job and pay a majority of the bills. He wasn't working at the time and I hated school. While my grades were average to high, I just didn't want to be apart of that environment anymore. 

Our overall bill was about £1300 and I'd have to give £600 of my pay check,with my brother paying the other half. 
I decided to just go with it and look for a job. 

Now, a week into my job search my father started shouting at me. Saying I was taking way too long, (keep in mind, when my brother left school. He gave him over 2 months to find something). He ended up putting me Infront of a computer and made me apply to things all day and night. I ended up going to bed at 6am the next morning. I got so desperate, I applied for McDonald's and within a day got the job... Unfortunately. 
It was one of the worst experiences of my life. A lot of inappropriate touching and horrible acquaintances. 

Anyway, a year into working. A new girl joined the team and as cliché as it sounds. I fell for her instantly. 
I went out of my comfort zone and just decided to flirt with her. Within that day we were dating. It was amazing. 

Obviously, I couldn't tell me dad about this. So we hid it for another year as we dated. Within that time, we ended up having sex. Sex before marriage would be a big no no. 

My father later found out. 
Now this part is pretty invasive. But he had connected to my WhatsApp messages and was reading them on his laptop while I slept. 
I believe he actually opened my phone while I slept, using my thumb recognition. 

I was chewed out the next morning and told to break up with her (which I didn't). Because she was a whore and didn't really love me. 

He then told me to get out of the house and never come back. I will give some context for this. My dad likes to use this line when we're in trouble. He'll make us go outside our flat and then a minute later call us back inside. 

He had never really gotten to that point with me. But my brother experienced it all the time. 
I'd always told him that if our father ever did that to me, I'd just leave. 

So as you can imagine, I left. I walked for hours while my dad was blowing up my phone to come home. If you thought this was because he cared and wanted me to be safe? You'd be wrong. 

He would later send texts telling me not to tell anyone what was happening. It's none of their business and I'm not ruining his reputation.
I wasn't planning on telling people anyway. But the fact he said that shows he only cares for others opinions. 

Because I had left so quickly, I hadn't had time to grab anything. I had a phone and the clothes on my back. 
I had to call my girlfriend for moral support, and after talking. She straight away booked a hotel. I was so thankful. Lucky for me, I was getting paid the next day. So I'd be able to get my money and hopefully rent a place. 

To this day I haven't spoken to my father and I completely blocked him. And while I struggle to pay my rent every month, it's still way better than my situation prior. 

The story does have a happy ending. Remember how I wasn't able to get my stuff? 
Well, my father had gone on holiday ( one of my friends tipped me to this). So my girlfriend and I went back to the house and broke in using a credit card. 

My dad never locked his door, so if you just swiped a card through the door with enough pressure, you could eventually make it turn and get in. 
I was actually struggling to do this, until the neighbor came by and actually did it for me. He was such a good guy! 
I know he just assumed we were locked out, but he really saved my life more than he knows. 

I took everything I wanted, including stuff like the TV. Since it was my money that paid for all of that. 

I can only imagine how shocked my dad was when he came home and found all my stuff gone. He was probably going to sell it to cover the rent.I supervised a glass manufacturing department. One night we had an issue with a thermocouple that controls the temperature of the glass. Because it was creating nuisance alarms, the operator disconnected it and forgot to notify the next shift to monitor it manually. We lost control of the furnace for a couple of hours, and scrapped product. The plant manager came in that morning screaming and ripped the entire staff a new one. We were trying to explain that the thermocouple needed to be fixed, but instead he continued to yell at us, tell us we were idiots and told us to monitor it and notify him every time it went into alarm, or else he would fire us.

To further reprimand us, he insisted that we call him at home in the evening every time that temperature went into alarm so he could insure we were doing our jobs. What he did not know, and what we knew was that the alarm for the broken thermocouple happened about every 15 minutes.

My operator was worried and asked me what he should do. “Since the plant manager was so insistent,” I told the operator to “wait until AFTER midnight, then call and inform him EVERY time it happened according to HIS direct request.”

The Plant Manager came into work the next morning very bleary-eyed, and sheepishly told us that we did not have to do that again. He finally listened to us and we got the problem fixed.

TLDR: if you are abusive to my people, I will be a total dick.As you can imagine, a lot of companies are figuring out how to manage remote staff right now in response to COVID19. I am a social media manager for a large university, and am considered “essential staff” for some instances (if there’s a snow day, I can work from home but need to monitor social channels for questions, problems etc). 

Weeks before the virus got as widespread as it is now in the US, I asked my supervisor to consider remote options as my husband and I had been keeping a close look at its progression abroad, and he has an autoimmune disease, but I was literally laughed at and told it would never happen.

Last week, our university announced that they’d be shifting to online learning for three weeks. I again asked if we’d be given remote options at this time as well to help flatten the curve, and given that my job can be done literally anywhere, it shouldn’t be a problem. I again was told nope, as “essential staff” I’d absolutely have to come in, and more details would be given in an HR email later that day.

HR email comes in and affirms that ALL staff were expected to come in as normal (about 4,000 employees) and if you wanted to take time at home, you’d need to take personal, vacation or sick time. Staff could call/email HR and make individual cases to request remote work, but I’m in the state with the fourth-highest cases of COVID19 right now, and we all know college campuses are cesspools for disease, so staff is livid. 

The next day, I emailed my supervisor again and told them that I called/emailed HR saying that if I don’t get approval for remote work, I’m going to follow email protocol and take sick leave for the foreseeable future. Luckily, I am in a union and can request up to 26 weeks of 100% paid sick leave for myself or caring for family, and I knew it would get approved. I said the ball was in their court, and they could either have me at home actually working, or have me at home and be down an essential staff member. Silence.

In the meantime, I got a phone call back from HR from a frantic employee who said they received literally thousands of emails/phone calls similar to the one I sent and I could expect an update by end of day. Turned out I was not the only one threatening their bosses with time off.

At 5 pm, we got an email that all staff and classes are remote until further notice. I know it’s likely they would have eventually made this call anyway, but I’d like to think the THOUSANDS of employees threatening malicious compliance made it happen sooner.This happened 2 decades ago.

Some background: My first job was at a fast food chain. I worked hard, impressed the store manager and got myself promoted. At the time, I was still 17. So, I was promoted to “Team Leader”, with implication that I would get promoted further when I was older. I was still in high school, so I worked the evening shift which started at 4 and ended at 12. The evening manager was a good guy who also worked hard and as a result had gotten promoted to a store manager position at a different location. Since they needed a manager (and I wasn’t old enough) they hired a new manager who I’ll call Karen. So Karen is hired and starts shadowing the current night manager learning the ropes. After 2 weeks, he departs and she is now set take over. That’s where this story really starts.

I normally get in around 30 minutes early. One of my responsibilities is to make a position chart (which tells the workers where they are working that night). I need to hand it off to the manager for approval before posting it. As I arrive, I notice one of our night shift workers is already there. We’ll call her Jen. She is sitting in the lobby crying and being consoled by other employees. I always found her to be a bit manic, but she was a nice girl. She had a rough home life, so I didn’t hold it against her. Come to find out she had just had a large fight with her mother, which ended with her getting kicked out. So, she is effectively homeless. Good reason to be upset. I ask her if she needs the night off. She says no, she needs the money. I can’t disagree and head off to get started.

For the night shift, the night manager typically runs the drive through register after day shift leaves. There are a few reasons for this. First, this means that the manager has control of the drawer (and money) for the entire night. This eliminates the possibility of employees having short drawers. Second, this also puts the manager as the person interacting with the customers. I lived in a college town so drunken guys drive through all the time and just want to chat up the pretty face behind the register. Third, it gives the manager the least amount of responsibilities as far as clean up.

So, given what I now know, I make up a position chart and place Karen on the register and Jen on a fryer where she can get help if she can’t focus. I walk to the office to hand off the chart to night manager and was surprised that he wasn’t there. He normally is in at least an hour before shift to make sure everything is ready. That’s when I remembered, this will be Karen’s first night alone. I groan inwardly. This is gonna be a “trial by fire” kind of night. The day manager is there but no sign of Karen. It’s now 10 minutes to shift and even day manager is wondering what’s up. I fill day manager in about Jen, show her the chart and ask if it looks good. She agrees, and I said I’ll post it for now and Karen can sign it when she gets in.

I had just finished posting the position chart when Karen shows up looking frazzled. She heads for the office without a word to anyone. Meanwhile people start getting into position and ready for the shift. A few minutes later Karen walks up, pulls my position chart and replaces it with a new one. Again, she walks off without a word. According to the new position chart, Jen is working the drive through and Karen is working… nothing. Her name isn’t there. She has another employee working 2 positions and the whole shift working effectively one person short. WTF? I head to the office where Karen and day manager are talking and ask for some clarification. I explain there must be a mistake.

Karen: No, that’s right.

Me: But you’re not in a position and \*worker\* is working 2 positions…

Karen: Well how am I supposed to be in charge if I’m in a position?

Dayshift and I just stare at her blankly.

Dayshift: You need to be in position. You are accounted for in the labor calculations.

Karen: Well, I have 6 years of management experience and I have never needed to fill a position to get the job done. Things are gonna change around here. We do things my way now.

Now, she just spent the last 2 weeks shadowing a manager that walked her through every step of the job. She KNOWS she should be in position and why. This shouldn’t even be a question. She just wants to spend the shift sitting in the office and everyone knows it.

At this point, dayshift manager and I are sharing horrified glances at each other. I tell Karen that she’ll need to go get people moved around if that’s what she wants, because it’s her plan. She gives an exasperated sigh and heads that way. I turn to dayshift and plead with her to call the store manager and let her know what’s going on. She agrees. I head back to the line and start working. After short time later, dayshift pulls me aside and says that the store manager said it is Karen’s shift; she is in charge. She makes the decisions. Then she leaves for the night.

The shift proceeds to implode in a spectacular fashion. Less than an hour in, the employee working 2 positions is so far in the weeds that orders are taking 3 times as long to get out. The drive through is backed up and the guys stuck at the window waiting are trying to flirt with Jen, who is having none of it and getting more annoyed by the minute. As the wait gets longer and longer, the people are becoming more and more irritated as they get to the window and they are taking it out on Jen. Things are starting to get out of hand and Karen is nowhere to be seen. I go to the office to let her know we need help and find her watching a portable TV. I start to tell her what’s going on and she cuts me off. She tells me get back on the line, do my job and stop bothering her. I was about to try and explain when I just thought, “You know what, screw that.” Cue malicious compliance. I turned, walked back to the line and watched the situation unfold.

30 minutes later, a car at the window is giving Jen an earful about how long she has been waiting. She calls her worthless and Jen goes off. She takes the large strawberry milkshake next to her, chucks it at the lady and calls her a fat ugly c\*\*\*. The lady and the inside of her car are covered in pink goo. Everything went so silent you could hear a pin drop. Then the lady starts screaming. Jen closes the window on her and walks calmly to the back. The lady peels around the front and comes in the front door screaming for a manager. I go and knock on the office door. Karen appears looking pissed and annoyed. She tries to snap at me, but I tell her she has a customer at the front asking for the manager. Karen rolls her eyes and heads towards the front, oblivious to the shit storm that is waiting. I went and found Jen huddled in the back crying again. I tell her to get herself together and head back to the front when she is ready.

I head to the line where the now purple faced lady is screaming at Karen about dry cleaning and upholstery cleaning and “I want that girl fired.” At this point, I can see that Karen has finally realized that things have gotten WAY out of control. She is trying to calm the lady down, but she is having none of it. Eventually, Jen comes back to the line and lady starts in on her again, calling her all kinds of nasty things. Karen just stood there and let the woman berate her. Jen just kinda deflated in front of us. Watching her crumble like that just broke something in me. I walked over to Jen and said, “Just quit. You’re better than this job. And you can do better.” She looked up at me for a moment, then smiled. She lifted her chin, walked to Karen said “I quit”, handed her name tag to her and walked out.

Karen started apologizing to the lady who now seemed slightly mollified. Then, Karen started bad mouthing Jen to her. Saying how she was a terrible employee and how we were all happy she was gone. That’s when I decided I was better than that job, too. I looked at Karen and said, “The only terrible employee here is you.” And I walked out. 2 other employees walked out right behind me. We all met with Jen in the parking lot and went to an IHOP where we sat and speculated on how Karen was getting along. Jen told me that was the first time in her life anyone had ever stood up for her.

The next day, I got a call from the store manager asking for an explanation. Apparently, Karen had struggled the entire night with service. Afterwards, she had been there most of the night trying to clean and prep for day shift and had done a piss poor job. The story she had given the store manager was that Jen and I had planned everything with the intent to set her up because we didn’t like her and wanted to see her fail. Karen had basically blamed the whole incident on Jen and I. The store manager told me she was investigating to get all sides of the story. So I told her. A few hours later, she called again and informed me that Karen was no longer employed and asked if I would be coming in that night. I asked if Jen was getting her job back. She said no. The whole shake debacle wasn’t something she could overlook. I said then my answer is no. She was surprised. She tried to negotiate with me. I told her my price was Jen getting her job back. She said she couldn’t do that. And that was that.

If you’re wondering how Jen turned out, I married her. We are very happy and have 4 children.

TLDR; A new manager tries to change things to give herself an easy do nothing job. When I tell her it will backfire, she tells me to go back to work. I do and everything goes down in flames. She tries to blame me and gets fired anyway.

&#x200B;

EDIT: Wow! Just wow. I wrote this while I was on break at work. Saw a few upvotes then drove home. And now it's just gone crazy. I tried to thank as many people as I could but I know I missed some. I showed it to my wife when I got home. I thought she might cry but she didn't. She says it was one of her darkest days, but it ended up being one of the best of her life.  So I work at a store that sells kitchen appliances and other kitchen related stuff, normally when we’re supposed to leave or go on break we’re supposed to tell our manager, I was helping a long line at cash and had already been there for 8 hours and assumed they had someone to cover me, I wasn’t allowed to use the walkies to ask to be covered to go home, so I quickly found my manager and told her my shift was done.

She got really pissy at me and said “could you really not stay a few more minutes” I tried to tell her “I thought you had someone to cover me I can stay if you want” she then replied “no no just go, but next time you need to wait for a manager to let you go home” 

*record scratch*

This was never a rule, I asked other people who’ve worked there for years and they agreed that it wasn’t a rule.

I worked again a few days later and the store was empty, my shift was over and was about to ask to go home then I remember what my manager told me.

Cue malicious compliance.

I continued to wander the store and slightly fix shelves, making sure I was near my manager. After about 2 and a half hours she said “you’re still here, why haven’t you gone home?” I replied “you said I need to wait to be told to go home.” My manager looked at me as though she was mentally kicking herself “just go” she said. I clocked out and that’s how I got paid an extra 30$ for doing literally nothing.

Edit:

Holy crap this post blew up, I wanna answer a few questions and comments I see y’all have been making.

1.”are you only making like 12$/hour”
Nah I did some rounding I acc make 15$/hour but rounded it down for simplicity’s sake prolly should’ve elaborated on that 

2.”didn’t you just waste ur time”
Nah, this company is very stingy with hours for everyone and the way I see it I got paid while barely helping the company so I don’t care

3.”you should definitely be making more”
Yea I should, but this is only a temporary job to make extra money until school starts in September so don’t worry bout my financial well-beingBacktrack to 1987. Times were good, jobs were plentiful and little 14yr old me walked into a job as a bakery assistant. Even the 4.30am starts didn't put me off, I rolled in every Saturday morning and worked like a trooper. 

About two months in, someone complained about their donut not having enough jam in. I wasn't responsible for this, but the lady was having none of it and demanded a new one, full this time, not like the last one. Well....ok then.

In the back of the bakery was the donut filling machine. It was like a jam vat with a spike and a pump handle. I took an already-filled donut and put three more pumps in. It was quite round. Another pump, and it was looking pretty much fit to burst. 

Back at the counter, the lady was looking impatient, so I hurriedly placed the weaponised donut in a box, gave it to her, apologised and off she went. The car park was visible from the shop, she made it back there before opening the white box and taking out the sugary goodness she'd asked for. 

I saw her bite it and recoil in absolute horror as the donut exploded all over her blouse. I laughed my head off. The shop owner found it less funny but realised the irony of it. For a moment I thought she was going to come in and complain but she obviously realised she'd gotten exactly what she asked for. 

She never complained again, but I was also never ever trusted with the donut filling machine again either!So I was in a speech class, it was my last semester. Completely online due to COVID. Our professor assigned us a group speech that we were to record and send to him by the due date. I thought it would be easy enough as he gave us two weeks to work on it and group speeches weren't anything new to me. He even made separate discussion boards for our groups that we could use to communicate. This project was worth 30% of our grade so failing this project meant you would pretty much fail the course.

I wanted to get it done early so we wouldn't have to worry about it so I immediately post a message to everyone in the group asking when they were free to do a zoom meeting to discuss the project. No reply for a few days by any of them. I then post again. This time a little more stern as it didn't seem any of them cared enough to even reply at all. I waited a few more days. At this point we only had a week left before it was due so I just divided up the work and posted what everyone would need to write their portion of the speech about and gave them a date/time that I would be holding a zoom meeting for the final recording to send the professor. Still no reply.

It was now the day before the speech was to be recorded and two days before the speech was due and my group members had not made an attempt to make contact in any form at all.

So I did the only thing I could think of and emailed my professor explaining the situation. But I assumed he would not reply because throughout the entire semester, it took him over a week to reply to any emails I had sent him. I then did the entire group project on my own, which took me the entire night with no sleep. After I finished writing everyone's speech, It was around the time I had scheduled the zoom meeting to record. I joined it out of amusement knowing nobody in my group would be there. Sure enough it was empty. So I did the entire speech myself. But the rubrick really put emphasis on transitioning to our other group members including saying their name. So between every section where it would cut to a different member, I would say something like, And now (My Name) will explain the importance of blah blah, then mute my screen briefly as if to add a cut, put on a different hat, and continue the speech. I did this for all 6 portions of the speech. I turned in the speech shortly after and filled out the "Group Member Role" sheet that was due as well. I just put my name in every box that was supposed to be a different member.

A week passes and I see he graded the project (Still not replying to my previous email about the situation btw.) and he gave me a 0 stating it was supposed to be a 'group' project and me doing it solo meant I did not follow instructions. I was actually infuriated by this and knew that emailing him about the grade was as good as useless so I went straight above him to the board of the college and explained to them what happened. They apologized and said the situation would be resolved and within a few hours of me talking to the board, He had replied to my email three times stating that he was sorry for the miscommunication about the project and that my grade would be corrected, scolded me for going above him saying "I should have just emailed him again if I couldn't get in contact with my classmates." and putting the blame on me for not 'trying harder' to reach out to them. The next semester, I saw that he was no longer with the school. My guess is that it was a habit of his to not reply to emails and he got fired for it.

Also his 'corrected' grade was a 70. But I was so mentally exhausted from the situation at that point that I didn't care to fight it anymoreEdit:  MC stands for Malicious Compliance. This has nothing to do with Minecraft. 


Story starts now:

About five years ago I was the office guy for a small lumber mill. My direct supervisor was the general manager, but the owner was also pretty hands on. 

The mill wasn't generating as much profit as the owner believed it could (he was probably right, the guy was smart as a whip with 60+ years of experience). 

One of the things the owner tried to do was hire an outside consultant to try and find ways we could safely increase productivity or cut expenses. The guy had owned and operated his own mill and also had a ludicrous amount of experience. 

One of the things the consultant had been pushing for was running the mill into overtime. He thought we could increase productivity without incurring more expense than we gained. 

My boss asked me to run an analysis of how much we would gain/lose if we ran overtime. I did the math and gave him the results, even in the best case every minute of overtime would result in a net loss to the company. This report had taken me several hours as I wanted to be sure I gave him the right answer. My boss took it, nodded, and the next day announced we would be running the mill in overtime. 

Two weeks later when I prepared the end of month financial statements it showed a large loss. I was quietly seething, since I felt like I had been asked a pointless question, my time wasted, and my input ignored. 

But, looking back on it with significantly more experience, I think I know what happened. I think my boss was bothered by the consultant who had come in to tell him how to do his job and then given him bad advice. The owner wouldn't listen to my boss telling him he didn't need a consultant, so he did exactly what the consultant suggested and let the owner judge for himself. 

As far as my report went? I think he just wanted to be sure it wouldn't cost us too much when he pulled the trigger. 

Tom, if you're reading this, I'm sorry I was resentful about the whole affair for the past five years, my bad. 

Edit: Please stop asking me where/who. I'm not doxxing them. 

TLDR: My boss needed a consultant off his back, so he had me check to see how much it would cost us to just follow his advice. We followed his advice, lost some money and got rid of the consultant.For context:

I am a 20 something British-American male living in a very southern and undereducated part of the US. I have been here for a while now and generally when I tell people where I am from, I get a little push-back because I don't really have as thick of an accent anymore.

Onto the story:

I work in a small office, we have a rolling line of temps that come and go, most of them are barely high school graduates or people with very little in the way of worldly experience, this is important for later.

So one day, they bring to usual parade of new-hires around and I do my introduction

"Hi I am OP, I am one of the recruiters here at Company X. I am married with two dogs and I am originally from the UK."

Normally, this is just a throwaway line that I use as an icebreaker and it normally rolls right off. Until this one wonderful young woman pipes up,

"Um, you don't sound Bri-ish (She, of course, left out the t very purposefully.)

Me: "Sorry love, forgot the coat and tails at home." I say as I drink my Twining's.

The group kind of laughed it off and I figured it was a pretty open and shut deal.

**Nope.** 

A couple of days later, word gets around that this chick has been telling a bunch of people that I'm not British and that I'm "lying for clout". She said that I don't even sound British and that she is dating a British guy and "knows how they act."

So, rather than be a mature adult, I do the very British thing of *Malicious Compliance*

I need an intern to bring me some tea? "Would you mind climbing the apple and pears and pouring me a cup of Rosy Lee?" 

I started wearing 3 piece suits, a pocket-watch and a monocle I found at a thrift shop. I went **Super-Saiyan 3 British**

Obviously about 3 hours into the first day, my boss wants to know what is up, I tell her and she finds it so hilarious that she assigns that intern to me for *the rest of the day* I kept using odd British rhyming phrases and sayings and she would have to keep asking me to "speak normal" 

I would reply, "But I thought you know how us British people act." 

She quickly realized her error and we've been cordial ever since.

Nowadays, I keep my old red passport in my desk drawer just in case someone pulls that stunt again.

**And for the record, I'm not British, I'm ENGLISH, and a Scouser at that!**Okay, this happened about 20 years ago, when I was 17, and working in a major UK supermarket, in a rather affluent London suburb. This was my first "proper" weekend job.

I used to work in the bakery, and it was the best section to work in a supermarket! My job was to make sure that bread and fresh cakes was well stocked, and presented (and "test" the odd doughnut - for quality control purposes), so that we can make sure there was fresh items available before we ran out, slicing fresh bread, and... Making sure rolls were stocked and tongs were available.

One busy Saturday, I was doing a quick inventory count, and when I came to the individual rolls, I saw a middle-aged lady, in a large furry coat and luscious red fingernails. I didn't pay much attention to her, until I saw her with a crusty roll in her manicured and bejewelled hand, give it a squeeze, poke her thumb through the crust and threw it back in the basket. She did it again, and when she reached in to try a third one, I piped up;

"'Scuse me, Ma'am, would you mind using the tongs provided, please?"

She ignored me, and grabbed a third roll, and broke the crust, so, a little louder, I said, "Ma'am, please use the tongs provided."

She heard me that time, and glared at me and said, "I beg your pardon?"

"Ma'am, please don't grab the rolls, please use the tongs in the basket."

"Are you saying that my hands are dirty?" She then raised her voice while waving her embellished hand at me, wiggling her fingers so they sparkled as they moved "Are you suggesting that this is FILTHY!?!"

Well, knowing that folks tend not to wash their hands before using trolleys and baskets, without blinking or thinking, I said, "Yes, they are. Please use the tongs."

The inevitable happened. 

"I want to speak to your manager at once, you should learn to respect your elders and betters! I'll have your job for this insolence!"

So, I called for the bakery manager to come on down, bearing in mind, this was a busy Saturday, he was in his whites and wanted to know what the problem was. The woman went into a sob story on how she was testing the rolls for freshness, and I was so rude to her, telling her how her hands were filthy, a few crocodile tears here and there, how she had never been so insulted. 

In a stern voice, my manager turned to me and said, "Did you say this to her?"

Now, I was starting to think I did something wrong, and a bit nervous, I replied, "Yes, I asked her to use the tongs, she ignored me, so I asked her again..."

"Okay." My manager turned to the woman, said that he will be back shortly, he needed to do something and get some paperwork. While my manager was out of earshot, the woman crowed "See what happens when you don't know your place? I said I could have your job for this."

My manager did a quick count of the rolls, muttered "224" loudly and went into the back room, he then emerged with an industrial sized black bin liner. He then proceeded to empty 8 large baskets of rolls into the bin liner, and a label for 224 individual granary rolls, tied up the bag, handed it to her and said "Here you are, Madam, they're all yours!"

"I beg your pardon?"

"The rolls, Madam, they're all yours. You openly admitted to contaminating our stock, you ignored a member of staff when she asked you repeatedly to use the tongs. You've wasted my time, you are paying for the stock you have damaged. Good day!" 

"What am I supposed to do with all of these bloody rolls? I only wanted 2!'

With a dazzling customer service smile, My manager chirped "Not my concern, Madam, security will escort you to the tills and make sure they are paid for. Enjoy your weekend." He then turned on his heels, and went back upstairs to the bakery.

The woman looked at me, then the huge bag, absolutely aghast, so I did the only thing I could do, grab a random loaf of bread, take it to the bread slicer, and laugh in the back room.

I saw her almost every week afterwards, always using the tongs.

We wouldn't get away with that now, but easily my favourite manager, in all of my years of working.

ETA: I do not consent to having this shared outside of Reddit. Ta!Patient comes into my pharmacy. “I’m here for my covid test appointment” (btw please stop coming into our store without a mask if you think you may have covid. We have a drive thru)
“I’m sorry you must be mistaken, we only do the tests on Tuesday’s and Thursday’s because of our lab delivery system.”
“No I signed up for the test!”
Proceeds to show me forms for the antibody test. I explained to him that this isn’t a covid test it’s for antibodies and it won’t tell him if he at that present moment has the virus. He tells me he needs a negative result for his sons soccer camp so we need to just do it. Manager steps in and reminds him this isn’t the same thing. Patient starts getting mad and interrupts manager to say “look, you don’t know what they do and don’t require for my sons camp so just give me the damn test I paid for.” 

K. We do the test.
While waiting for the results, patient walks around the store, and my manager calls the soccer camp registration manager, his friend, and confirms with him the antibody test won’t work for them (no information about the patient was talked about, only the question of which test works for registration). Camp check in is in an hour. 

Patient comes back, we let him see his results, ring him up, give him his receipt (we do this for a signature for record keeping, receipt was no charge because he paid online), then manager proceeds to tell him about conversation with soccer manager. Patient is pissed and yelling he wants a refund and we tricked him.

Manager: “no sir, I tried to explain the difference to you and you told us to give you what you paid for, so we did. Your lack of understanding is not our fault and we are not responsible to pay for that.”

I fucking love my job, but a big shout out to my manager who has zero patience for Karens.

ETA: since so many of you clearly are not familiar with HIPAA, calling someone and saying “does your camp accept antibody tests instead of covid tests?” is not a violation. Please stop pretending it is like you understand HIPAAAs a designer, I try to educate my clients on design and why something has to be done a certain way. My agency is not cheap, so we make it quite clear that they are paying for our experience and knowledge, not some Photoshop monkey. Most of the time, my clients are appreciative and enjoy the extra guidance and professional advice.

Occasionally, we get "fun" jobs.

The sales pitch went well enough, the business owner, Bob, seemed like a decent guy and happy to trust our professional expertise. However, shortly after signing the deal, he brought on a new manager, Karen, who was put in charge of marketing, including the new website we were just contracted to do.

It quickly became clear that Karen thought of herself as a multi-disciplinary genius and despises us because she thinks she can do better than a professional design agency. Karen loves sending over incomprehensible design instructions and feedback in the form of design mock-ups she creates in Powerpoint. They as ugly as the devil's butthole after a strong curry, but we try our best to translate the abominations she birthed into good-looking professional design proposals that best reflects the intent of her ideas.

Karen did not like it one bit. Karen was rude, uncooperative, and removed Bob from the email threads when we tried to reach out to him to get his opinion. When we sent over a design, she would bitch about how it wasn't want she wanted, and scream over the phone while our team patiently explained why we couldn't design *exactly* as she wanted. Mainly: It would be ugly as heck and nobody would want to do business with them with a website like that.

The last time Karen bitched about how we were "stupid morons" for not doing what she wanted, we got her on the phone with Bob. She was screaming incomprehensibly and nobody got a word in. Finally, Bob took her side and said "Karen is extremely experienced and knows what she's doing. I want your team to FOLLOW EVERY INSTRUCTION, EXACTLY AS SHE ASKS."

*No problem.*

Once again, Karen sent over a ridiculous 70mb Powerpoint. If we followed it *exactly*, it would look like a website from the 90s with the worst UX ever. We went through every little pixel of her PPT, asking her "So do you want us to copy this... *EXACTLY*?" To which she would reply with a smug YES. So we documented her instructions down to the letter to cover our asses. Once again, we asked Bob: "Are you *SURE*?"

Reply: "Yes please hurry up and make those changes exactly as she asked."

*Okie dokie.*

We copied every ugly font choice, every terrible gradient, every hideous element into the design. We even went the extra mile to export the ugly lopsided shapes she drew as .PNG graphics, so it would all be "exactly" as she wanted. Then we sent the design over: "Here is the design, we have done everything exactly as instructed!"

Karen once again replied, taking Bob out of the loop, "PERFECT! Now, it wasn't so hard to do things EXACTLY ASK I ASKED, was it? ;)".

We waited.

Bob exploded, demanding a meeting the very next day to explain why we were delivering such shoddy work.

We go to the meeting and Karen starts demanding that we propose a completely new design.

We presented all past designs, the document in which Karen confirmed that she wanted all the changes, the countless emails in which we painstakingly explained to her why her ideas suck, and finally, the last email in which she praised us. "You see, Bob, after our last call with you, we had followed Karen's instructions TO THE LETTER, EXACTLY AS SHE HAD ASKED. She seemed very happy with it. I am confused, why the quick change of heart?"

I then pull out the contract and calmly point out the portion which stated the number of design proposals we would create. Karen had used up all of it. I had reminded her that she was limited to X number of proposals, but she clearly didn't remember any of it because she didn't bother reading our emails, and would keep talking or yelling over us when she spoke on the phone.

I looked Bob in the eye and told him he could either pay extra for each additional new proposal Karen wants, or choose from the existing designs done. They ask for some time to discuss privately. We break for coffee.

"Well, Karen is extremely experienced in this field. We will go with the last design since it is exactly as she wanted."

Even my intern couldn't hold back his surprise. As we drive back to the office, he asks, "Is Karen sleeping with Bob or something? Why does she have him by the balls like that?"

I shrug. It's his business, and we're getting paid anyway, and he clearly doesn't appreciate our design expertise after all. The less time we spend arguing with them, the more time we could use to focus on my appreciative, good clients.

We make Bob and Karen sign off on the design, and finish up the project quickly. Karen still tries to be difficult, but we stick to the contracted terms and she couldn't do anything.

2 months after the project ended, I get a call from Bob. He began with some small talk about innocuous project-related business, but I realized it wasn't the purpose of his call. Karen had been fired after making more serious mistakes causing major losses to his company. He sounded contrite, but did not offer any real apology. "That's terrible, Bob. I'm so shocked. I thought Karen was extremely experienced and knew what she was doing."

Edit: Sorry guys! As much as I would love to show you the site or Karen's presentations, I'm afraid I must keep things anonymous! You'll have to trust that it looks every bit terrible and outdated as a website designed by a Karen(tm) could be. We did not put our company name in the footer, and it is obviously not included in my company's portfolio.Hi there! Long time lurker, first time poster,  on mobile so please be gentle.TL;DR at the end.

I deliver home heating oil in a very rural and mostly flat part of the UK. In my delivery area there are many large drainage channels or “dykes” in the local lingo. The roads are often very narrow and single track and frequently run alongside these dykes separated only by a narrow grass verge. No safety barrier. 

Anyhoo, this one day in the depths of winter it was below freezing, there had been a light spattering of snow and there was a thin scum of ice on the water in the dyke. I had just finished doing a customers delivery and was winding in the hose prior to collecting payment and departing. My truck was completely blocking the road as there was nowhere for me to pull it off the road. We are limited by the length of delivery hose, blocking the road is common and legally acceptable as long as we work quickly and safely. 

So...... I was just waiting for the customer to finish writing the cheque for their oil when this large Mercedes car pulls up behind my truck and the driver immediately starts leaning on the horn and shouting and swearing and shouting at me to ‘move that f**king truck out of the way, NOW!’
 
My usual response when faced with similar behaviour is to blank the swearer and pretend they don’t exist. Being 6’3” and 285lbs helps keep most people at bay! 

I ignored Mr Shouty man and finished up with my customer. The customer said to me “ Ignore him, he’s well known in the village for being a bit of a dick!” I said Goodbye and got into my truck. 

As I was putting away my paperwork prior to driving off , I happened to glance on the drivers side mirror ( the same side of the truck as the dyke) and saw Mr Shouty Man storming up the side of the truck with a tyre iron in his hand! “Oh Shit! “ thinks I and immediately hit the central locking button locking myself in the cab. Next thing I know Mr Shouty Man has climbed up onto the step, is hanging off the mirror arm with one hand and brandishing the tyre iron with the other all the while shouting “Open this door you four-eyed c**t!!” (I wear spectacles for driving! Oh the wit of the man! Lol)

Cue Malicious compliance......

He told me to open the door.......

So I did........but, as I did so I kicked it open. He lost his grip on the mirror arm and was flung backwards into the dyke up to his chest in freezing cold, filthy water! 

I calmly started my engine and drive off! As I left I looked in the mirror to see this guy floundering around chest deep in the icy water, dressed in a business suit! 

I called the customer who had witnessed everything and happily they said that they would give a statement to whoever needed one confirming I acted in self defence. Then I made a fairly difficult call to my boss and told him what had happened and he said ‘I’ll await his call with interest!’ No bollocking , nothing!
When I got back to the yard that evening I asked my boss what had happened and apparently no call of complaint was made that day or ever!

That is my story, please be gentle🥴

TL;DR Got threatened by violent motorist. Obeyed his instruction which caused him to fall into freezing water.Edit: I've gone through every comment. Thank you for the conversation, but I'm going to disable inbox replies for the post now. Have a great one!


My work environment is less an environment and more-so a conglomeration of duct tape, spit, and cussing. I managed, among many things, a set of rentals, accounts receivable, and customer database analysis. Essentially, our company's bus factor was far too ~~high~~low.

Another important bit that I handled were various legal documents that the State requires meticulous processes to be followed, and allows for a digital or physical paper trail. I opted for digital.

Now, my boss kindly provided me a Pentium 4 dual core computer that he found at the bargain warehouse for about $40. I had the most sophisticated work station in the business, for context. This wasn't quite enough for database management and analytical software to boot up - more or less process a dataset, so I called up our IT guy.  Who worked for the boss's friend's sister-in-law's business. 200 miles away. I go, "Hey Tim! I need to add my personal laptop to the company network. Can you make that happen?"

"Sure, I'll be down to that location in a week or two. Can it wait?"

"Sounds perfect, Tim."


So Tim shows up. We get the boss to rubber stamp that this is all OK, and I have remote access to the servers and some annoying corporate* mandated securities on my laptop. Which, no big deal, they stay out of the way.

^^*Tim's ^^corporate. ^^My ^^boss ^^doesn't ^^know ^^a ^^computer ^^from ^^a ^^VCR

We didn't have anything like a software policy, either. I think some computers had Office 2007 installed, but that's clunky and makes data transfer complicated. It's the 20 teens, there's no need for that.

I do all of my work on a google drive account tied to my work email. This is great, because I can hot-swap my work station to wherever the boss wants me today. Sometimes he likes to pretend I'm a secretary and throws me in his office. Sometimes he thinks I'm a technician and puts me at a station with no computer. Whatever. Data is transient. 

Anyways. Things have been tense recently. I've moved almost all of my job to digital, and the boss thinks that means I don't work any more. Obviously, an office monkey with no papers is an office monkey with not enough work. Now, he wasn't EXACTLY wrong. I had been automating things, and was doing the job of about 6 people.

How can I do the job of 6 people without the boss knowing? Easy. He likes to manage by the seat of his pants. One day he fired a maintenance person and just "rolled" that job into the receptionist, driver, and technician jobs. One day he decided that the sales team could handle marketing - surely buying a single $2000 camera is cheaper than having a professional do shoots each week. Besides - guerilla handicam sales pitches are in vogue, it'll be great! 

Moving on, after two years of "shuffling" I had accumulated a large amount of jobs. Many of them tedious. And, with the right tools (made by me, at home, on my personal laptop that happens to be able to connect to the network), a good 4 hour job can be completed with about 10 minutes of sorting and parsing data. 

So the time comes. We all know its coming - one of the suits tipped me off that the particular suit who's payroll is wasted on chumps like me had propositioned the boss that a pair of receptionists can do the work I do, for cheaper. Just hire some college kids, work 'em each 18 hours a week, it'll be grand.

Knowing that, I backed up everything to my personal google.drive account - but of course did not delete anything from the company owned one. Like I said, the State has a vested interest in these processes, and I knew in my heart-of-hearts that the company couldn't be trusted to maintain records. I didn't want to be on the hook for that in 6 years, so I kept a copy.

I figured it would go smoothly. I'm called to the big office for a meeting. There's too many suits, my supervisor gives me some side eye. It's not a surprise. I carefully make sure to click, "Log out of all locations" on my Google account and tuck my laptop into my car before heading upstairs.

The meeting starts with the boss saying, "Well kiddo," yes, he calls me kiddo. Since I'm not 60 years old, I'm obviously a child. "Well, Kiddo, I'm sad to say that I was wrong. I shouldn't have hired you. You're fired."

Well... that was blunt. And rude. So I stand up, extend my hand across the table, and prepare to thank him for the last few years.

"NOT so fast. Sit down, we have things to discuss."

Hahaha... what? I sit down for a moment, in brief shock. The adrenaline starts to pump and my finger tips are cold. Boss begins to tell me all of things they need from me. Contacts. Account statuses. Explanation of discrepancies on AR accounts. documentation for State interests. All things that, as his competent employee, I could have printed and sitting on his desk in moments. I decide to comply with him starting the meeting by saying I'm fired. Where I live, either of us can stop the employment situation for any reason. He had legally fired me.

I counter him, "Well, Boss, I don't feel particularly comfortable accessing your network since I'm not an employee."

He exploded. Think of Karen, a millionaire Karen with little-brother syndrome who wants to be John Wayne but looks a bit too much like Smoky the Bear's fat cousin to get the role. His explosion was violent. Spit everywhere. I'll save you the details of how he stalked me to my car and demanded the employees "form a barrier".

He called me a few times. They went to voicemail as I drove to a public wifi hotspot. I carefully removed my laptop from their network. I drove home, unpacked my work lunch. My phone hasn't stopped ringing - he probably had a receptionist being paid minimum wage to hit the "redial" button.

Eventually I answer a call from his cellphone. He makes some demands. I very flippantly offer to come to work for him at 10x my rate. He yells some more. An hour later, he's pounding on my door. I don't want to deal with that, I know he carries a loaded pistol in his car (again, cowboy - emphasis on the boy). The cops escort him away and I email a copy of my security footage to the responding officer. He thanks me.

The company doesn't flounder, of course. Bossman is a millionaire, and has been very carefully losing tens of thousands of dollars a year while operating his business. He may have lost some more in the interim. 

But that's not my concern. My concern is collecting my unemployment. And wouldn't you know, I was fired a few days before fall college class selection begins. I decide to take a few master level classes - I've had my BA for awhile, might as well get some more school in on the Boss's dime. Classes go well, and I coast through spring semester by tapping into a bit of savings. And wouldn't you know it? The pandemic happens, and my unemployment benefits are extended. Guess I'll take some summer classes. And those extended benefits were at 3x the base unemployment rate? Gee wizz, guess I can take a full set of fall classes too. And then the state extended it for another 3 months at double the base? I have winter session's signup date marked on my calendar!

The bossman calls me this morning. I coyly thank him for firing me without cause a year ago, and let him know I made the Dean's list last semester. He tells me to fuck off, he called to take me up on my deal - he'll hire me at 5x my rate to give him some information. I remind him, "Wasn't the deal 10 times my rate?"

Fuck you, 5x is too much. And I only need you for an afternoon.

"Well, I've been thinking about it. My unemployment benefits run out in a week or two. So I'll do it. I'll contract for you. I want 20x what I was making. 40 hours minimum. Paid in advance. Oh, and written scope of work - I'm only doing the work you say you need done during negotiations."

Fuck you, I'll give you 5 times and a day of work and that's final.

"No, thanks Boss. I have to get back to the classes you're paying for. Thanks again!"

I hang up. He calls back an hour later, just moments before I started writing this, actually. It's actually his daughter, the comptroller of the company. She says she spoke some reason to the boss. He'll hire me at 20x my rate for 40 hours of work, half paid up front.

"Actually, it was 100% up front, not half."

Fine. she starts telling me what needs done. Turns out, they're failing a State audit quite badly. Like, "Boss is not a millionaire if this isn't fixed" kind of badly. They have all the information they need, of course - it's on my company email account's google drive.  I'm not going to tell them this. Once he pays me for half a year's work, I'll gladly spend the hour or so of time it takes to transfer all of the data he needs to a flash drive, wait until Monday of next week, and then hand it to his receptionist.

Really, the man couldn't have been nicer. He's already covered me going to college full time for over a year, and is about to cover another two semesters. I should buy him a cake.

-----------------

**Edit / Update:** I got a call. They seem to have decided that the daughter/comptroller would be the best point of contact, which is fine with me. We got along fine, she has a nice kid that used to run around the office. It seems like the bulk of the issue is the information that they can't find. That's roughly zero work. But since they can't find that information at all, auditors are nitpicking very fine details that my replacements have bungled up. From the way she told it, it sounds like a nightmare. The literal end of times. Honestly it sounds like a solid day of work running through their server with some of my tools. Maybe two days. She wants me to start ASAP while they finalize writing up a contract. I gave a surprised, "Heh" of a chuckle and said no dice. Contract first, and I'll have them pass the audit perfectly, like I always used to.

"But there's a deadline."

I work fast.

"You don't understand, we only have until the end of the month. This needs started on today."

I work fast, and it sounds like you should hire someone who knows how to write contracts fast, too.

"Whatever. If you don't fix this you're.... you know what, nevermind. I'll email you something in the morning."

Sounds like a plan, good night.

--------

edit 2: I'll do a final update once everything is settled, per the subreddit rules. The ending won't be as glamorous, but it will be an ending.

Edit: everything was wrapped up. I'll post an update and link back here once I can. (Link: https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/jlnb0f/boring_update_dont_start_a_meeting_by_ending_the/? )Like a lot of the stories here, my MC was due to scheduling.  

I was a system administrator for a big, 3 letter telecom company in the one small(er) department.   There were two admins, me and J.  J was awesome.  Super intelligent, very friendly, and was great at his job.   He and I decided that I would come in early and he would stay late, so there was more coverage during the day.   It worked great for both of us for a few years.  

I would get to work around 6:30 am.  I would review all the system generated reports overnight, check the health of the servers and database, and then generate the daily reports for various managers throughout the company (including my own manager and his boss).   After 9 hours (plus 1 for lunch), I would go home around 4:30 every day.

J would show up around 10:30 and would usually be the last person to leave around 7.  

My old boss left and my new boss, T, was a major idiot and a huge asshole.  He knew nothing about IT and should have never been put in charge of people.  (he was a nepotism hire)

After about 6 months of T working there, he brought me into his office.  

He said that he was very concerned about how I would just up and leave each day at 4:30….so consistent that you could set your watch by it.  

I tried to explain that I’m there at 6:30 – 3 hours before he showed up and 4 hours before J showed up – but T was having none of that.  I was leaving way too early.

I asked him what my hours should be.  

He said I should be more like J.   He said “J is usually here long after everyone else leaves.”    

Once again, I tried to point out that J gets there at 10:30 – 4 hours after me – and leaves by 7…an 8.5 hour day (with an hour lunch), where I get there at 6:30 and leave at 4:30 – a 10 hour day (with an hour lunch).  

T just couldn’t comprehend that.  

So, I complied.  I told him that I would be the last one to leave from now on.  

T was happy.  

So, I came to work about 10:15 the next morning (which was a Friday).  I started my normal routine and about 10 minutes later, J came in.   We worked the day and the last person (with the exception of J and me), left around 6:30.  We both left at 6:45….and I made sure that J left the building before me.  

The following Monday, I once again showed up at 10:15.  This time, there was about a dozen emails and a few voicemails from managers and executives all over the company wanting to know why they haven’t received their daily reports.  (These reports were used in various Monday Morning meetings all over the globe).   I explained to them that my hours have changed, and they would be getting their daily reports by 1:00 PM.  

One of those executives was my bosses, bosses, boss.  

Before the end of the day, I was in her office with T and T’s boss.  

I explained to her the same situation that I had explained to T before this all started.   

She immediately told T that the work I did between 6:30 and 10:30 was mission critical to the entire company and I was to immediately go back to my old schedule.  

I then sheepishly pointed out that 6:30 to 4:30 was 9-hour work days and J’s 10:30 to 7 was 7.5-hour workdays.   I said I would be happy to go back to a 6:30 start time, but was going to limit my hours to 8 hour days (since I didn’t get OT).  

So, starting the next day (Tuesday) and every day after, I showed up at 6:30, did my work, and smiled and waved at T when I went home at 3:30 later that afternoon...so consistant, you could set your watch by it.  

------
Edit to add 3 things  

1.  I don't get OT because I was salary...but my salary was based on a 40 to 45 hour week.  

2.  To those who say I threw J under the bus - he was well aware of the situation and supported me.  Plus, (as I said above), he was absolutely amazing at his job.  They wouldn't touch him with a 10 foot pole.  

3.  I've only received 1 left nipple pic in 2.5 years, so the user name doesn't work that great.When I pay my mortgage, I round up and divide in half. I pay half every other week.  So my mortgage got picked up by another company when my mortgage company went out of business.  To do what I was doing with the NEW company was $300 to enroll and an extra $40 EACH PAYMENT.  Oh hell no.  I spoke to my credit union and they had an auto pay that would pay my bills from my direct deposit FREE.

So nearly a year goes by and I get one of those scary ass letters "You are in default on your mortgage. Unless we get X payment within 10 days of this letter we will foreclose." I was astounded since I had never missed a payment and was actually paid a couple of months ahead.  I spoke with their accounting  department. It seems they couldnt accept "half payments" only full payments (even though they had done so for year) so the money had to sit "unapplied" until a full payment was accrued. That made sense EXCEPT again, they got MORE than enough and it was always in there in full before the due date so on the due date they should have just taken it and applied it to the mortgage.

So further digging, the rep says to me "OH by the way - we have $8200 of "unapplied funds" in this account. What do you want to do with it?" Uh PAY MY MORTGAGE WITH IT?  "Oh we cant do that." So I had to get a check cut for $8200, pay $45 for them to overnight it to me, take it to my credit union, cash it, pay $25 for a cashier's check, and pay ANOTHER $45 to send the cashier's check BACK to them.  I called relentlessly to see when it had arrived and had all kinds of postal tracking, signature confirmation, etc. Remember, I only had TEN DAYS to get this shit straight!

So they get it and verify that it is applied to my mortgage and that there will be no foreclosure. The rep tells me "Well your next payment is due in 2 weeks and there will be penalties and late fees applied so the amount is XYZ AND we are raising your interest rate (to nearly twice what it was before)." Uh no. ALL THIS IS YOUR COMPANY'S FAULT.  She says "You knew these were the terms and conditions when you took out your mortgage with us." Uh no. I didnt take it out with YOU, I took it out with another company and I was ASSIGNED to your company.  "Well dont be late with the next payment!" Uh no. I want to speak with a manager.

So I FINALLY get to speak to a manager and he wasnt much better. His only response "Well you can always go with another company but good luck with that these days - so many foreclosures and your credit is not very good from missing so many payments."

So I decided to take his advice. I contacted my credit union, explained everything, showed them THEIR OWN payment transfers, AND the mortgage statements showing the other company had received the money bi-weekly like clockwork, and...the credit union took over my mortgage. I got a reduced interest rate AND killed all the fees, penalties, and got the overpayment back (I applied it to the new mortgage payments) etc.

So when a company acts like they have you over a barrel and tells you to try to go with someone else, DO IT!!

EDIT: This still astounds me even after all these years. I cant imagine any other company - car loan, credit card company, etc - asking "Hey what do you want us to do with all this money sitting over here?" and not AUTOMATICALLY concluding "Oh yeah, lets apply it to the outstanding balance!"Back when I was in nursing school, we were supposed to wear black, non-porous, close-toed footwear with non-skid soles for our clinical rotations that weren't Crocs. Most of my fellow female students wore classic nursing clogs like Daskos and Sanitas. I tried wearing clogs like this in the past and had rolled my ankles too many times to recall, so I decided to not go that route for shoes. 

I'm a military spouse, a vet myself, and have aforementioned shitty ankles, so my footwear of choice was a pair of black leather tactical combat boots. As a show of support - and to make sure I always looked sharp at clinical - my hubby always shined up and edge dressed my boots every evening before clinical the next morning. The boots always looked professional, they were comfy as hell, I could bump my toes into beds without breaking a toe, and I could wear them all day without having back pain, foot pain, or rolling an ankle. The same could not be said for my classmates wearing more traditional shoes like clogs. 

During the first week of my first semester, I had an old-school nurse as my clinical instructor. I say old-school because she believed female nurses should still be wearing crisp white uniforms with the stupid starched hats and that our profession lost prestige when we transitioned to scrubs. This instructor got such a bee in her bonnet about my boots and decided that my boots were out of regulation that she threatened to take it up to the director and have me tossed from clinical thus failing the program. 

There was nothing in the handbook specifically stating I couldn't wear my boots since it just stated 'footwear' which was black, well-maintained, non-skid and non-porous. Check, check, check, check. Furthermore, the pair of boots that I wore were meant to be worn by EMT's, so they were waterproof, bloodborne pathogen resistant, puncture proof, oil proof, non-skid, and had reinforced toes. They were just as expensive as Dansko clogs, and could handle lots more abuse. I knew I was in the clear, and so I decided to keep on wearing them. 

The day after the instructor commented on the inappropriateness of my boots she did a uniform/shoe inspection to make sure we were appropriately attired. I, of course, was wearing my nicely polished combat boots. She failed me for the day based on my boots, so I politely objected, stating that my boots fell within the definitions of acceptable footwear in the handbook. She literally marched me to the directors office like I was kid caught stealing cookies and demanded I get tossed for the boots, failure to follow program rules, and disrespect because I objected to her failing me. 

The program director, upon further close reading of the program regs, determined there was nothing that was wrong with the boots, they adhered to the standards set forth by the program, and that they were honestly safer than most of the shoes the other students were wearing because they were waterproof, puncture proof, non-skid and had reinforced toes. She rescinded my fail and allowed me back in clinical. After that, I heard not a peep about my boots from any of the faculty the rest of my program.

Fast forward to graduation... 

I had been my wearing combat boots since I started and had no intention of stopping, especially since many of the vets that I cared for during clinical always reacted positively to them. Our nursing pinning ceremony - the event where we receive our nursing school pins and are officially recognized as nurses - has an all-white dress code. White uniforms, starched white hats, white close-toed footwear. The word 'footwear' is key: the dress code did not state shoes specifically, and I knew this. 

Same bitchy old bat nurse sees me in the hall and makes it a point to tell me I'll have to get some 'real' white nursing shoes to wear to pinning since I can't obviously wear my black combat boots because we needed to have white footwear. I politely smiled, nodded, said that I'd have white footwear, and went on my merry way...

...And then wore the all-white Doc Martin combat boots my linfantryman husband bought me as a graduation gift to pinning. The instructor stopped me after the ceremony and complimented me on actually getting nursing shoes... At which point I pulled up the leg of my white scrubs and showed her my boots. The look on her face was priceless. 


TL;DR... Nursing instructor tries to fail me for wearing combat boots, nursing director okays it, I wear black combat boots the whole program. Same instructor tells me to wear white nursing shoes for the pinning ceremony, I wear white combat boots instead.

**EDIT: So this post kinda blew up, and a lot of people are asking what kind of boots I wear. I wear ATAC 2.0 8" Defenders by 5.11. You can get them directly from 5.11, or at Galls. Thank you for all the love!**In a previous life—before my world came apart about five months ago—I was the solo pastor of a medium-sized church in a large(ish) Southern city. One unhappy side effect of being a solo pastor is that when your phone rings, you answer it even if you don't recognize the number since you have no idea how important the call may be. It could be a church member's grandkid (whom you've never met) calling to tell you Miss Bessie has been diagnosed with some horrible disease. Or it could be a church member who just wants to talk your ear off for two hours. 

So earlier this evening my phone rings. And since old habits die hard, I answered it. 

Me: "Hello?"   
Her: "Heeeeeey, what are you up to?" 

I want to be clear before I proceed that I don't recognize this lady's voice but I just assumed that she was a former church member, member's kid or grandkid...something. So I was cordial. 

Me: "Not much, honestly. I actually just walked through the door with some food. How about you?"   
Her: "I'm hanging out with {girl whose name I don't know}."   
Me: "Great. I'm sorry to have to ask this, but with whom am I speaking? I don't recognize your voice and I have no idea who {other girl} is." 

**Ladies and gentlemen, apparently that was the wrong thing to say.** 

Her: "Darren, you know who this is! This is Jessie!"  
Me: "Well, Miss Jessie, I hate to break this to you but my name isn't Darren and I don't know any women named Jessie. I believe you've called the wrong number."   
Her: "No I didn't! This isn't funny Darren. What happened? Did you leave your ringer on again and you're worried your wife is going hear us talking?"   
Me: "Ma'am, I'm very sorry but now I *know* you've got the wrong number."   
Her: "I want to come over there and tell her all about us and how you've been screwing me behind her back for two years. I'm sick of this shit." 

**Cue malicious compliance.** 

Me: "...you know what, that would be great. By all means, come to my house and wake my wife up and tell her all about our torrid sexual affair."  
Her: "I'm leaving now." *engine cranks in background.*   
Me: "Okay. See you soon!" 

Five months ago I discovered that my wife of ten years started cheating on me eighteen months into our marriage. She racked up a grand total of 16 affairs in a decade. 

Somewhere in my immediate area a man's wife was just awakened by her husband's sidepiece banging on the front door. She deserves to know what kind of man she married. I'm just sorry I can't be a fly on the wall for the very special episode of the Jerry Springer Show that just started in her driveway.I worked for a big (American) technology and defense firm with tens of thousands of employees. A senior executive who had worked there successfully for years was caught with a falsification on his résumé. He was fired immediately, and a new policy was instituted requiring all employees to sign a form giving the company permission to query the college or university with their highest claimed degree for verification.

I have a doctorate from an old prestigious European university, an institution that I was quite sure would have no interest in such a query. But whatever... I signed the permission form and attached a note warning the company that the university would probably ignore the request. Which it did.

After a month or two with no response, HR called me in and said that the university had not responded (as I warned) but that corporate would accept a photocopy of my degree. Fine, I'm good with that.

Remember the "old, prestigious European university" part? My degree is a piece of actual parchment about the size of a throw rug, with a wax seal about a centimeter thick, and written entirely in Latin.

So I bring it into the office and photocopy it a bit at a time by sliding it around on the photocopier window. Takes like 12 pages to get it all. I staple them into a pile and give it to HR, who reluctantly pass it on to corporate.

Another month passes. HR calls me in again. "Corporate is complaining that your degree is written in a foreign language."

"Yep," I say. It's in Latin. "Tell them to find a priest to translate it." And walked out. 

Never heard from them again about it.

_______________

EDIT FOR CLARIFICATION. (1) This took place well over 20 years when stuff like this did not all happen on the web... snailmail and paper were the standard.  

(2) Commenters are taking the "throw rug" simile a little too literally. It's quite large but would make a rather measly throw rug.

(3) My work was in the civilian sector and did not require a clearance. The fact that I am an American with a foreign PhD did not cause any hassle.Many, many years ago I worked in a small coffee shop on a University Campus. Work was great, we had fun and loved the owners. Unfortunately after two years of working there, they retired.

New owner came in, put up multiple cameras (like 8 in a 3m x 10m coffee shop with all the cameras trained on the counter and staff areas) and used to proposition the girls (we were all university students so 17-21 years old) that they would get extra shifts if they went home with him. If you argued back then you got your work hours cut down the bare minimum.

A couple of months in, he decides that he's going to change the uniform. Our uniform was just a loose black polo shirt with the cafe logo, black pants and closed shoes - standard coffee shop staff attire. He decides that the uniform will change, but only for the girls.

Now the girls will wear a midriff top with the cafe logo and low rise pants. The boys still get to wear the old uniform. We argued that it was unsafe (hot coffee and plates of food next to bare skin) and got told too bad, so sad. Staff got together and hashed out a plan.

The first day of the new uniform, the girls showed up in the old uniform. The boys showed up in the midriff tops and the low rise pants.

The new uniform policy lasted an hour. Boss was not impressed.

No-one lost their job because our coffee shop was right next to the law faculty. One of the students had already had a conversation with her lecturer about what was going on. I'm pretty sure that if we'd been fired for non-compliance with uniform, that the boss would have found himself in far more trouble.Note: The story is sad and I have sympathy for the victims but I don't feel like a bad guy. Two layers of compliance.

Years ago I lived in a very Hispanic neighborhood (vaguely relevant information) with a lot of young children. They were very loud and screamed constantly during all hours of the day and night. Not just giggle playing screams but blood curdling horror screams.

All. The. Time.

One day I get a knock at my door and see two blue shirt police officers; white guy and Hispanic woman. They ask me if I've seen anything strange, creepers, uncomfortable situations, etc. Things have been pretty normal and say as much. They proceed to tell me that a little girl is missing and if I had heard a scream or struggle. I let them know that the children scream everyday and constantly, so I wouldn't have paid attention to any particular scream.

That's when the Hispanic officer lost it. She got IN my face about racist white males ignoring the plight of Hispanics, not caring about the neighborhood and community and for not calling the police when I heard a child scream.

So I agreed to dial 911 at every child scream from that point on.

Within three days I had to called 911 at least 15 times. Each time I explained it was relevant to case #XXXX with officer (Hispanic lady) that I should report a child screaming in the neighborhood.

Eventually I got a call from a superior officer about abusing 911. I agreed and was told to contact Hispanic officer directly with any other information regarding the investigation.

Malicious compliance level II. 

Now I was authorized to call Hispanic officer directly, day or night, when I had information regarding the investigation.

And I did. Every scream, she got a phone call. 2 in the morning and kids are screaming? Guess who else gets to wake up?! Morning officer Hispanic lady!

She tries to get me in trouble for harassing her but I had a nice trail of documentation with 911 and her own supervisor to always keep her informed of screaming children.

To help everyone feel a little better, the little girl was kidnapped by her uncle and found safely in another state. 

Some edits to help. I didn't read 800+ comments but I'll try to give some more information over all.

-MC level I ended after the first weekend and MC level II ended by the second week.

-More than once (witness car accidents, questions about domestic violence) I've been given direct contact information by officers. Though in this case I was given the business contact by the other officer.

-The white male partner during the initial encounter did nothing. I could only tell he was alive because he blinked. He was a non issue.

-I probably was too casual about dismissing children screaming, but it was the officer who decided I was ignoring 911 worthy phone call situations. Quit your bitching.

-Duh, it's malicious compliance so someone will call fake. I'm not telling a boring everyday story but a once in a lifetime one off. That's the interesting part.

Edit #2 and hopefully last addition.

This was as much a CYA(cover your ass) as it was Malicious Compliance. I wanted to make sure everyone knew I wasn't indifferent to my neighbors or trouble in the neighborhood.Years back, I drove a truck/delivered furniture. My helper and I got along great and we worked very well together. The warehouse manager was kinda a douche-bag that really got off on the power trip. He was always so serious, like he believed that you couldn't have fun at work.

He instituted a "Two Hour Window" policy for deliveries. I'm sure most of you are familiar with this now, but it was new to the company. He would create our route for us, time everything in his head and create a schedule. He would then call the customers and let them know what two hours we would be expected at their house. 

The first day the policy was in place my partner and I kicked ass. We got so we were ahead of our window, So I called the next customer and asked if they minded if we came early. The customer was very happy that they didn't have to wait. I did that for the rest of the deliveries that day. We ended up back to the warehouse before our last delivery was even scheduled.

Did we get a GREAT JOB!!? Did we hear,"Maybe I messed up on the scheduling". No, we hear, "You broke the rules by going to the customer's house before I said you could be there. If it happens again you will get written up!"

OK.

We would start out our day busting ass. We would fly through the deliveries until we reached a time where would just stop for an hour or two. I live in New Jersey, there is a lot you can do. We went to arcades, museums, the beach. All paid time because we wouldn't want to break the rules and get written up.This happened to me a few years ago. I was owed a significant sum of money by the company which handles my doctor’s billing (she worked at a large healthcare system which outsourced billing to this company). For months and months I tried via email and phone to get the money back....but each contact I was treated rudely or ignored. They would either say they are still working on it or would act like I had never requested the money in the first place and needed to start the process over. It was maddening.

One day after receiving another rude email from this company I decided to leave a Yelp review on my doctor’s page. I essentially said that while the doctor and her staff were helpful and professional, the billing company they used was atrocious and made the entire experience not worth it.

Lo and behold, the very next day I get a call from the CEO OF THE BILLING COMPANY. He asks what the problem is and I explain. He says, “Ok, I’ll make sure the money gets sent ASAP. Could you please take the review down?” Apparently he was getting angry calls from my doctor and he seemed pretty pressured to get it taken down.

I respond that I can take the review down after I get my money back. He gladly accepts my offer. A week later, there is my check in the mail.

Here’s the thing though. I never specified how long until I would take the review down after I get the money. So I wait a week. Get some calls/texts from the CEO. Ignore them. Wait another week. Respond that I’m having technical problems logging into Yelp but should have it resolved ‘soon’. After about 6 months of him reaching out and me being as unhelpful as possible I finally took it down. The next time I returned to that doctors office, it was a whole new billing system, not sure if my review made a difference but it was sweet malicious compliance regardless

EDIT:  
Wow this has really blown up. Thank you for the awards.

I went back to review my correspondences with the billing company. It made me realize the whole situation was even more screwed up than I had originally described here. The reason they owed me money was because at first, my insurance had told me they were not going to cover the appointments because the doctor was not in-network. However, I had found the doctor through my insurance website. When I went back to check, the doctors name was no longer listed on their website. Luckily for me, I had taken a screenshot at the time so I could have the phone number for the doctor on hand. After I sent the insurance company the screenshot, they agreed to cover the appointments. They paid the billing company, yet the billing company refused to refund me the money I had paid. So essentially, they were collecting from both myself and the insurance company and trying to get away with it. American healthcare in a nutshell lol.

Also, when I told my wife about this post she told me I need to make a correction. The CEO sent me a check within four days, it was not even an entire week. After months and months of reaching out.

EDIT 2:

I’m not going to provide the name of the billing company, I don’t need any more drama with them.

The insurance company was Aetna. Seriously screw them.This story was posted in Child-free, and I was told you people here may like it, this isn't exactly the same as my other post but it'll be close enough, I don't wanna just copy n paste. 

&#x200B;

Last year I went to my Uncles house for Thanksgiving, I cooked the turkey the day before and put it into the fridge before going to sleep on their couch. I woke up to their young kid screaming in my face to make him chicken nuggets at 4 am in the morning. They never make him behave, nor punish him for anything he does, so I ignored him and went back to sleep after he decided to go scream at his parents he wanted nuggets. Cut to 9 am, everyone is getting things ready for the day, cooking is beginning for the dishes that need a few hours in the oven. They didn't buy a turkey, they asked me to buy one, I decided to cook it the day before and thought we could toss it into the oven an hour before the time to eat arrived so it would be warm, however their kid started randomly coming up behind me and screaming as loudly as he could into my ear. I asked them to make him stop, seeing as I prefer my hearing intact and don't like anyone just screaming in my ear for no good reason. 

&#x200B;

I was told by my Uncle, word for word 'It's our house, if you don't like it, leave.' 

They where shocked when I actually did just that, I opened the fridge, took my turkey out, got into my car and drove away. Not one minute after leaving I was getting spammed by calls and texts asking, begging, or threatening me to come back with the only turkey for thanksgiving. When I got home, I called him, and told him 'You told me to leave if I didn't like it, so I left, play stupid games, win stupid prizes' then hung up, and blocked his number. I have many stories about them refusing to control their kids, then them having to deal with the consequences that result in this.A few years ago i bought a new shed/sunroof combination for my garden, it was pretty expensive and thus i also paid for the company to build it. Knowing me, i would mess up so i was happy to pay for a professional to come fix that for me.
The shed has a roof with a bitumen topping, it looks like very thick sandpaper. The professional builder tacked it in place and that was that. I asked him if no glue would be needed to keep it in place, but obviously i know nothing and that was a dumb question. Lo and behold, 6 weeks later a mild storm blew off the entire bitumen topping of the roof. 
I called the company only to be told i should have known this would be a temporary roof and these need to be changed like every year. (Can you smell the BS?) I replied it has only been 6 weeks, you need to come fix this. Nope, a storm was the reason for damage, act of god, no help from them. Well ok, they promised to send a new roll of bitumen so i could replace it myself. I waited, no bitumen.

I went to their facebook page to find lots of people complaining about similar stuff. I wrote a review warning people to not buy their expensive sheds as they get built wrong and any damage resulting from this does not get resolved by them what so ever. (Mind you this shed was over a 1000 euros)

A half an hour later i get a phonecall from said company. They tell me they will come the next day to put on expensive shingles to make up for the damage, at their own cost. BUT i do have to change my review. I waited for them to come fix it, and they held to their promise. So did i.

I wrote on their page how they came and fixed my roof, even exchanged the material for a much more expensive solution, the very next day, at THEIR OWN COST! Needless to say this caused a sh\*tstorm of customers demanding the same solution. 
You're welcome, assh\*les.

TLDR: company messes up their own product, refuse to solve the problem. Only want to resolve it after an angry review on their facebook page. After they resolved the problem i changed the review to a very positive story, resulting in many many others demanding the same.

Since people keep asking; yes they came to fix the roof.My boyfriend and I broke up a few months ago, but there have been complications with the apartment because we are both on the lease, and blah blah blah. But I found a new place to live and moved out last weekend. I got the important stuff out, but there were still a few small boxes left and I didn’t go through the kitchen because I didn’t know what my new roommate had. My ex helped me move, and everything was going very well and we were being cordial. 

Well, last night, my ex asked me to come over to pick up a few of the small boxes that were in the closet, and to say hi to his dog who was sad that I was gone. So I go over there; we are hanging out. I play with his dog. Everything is good. Then I asked him if he minded if I took the dish brush because my new house didn’t have one. I asked because I bought this dish brush just a couple weeks ago, and I even splurged on a nicer one (like $5 lol). 

Side note: I am the only person in our relationship who ever bought household items like this. I just moved into a new place where the rent is higher. I’ve had to pay for a moving truck, and all the other little things associated with moving somewhere new. The last thing I want to do is go to the store and drop another $50 or so buying a bunch of little things I literally just bought a couple weeks ago. 

Apparently asking for the dish brush triggered him, and he made the ridiculous dictate (at 8 pm on Wednesday, mind you) that I could take anything I that’s mine TONIGHT, but anything that was there when I left THAT NIGHT would be his property now. 

I, annoyed, said no, that I don’t agree to this. I immediately said the dish brush was not a big deal. I told him that I did not come prepared (with boxes, bags, etc) to get everything I wanted from the kitchen.  I said I could do this tomorrow or any other day of his choosing. I begged him to compromise. I told him I wouldn’t take the dish brush or anything that he said he wanted. However, he only tripled down, and refused to budge from his ridiculous demand. 

So I became very irate. I told him that if he was going to make me move all my dishes out in plastic trash bags tonight, that I was going to take every last thing that was mine. Again, I am the only person who ever bought anything like pots, spices, utensils, cleaning supplies, etc. I was planning on leaving most of it with him because my new roommate already has a lot of this stuff, but I decided that if he was going to make such a ridiculous rule, then I would take it all. I took the dish brush, the sponges (used and unused), all my spices, the soap, the utensils, all the pots, the Tupperware, the toothpicks, the toilet paper, the pillows, the wall hooks, the coat hangers...I even took the light bulbs. I took it ALL! 

Did I yell? Yes. Was I petty? Absolutely. But I think it is quite petty to make a demand on the spot, that everything I don’t take tonight becomes his when this was not the pretense under which I came over, and I was obviously not prepared.Costco has a pretty relaxed return policy, so 99% of the time customers bring things in to return or exchange, my friend says it's no questions asked.

But if on the computer system he notices in someone's transaction history that they're abusing the system, he'll deny the return and offer a pretty clear explanation as to why. Honestly, most people don't raise a big stink. The evidence is pretty clear and they say, "okay, I didn't know that's how it worked," and go on with their lives.

But last week, a customer was getting upset that my friend wasn't going to do a return even though there was a long list of transactions that made it pretty obvious this guy was routinely buying things, using them a few times as needed then returning them. In this case, he had bought a bunch of food and was trying to return the packaging for full returns. He's not backing down.

My friend has full authority to cancel a membership (and this comes with a refund most of the time), so he tells the guy, "Sir, it doesn't seem like you're happy with our products and services. I'm going to go ahead and cancel your membership and give you a FULL refund of the annual fee."

The guy, immediately understanding that this means he won't be allowed back in a Costco, sits kind of stunned for a few seconds, then gets REAL panicky, like "No no no, I'm good, please don't do that."

My friend isn't backing down so the guy asks to speak to a manager. Friend plays the whole "I am the manager of this department." So the guy escalates.

The assistant warehouse manager comes over and looks at the transaction history and immediately sides with my friend, saying virtually the same thing but in super sing-songy "we're so sorry you haven't been happy with the products we sell," and backs my friend up while he finishes cancelling the guy's membership.A few years back, I started my first job as a mechanic and was informed of a mandatory monthly kart race in the local track which was promoted by my boss and owner of the company. 

He didn’t care if you enjoyed it or not, he booked the time slot and we all had to show up (after working hours and paying our own ticket to drive). It was supposed to be a team building exercise and I could see the boss really liked race cars through the various pictures and trophies in his office. 

During the week, in anticipation to the event, boss would motivate / participate in setting the mood for the upcoming race. It was the only topic that week and I was told by colleagues that this was really important. 

I knew that, on the evening of the race, I had to pick up my girlfriend and that would clash with the race, so a couple of days before, I told my supervisor that I would not attend the race. It was after hours and on my dime anyway so I didn’t think it would be a problem. 

Some 20 minutes later, I’m summoned to the boss’ office and he’s not looking happy. He tells me that building the team spirit is one of his priorities and that I’m new there so I was to give a lot of focus to this monthly event if I was to keep working there, because it was part of the “core culture of the company”. I really needed the job so I just said “Sure thing, boss”. 

On the evening of the event, I drive to the kart track and, upon arrival, I see my colleagues all in jeans and t-shirts and my boss in full ballerina attire. He had racing overalls, racing boots, gloves and even a custom helmet. It downed on me the reason for the event and why so much attention was given to it: kart racing was his thing. 

With about 15 racers, I asked to start dead last. Boss man listens to me talking and intervenes in front of everyone that we were there to race and not to just drive around slowly. Up until that point, I wasn’t really paying much attention but I decided to comply and show how much the “core corporate culture” was important to me. 

Starting from last, I proceeded to overtake all other karts, including boss man on the outside of a fast corner (overtaking on the outside is often seen as a bold arrogant move). After just a few more laps, I reached him again and, as I was about to lap him, he went into the pits and stepped out. 

I duly won the race and, as I left the track into the bar (the real team building event), someone tells me that the boss had left. At the bar, the topic of the evening was how I had outraced everyone and how the boss, who had won all races since ever, was livid with my performance. 

Too bad for him. I guess I forgot to add to my resume that I had raced karts competitively as a kid so I knew what I was doing and shattered his “Ricky Bobby” dreams. 

After that, I was always courteously invited but never again required to show up to his events. I went a few times but arrived late on purpose so I would just take part on the bar thing and not the race.I was working for a small local store chain (17 stores across the state). Paid $1 over minimum wage, apparently had decent benefits if you were full time (they made sure no one was), and wasn’t too terrible. 

Then last week the entire staff at a different store quit at once. Didn’t think much of it until our boss’s boss came in and said he needed people to go cover that store. It was 42 miles away. Do we get any sort of raise or gas money? “No, we don’t pay you to drive to work”. Will we work 8 hour shifts? “No, you’re all part time employees”.

Of course, everyone started voicing their disapproval. Half of us don’t drive at all, and most share a car with a family member. We’re making maybe 20k a year and now they want us to drive over 1 hour each way in traffic to work a 3-5 hour shift? The manager(director?) got upset and said, “I will be back tomorrow and expect 4 volunteers. If you don’t want to be a team player, I suggest you find another job”.

So I did just what he suggested. Went online and found companies offering entry level positions for several dollars an hour more and some even had a signing bonus. I had two interviews set up the same day and ended up taking a warehouse job that paid $3 more and had a $1000 bonus after 120 days. Two other coworkers got a job there as well and we’re encouraging everyone at our store to apply. Apparently the job market has gone crazy lately but none of us were really looking we we didn’t realize we were underpaid.I worked graveyards in a large furniture warehouse preparing furniture for the drivers next day deliveries.  Each prepper was responsible for prepping two bays for delivery.  

To prep the furniture we would unbox all furniture, put feet on couches, hardware on dressers, build dining room chairs and make repairs.  

The culture was to prep your bay and when you finished you helped the next bay and snowballed until everyone was finished and then you would hop on a cherry picker to get last minute additions or replace damaged furniture. 

This place decided to implement a production standard.  You were given an allotted amount for each action down to the nut and bolt.  If you added up your allotted time and you finished early you got a 10 cent an hour bonus equaling 80 cents a day.   Also, this was to prevent you from helping other bays as you weren’t allotted time for other’s work. 

Malicious Compliance... I was efficient and didn’t waste any movements.  I would blast through my bay, add up all the allotted time and saw that I finished two hours earlier than I was allotted.  

Rather than turn in my sheet and get 80 cents extra for the day, I sat on a comfy couch at the end of my bay and did nothing until my allotted time was up.  

I remember when the manager drove by and said, “we need you to go help —— and get damages.”  I just looked at my watch, then at my beautifully prepped bay and said “I’m still prepping my bay.”  Put my headphones in and leaned back while he looked completely shocked.  There was nothing they could do as I was still on the clock for my bay.  I saw it more beneficial to get paid for two hours of doing nothing than 80 cents to work my ass off.This happened years ago but a post on here reminded me of it. 

So when I was a freshman in college I registered for a basic ass English 102 course that doubled as a humanities credit. I thought “great, two birds one stone” despite the Rate My Professor for this class being abysmal at best. 

A few things to note, I have ADHD and dyslexia (bs ds ps and gs) so I have a hard time reading most times but especially handwritten stuff. Even my own. It’s also important to note that I had an ADA allowance on file (meaning I get some permissions to allow me to take classes and function as normally as possible). These permissions included use of my tablet during class to write notes and about an hour longer on tests. 


Well first day of class, the professor strolls in with the arrogance and snobbitude of someone who *thinks* they’re getting tenured this year. He starts talking, going over the syllabus and says “there will be no phones, laptops or technology of any kind in my class. You will write all your notes by hand” which isn’t going to work for me, so I raise my hand and ask him if I can talk to him privately about the rule. 

That went over about as well as a lead ballon and he starts getting snippy and says “anything you need to talk with me about can be found in the syllabus”. But again I said that I needed to talk to him and that it was pretty important. Finally he just says to say it to the class, he doesn’t have time to take out to deal with whining of any kind. Like ok dude. So I say that I’m dyslexic and need my tablet to do the notes and read the assignments, and that *my ADA permissions are on file and emailed to all my professors before class*. 

He says “yeah I saw the email but I don’t care. You can do the work just like everyone else, you’re not special even if you were in special ed” 

The class goes deadly quiet at that. 

Im absolutely shocked at his bold and completely hilarious lack of awareness and care for his job. Im staring at him open mouthed and he thinks he’s won. He’s got this smug little face like I’ve just been told and they’re no other options nor is there any way he’ll regret his behavior. 

One of the girls in class finally finds her voice and calls hun out in his ableism and lack of decorum but he cuts her off saying “if you don’t like my rules, you can drop the class” so she says “okay” and pulled out her laptop and dropped the class right in front of him, and taking the cue from her 3 other students and I do the same and we leave class together. (At the same time) 

I’ve never met this girl before but she then asks me if I want to go to the dean because honestly I’m really shaken so I said yes and we go straight there telling the dean of students what happened as well as the ADA counselor. They took the girls statement and mine, and discovered that this Professor had pulled this shit for years but nobody wanted to get involved. 

Six months later I hear that not only had the Professor not gotten tenured, but he was fired and blacklisted from teaching at the collegiate level.


EDIT: WOW this blew up oh my goodness! Thank you guys so much fir the awards and I’m trying to reply to everyone but it’s a lot. 

I really appreciate the awards but please don’t spend real money on me! Give it to a women’s shelter or ADA foundation.So after I graduated college I went back to work at my high school job at a large auto parts chain. I have a few stories of malicious compliance from there because it was a miserable place to work with miserable management, but I think this one takes the cake.

I lived about 15 minutes from the store and would routinely work 1-2hrs past my shift to help the manager close up and tally cash sale receipts(we were mainly wholesale so the cash receipts were a small portion of the sales and had to be tallied by hand) as well as take out the trash, prep and stage the first deliveries for the next morning, as well as sweep the store front. I didn't mind doing these things because I got a little OT out of it, got in the good graces of the manager(or so I thought), and being that even though my drive home was short, staying a little late and letting traffic die down was fine with me. 

One morning I walked in at about 9:07, when my shift was scheduled to start at 9am. I didn't see what the big issue was since I had been staying late every day for months helping him close the store, but he apparently took issue with it that day. Which would have been fine if he had said something along the lines of "hey, liabilitylandon, you're late and I know you worked long yesterday, but let's still get here on time." But that isn't what he said. He flew off the handle and went on about needing to "work my schedule" and "we have schedules for a reason" and "you just need to be at work for the schedule that I made you". Well needless to say, since I had been staying late for months to help him close the store(it's against policy to not have 2+ people in the store at a time) despite it not being "on my schedule", this rubbed me the wrong way. So, I convinced myself that instead of causing a scene and yelling, I would just do EXACTLY what he said.

So, 5:30 rolls around(we closed at 6) and I stood in front of the computer until it hit 5:30 exactly, clocked out, and started walking towards the door.

Manager: where are you going?!

Me: home.

Manager: what? Why? Who is going to help me close the store tonight?

Me: I dunno, but you made it very clear I was to "work my schedule". So, I get off at 5:30, it's now 5:30, and I'm going home.

And I walked out.

The next morning I got there at 8:55 and just stood in front of the computer until it hit 9:00. Phones ringing? Too bad, my shift hasn't started. Deliveries need to go out? Sorry, I'm not on the clock yet. I clocked in at 9:00, and then clocked out at 5:30. Same conversation as the day before about who was going to help him close.

The third morning I walk in, and he waits for me to clock in, then pulls me aside to talk to me.

Manager: you know, I think we can overlook a few minutes in the morning if you stay and help me close.

Me: oh, interesting. I thought I was supposed to just work my schedule.

Manager: yeah well I guess we can overlook that.

I had very few problems with this manager after that little exchange. If y'all want more stories from the insane tiny-tyrant filled auto parts world, just let me know. Plenty more where that came from.


Edit:Wow, my first silver! Thanks redditors! Had no idea this thing would blow up like it did. Guess I better get to writing down these old stories.

Edit again: I'm dumbfounded as to how this took off! Thanks for reading! I really thought this was a pretty run of the mill post for this sub but y'all apparently thought it wasn't and spread the love. Thanks!

3rd edit: 15k? Are y'all serious?!? Crazy!

I would,however, like to clarify that this was by no means my finest moment in terms of being a well adjusted adult. Was I in fact late? Yes. Was my response petty? Yes. Would I handle it the same way now over a decade later? Hopefully(and most likely) not. But that isn't the name of the game in this sub, because this is "malicious compliance", not "I did the right thing".This was years ago but it still makes me giggle. When I was 19, I got my first real office job. We weren’t customer facing so everyone dressed really casually. Jeans, tennis shoes, t-shirts. One day my boss called me in to talk to me about dress code. He said that he’d like his assistant to wear business attire like they do at the corporate office. I ask what that is and he said like little dresses with jackets. I felt icky but I didn’t fully understand why for years. That night my boyfriend (now my husband), took me to the store and I bought 5 outfits that exactly matched my bosses’ attire. Old man jeans, cotton button up shirts and loafers. That’s what I wore until I left the company. He couldn’t say a damn thing and he never talked to me about dress code again. I now realize that it ruined his little fantasy and it makes me proud of my young self.

Edit

Well, this has been quite a day for my first post ever! I’m so glad my son talked me into Reddit because I’ve had the liveliest conversations with so many people today. For an extrovert, this is a dream come true. 

I love all of you! I’ve seen some really beautiful thoughts here and it’s really made me feel better about sharing the world today. Take care of each other, share your strengths and be as weird as you really are. 

And if I write a book, it will be called Malicious Compliance by F.U. Patience. Should you ever see it on a bookshelf, know it’s dedicated to you.Long story short:

I was employed at a rather large factory which is one of the largest plant based companies in the world, recently bought by an investment firm not so long ago.

Anyways, I developed a program which was used at the factory, it could tell whenever any machines were not running, even if it was due to a manual stop or anything else. My program knew the reason why the machine was idling. This program made it so much easier for the entire factory, workers were happy because they didn't need to do any manual work and write down every time the machine stopped.

Lead up to about a year ago.

Factory appoints a new chief, all the old employees that were in a leader position was let go because it was time for "new blood to come in". There was talk a lot of talk about selling off parts of the factory, including machines and so on. This included programs that I had developed, including the program that identified whenever a machine stopped. I developed this program on my spare time, showed it to the old management and they liked it enough that they wanted to use it on every station in the factory. Every machine was to use this program, all that had to be done was for the program to be maintained weekly. This was around 5 years ago or so.

When the newly appointed factory chief wanted to let the the old employees, me included, leave, it was not known that I was the person behind that program. Anyways, at my meeting with HR and the factory chief I said that I was willing to sell them the program and teach someone how to maintain the program. The factory chief laughed in my face and said it was company property and that it was simply "their program"  and not mine. I offered to show them the source code and everything but it lead up to the point where if I was to tamper with the program before my departure, they would sue me. I was officially let go, 2 month countdown began and after 2 months I was free.

After a week or so, they noticed problems with the program, it would stop loading, stop registering stops and it would mislabel stops. I knew that this was when the fun was about to begin. After a month, I was called in to the office and was told that "I had tampered with the program because it had suddenly stopped working." I let them know that someone had to maintain it. I was ordered to teach someone how to do that job and I told them "after you pay me for the program rights". They wouldn't budge and I was told to return to work.

When I had a week left, I strolled around the factory floor for a while and noticed that no stations were running my program anymore. I asked some operators why that was and they told me that "it just stopped working, now we need to fill out forms every time the machine stops manually." I shrugged and told them to thank the factory chief.

I left after that week, got a phone call about a month after I left where they begged me to sell them the rights and teach someone how to maintain it.

I never sold them that program, instead I sold an improved version to another factory nearby, where I am now employed.

Edit: I see some are saying that I am in the wrong based on US law, just editing here to let you know that this did not take place in the US. I made the program during my spare time at home on my own computer. After introducing the program to the former factory chief, I was allowed to try it out on one machine and test it. The maintenance was done on my office computer. After a few months I was allowed to roll it out for the entire factory. It wasn't done overnight, lots of debugging to do. I have not heard anything from the company for nearly a year so it would be weird for them to suddenly come after me now. Just wanted to make that clear.I am a store front window painter. I typically give quotes for jobs based on supplies and time to do the job. I recently had a business owner ask for a mildly simple design on a small window and gave her the price of 150 and did the job. The business next door wanted a very simple design on bigger windows and so I did the job for 250. After I painted they didn't like my price and wanted me to charge by square foot instead of complexity and time. I had them sign a contract stating the price per square foot regardless of design and that payment was due immediately. Then I measured the windows and the price came out to 500 dollars. Made for a nice Christmas bonus.Might as well share something that happened to me. Saw a thread over on legaladvice that reminded me about this incident, figured it might fit here. This happened to me in 2013. i was over 30, had gone back to school, and it was the Friday before finals week on my last semester to finish my CE degree. Bordering around campus, it's rather low income and not highly educated, and not a place I frequented.

****

I walked into a gas station, we'll call it Square L, about 7:30am. Locally, that's 30 minutes after they start selling alcohol, county is dry between 3am and 7am. Grab two of the largest packs of cheap beer they sell, and head up to the register. No big deal, just stocking up for a small "study party" with friends on campus later that day.
 
The person behind the register eyes me suspiciously as I set them on the counter and tells me I'm not buying them. I politely explain it's after 7am, and I don't see a problem. The manager, denoted by dress shirt instead of polo leans over and tells her to get my ID, so she asks me for it. I'm like fine, whatever, and I fidget around a minute before realizing it's in my car. I say as much and offer to grab it, and she told me to go ahead. 

I dash out to my car, grab my wallet from my book bag. No big deal. Walk back in and present it to the person at the register, who promptly glances at it, snickers, snaps it in half, tosses it in the trash, and tells me to get the **** out of her store. 

I stood there a minute, sort of dumbounded. The manager tells me to get the **** out of the store or police will be called and someone is getting arrested. I mumbled something along the lines of oh shit, and opted to comply with the second half. I went to my car, grabbed my phone, called non-emergency and told them I just had my driver's license taken and destroyed, read off the address, ended my call, then headed back inside and stood. 

The manager tells me that's it, they are calling the cops. I let her know I already did. The clerk laughs and shouts for the people in the store to hear "ya'll want to stick around, this punk *** ***** called the cops on us for taking their fake ID"

It took about 10 minutes, but they showed up. As they arrived, the manager rushed out the door, and I walked behind. The cop asked for me immediately by name, dismissing the manager pointing at me and rattling off about my 'fake ID'. I told him what happened, and I was told to leave or cops were to be called and someone were to be arrested. 

He then takes the statement from the manager, then the clerk, then requests the ID be retrieved from the trash. He looks it over, and hands the two pieces back to me. 

He hasn't said anything other than simple requests for info up to this point, then asks me to come along, and we're going to have a chat outside. At this point, I'm actually growing a bit concerned. 

He punches in the DL number, and up pops my face and info. Clean history both driving and criminal. He then lets me know that destruction of a license is a misdemeanor in this state, and asks which one snapped it. We have a brief conversation, and at this point, he's smiling ear to ear. He asks me if I want to press charges, and at this point, I've already missed first class, so state I do. I'm told to play along with him, and we share course of action. By this time, there were 4 squad cars, and police milling about. Customers had grown scare.

We walked back in, I'm staring at the floor looking pensive, and he says loudly "What do we say?" and nudges me. I politely say, "I'm very sorry this happened, and I'm sure it won't happen again." The clerk and manager begin chuckling. I then finish with "The manager requested the clerk take it, who snapped it, then the manager is the one who said someone is getting arrested."

The officer undid the cuffs from his belt, walked up to the clerk, and began with miranda rights. Another did the same to the manager. 

Another 30 minutes roll by while they are sitting in the backs of squad cars, store is devoid of employees until someone walks out from the back cooler. I wait patiently, eventually they are cut loose under 'own recognizance' and I'm given a date to play witness in court. 

We head back in and the manager is IRATE. The employee, on release, bolted. 

I pay for my now-warm beer, and leave.

My professor got a great laugh out of the police report, and let me do my project presentation late anyway.  

****

TLDR: The juicy bits are above, but in a nutshell, "Fake ID" taken and broken then trashed, I'm told leave or someone will call cops and someone will be arrested. I complied with the second option. 

****

Edit: Just got home from work and RIP my inbox. Thank you for the gold. Guess I need to make a few replies now.

Edit2: As for the court date, one of them pushed it further, so it turned into 2 dates. As the witness, I showed up, but wasn't really needed. The first pled no contest to a charge for destruction of state property, got 6 months probation and 1000 hours of community service, as well as having to write me an apology. The other ended up pleading guilty to an obstruction charge, and got 6 months probation only. Neither ended up going to jail, and only wore bracelets for the 30 minutes or so in the car. Sorry it's a bit anti-climatic, but I felt justice had been served.  

EDIT3: For those who say 1000 isn't possible, it started as probation and 100 hours for the first person who plead no contest. They spoke out against the judge. He upped it to 200, then 500, then 1000. Kid kept mouthing off, but the judge, at that point, told the bailiff to remove them. That was the clerk, and I remember there was a string of other offenses on their record. The manager had only had a previous possession charge, but on his date, acted humble and polite in court, total opposite of how they had in the store with the cops. 

EDIT4: I never did get the apology letter. If it was written and turned in, I have no idea where it went. 

EDIT5: For perspective on how this county does things, I, myself, received 200 hours and 6mos probation for getting caught stealing a pack of cigarettes when I was 19 (we were all young and dumb once, and they didn't used to hide behind the registers everywhere), which I served in about 50 hours picking up trash, then the guy signed off on the whole time.. so I doubt they'd have had to actually serve the whole thing. Early in my career I was working on a government project and assigned to validate contact information for people in the area (phone numbers, emails, addresses, stuff like that). I'm still shocked people used such rediculous emails on government forms. Emails similar to "BigTittyMaster69@ gmail" or "xxxSmokeBlunts420xxx@ Hotmail " were very common. (neither example are actual emails I delt with, just reminiscent of them) 

One day I went to my asshat boss to ask about one email. All I got out was "Im having an issue confirming..." and he cut me off saying just send it to him and he'll do it himself.

What he didn't let me get out was that the email was "Admin@ *very clearly a porn site*" and we had constant internet monitoring so I couldn't exactly verify it (also, I really didn't want to). It literally had "Furry" and "SM" in the site name.

So, doing as I was told, I sent him the email.

Thanks to our shitty walls my coworkers and I were treated to a loud "OH MY GOD" and the ensuing phone calls from IT and HR asking him to explain himself later that day.

His eventual response just said "verified"A few years ago I worked for Company X as the manager of some key administrative staff and had a chance to serve up some malicious compliance. 

&#x200B;

A bit of background;

&#x200B;

At the time of the MC I had 4 employees;

&#x200B;

\- Generic Employee 

\- Rock Star

\- New Guy

\- Dipshit (could not be fired as he was related to some very senior managers - nepotism at its best)

&#x200B;

We worked closely with the ops team where one of our responsibilities was to perform certain tasks - without which the entire operation would grind to a halt. 

&#x200B;

At the time there had been some expansion and a second shift was introduce (thus new guy was hired). Like anytime something new happened there were a lot of teething issues. At the time Dipshit and Generic Employee were covering the new afternoon shift (rotating weekly) while I had New Guy learning the ropes on the morning (where the workload was a *lot* heavier) with Rockstar and Generic Employee/Dipshit on their week of mornings.

&#x200B;

Anyhow - as mentioned, there were some problems with introducing a new shift and the Ops Manager (who I had worked with in the past and we didn't really get along) did as most managers do when something isn't going right - passed the blame over to our end (to be fair some truth to it however Dipshit was a minor cause at best). 

&#x200B;

One thing I really didn't like about Ops Manager was she was the type to go behind your back and be nothing but smiles to your face. 

&#x200B;

At the time Ops Manager wanted Rock Star on her shift - because he was the type of person who would constantly go above and beyond to make things happen (read: fix her problems). Instead of asking me if it was possible - Ops Manager went to our bosses boss to complain that everything that was going wrong was due to my department and how she needed my most experienced employee on her shift.

&#x200B;

The next day I got an email from The Boss with Ops Manager, My Boss and Her Boss copied in;

&#x200B;

"...... please ensure your most experienced employee is on the afternoon shift to help Ops Manager".

&#x200B;

I was a little annoyed.

&#x200B;

I must have spent about 10 minutes just looking at that email - my temper consistently rising the entire time.

&#x200B;

Until it finally dawned on me - Ops Manager wanted Rock Star but the request was for my most experienced employee.

&#x200B;

What Ops Manager didn't realize was that Dipshit had started about 2 months before Rock Star - and a few years before Generic Employee.

&#x200B;

Suddenly I was in a great mood and must have had the biggest shit eating grin on my face as I typed my reply.

&#x200B;

"Hi The Boss,

&#x200B;

We are of course happy to help Ops Manager with the multitude off issues that is happening within her shift.

&#x200B;

As such, Dipshit, being my most experienced employee will spend the next 8 weeks working only on Ops Managers shift"

&#x200B;

My boss and I had a great laugh over it - as it was essentially career suicide to complain about Dipshit - there was nothing Ops Manager could do but grin and bear it.When I was 19 years old and a fresh high school (or my country's equivalent) graduate, I had no idea what I wanted to do with my life. The one thing I did know is that I needed money, so I started applying for all kinds of jobs. After a few weeks of writing applications, going to interviews and waiting nervously for replies, I was hired as a full-time sales assistant an international company making smartphones, TVs and other electronic gadgets. 



Said company was in the process of opening their first official store in my country and I, as I was hired about 3 months before they were due to open, helped them however I could. I created one-pagers (basically posters that show all the hardware inside a device plus a picture), translated manuals, put security tags on products etc. Whatever they wanted me to do I did, sometimes until late at night, still foolishly thinking that this initiative would maybe be recognized in one shape or another.
Alongside me they hired 4 other people: 3 more sales assistants and a store manager, all of whom were young and ambitious, just like me. The grand opening went very well, business was booming for the first 2 weeks and everything seemed fine. That's where the problems started.



The first thing we realized we didn't have were guidelines on how to handle returns and warranty cases. As the company's electronics had been available online long before the store opened, some people now started bringing in their devices to get them fixed or swapped out, none of which we knew how to handle. This annoyed a lot of customers, being given the information that only devices bought at our specific store would be handled under warranty only made things worse for us. We were getting abuse on a daily basis that ranged from curse words to death threats, once we even had to call security because a customer was threatening us. This stress caused one of my collegues to quit, understandably. 



This, as it turned out was only the tip of the iceberg. Some of the other problems we had included:

-Having a break room with no access to fresh water, no fridge, no microwave and of course no bathroom (all big no-nos where I live)

-Resupply came in sporadically at best, sometimes we were resupplied twice a week, sometimes there were no deliveries for three weeks, making it very hard for us to tell our customers when their devices will be arriving.

-The store manager was so incompetent, he couldn't even finish our schedules 3 days in advance, allthough giving the schedule two weeks in advance is mandatory.

-One of my collegues thought "fuck this" about a month after our grand opening and went on sick leave, which where I live basically gives you immunity from getting fired, so now we where two men down.

-The bosses upstairs apparantly wanted us to provide tech support over the phone, which again none of us where trained to do. We did our best, but only really ended up with more threats in addition to having our official store phone number constantly blocked by these calls. Also, we were expected to take over social media communications as well, meaning we now had to answer questions on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram etc., putting even more strain on our small team.
In the end, the manager couldn't deal with the stress anymore and broke down about 2 months after opening. He even sought psychological counseling after quitting. While I was sad to see him go, I thought that now my time had come to prove myself.




I took over most of his duties, still only earning about half of what the manager made. Naively I worked 60 to 70 hour weeks for almost 3 months straight, still thinking that this would somehow pay off. I made sure to tell my bosses how much more I did than we agreed upon in my contract, but they didn't seem to care. That is, until our sales figures dropped. All of a sudden I had two of them come into the store unannounced, basically drag me into a back room and start lecturing me on how badly the store is performing. The conversation went something like this:

Boss 1: "So, why would you say the store's sales performance has dropped so much since (Manager) left?"

Me: "Well, a lot of customers are unhappy with the way we h-"

Boss 2: "Our products are very competitive, why are you still struggling to sell them?"

Me (slightly disgruntled): "Well SIR, as I was trying to say, the customers are not happy with our service and running a store with just two employees is almost impossible. If we could hire two more assistants, maybe we could focus better on our numbers..."

Boss 1: "The interviews for those positions are ongoing, you will have new employees soon. But you were hired for a reason, so would you just do your fucking job?"

Me:"...yes sir."

After that meeting I felt defeated. Doing all this extra work, staying late, taking responsibility for things I had no business taking responsibility for, the threats, the uncertainty, the stress, the sleep deprivation, all for nothing. And that's when it clicked in my head: 



Fuck those guys. The wanted me to do my job? Fine. From now on, I would do exactly what my job description says, nothing more, nothing less.




The next day, I came in early, opened the store, everything normal. Until the first tech-support call came in. I picked up the phone and, after listening to what the caller wanted, told them that I was only a sales assistant and therefore not qualified to answer their questions. Hanging up the phone without saying goodbye, a postman came in with some special documents for the store manager, requiring a signature. I said nope, sorry, not gonna sign that, I'm not a manager. After being informed that these were court documents and need to be signed for immidiately, I just shrugged and said: "Not my problem, just doing my job here man."

Later that day, after my collegue had arrived, we got a delivery of new product for the store. The delivery guy handed me the manifest, asking for a signature. Again I declined, stating that I was just "doing my job" and the manager would have to sign that. After making it clear to him there wasn't a manager on site, he left, taking all of the new product with him, product which we desperately needed. But I was beyong caring at this point. About fifteen minutes later, I got a call from Boss 1, asking me why noone had signed for the delivery. I told him that, as there was no manager on site, nobody there was allowed to sign that document. After a few choice words, he hung up the phone and I went back to work, chatting with customers and generally not caring about anything.



Half an hour later, Boss 1 and 2 descended onto me. They rushed into the store demanding an explanation for my behaviour. 
I simply replied: "I'm just doing my job sir, just like you asked me to do."

Boss 1: "What the fuck do you mean? Then why has nobody accepted today's delivery or the documents we've sent you?!"

Me: "Well, that's the managers job. I am not a manager."

Boss 2: "Yes you fucking are, what the hell are you talking about?"

Me: "Uh, no, not only would my pay be pretty poor for all the work I am doing, my contract clearly states that I am a sales assistant and as such shall only fulfill duties related to that position."

Boss 2: "And who the hell is supposed to the managers job if not for you?"

Me: "I don't know, but I would gladly do it, if you doubled my salary of course."

Boss 1: "Hahaha! (actually laughing in my face) Who the hell do you think you are? We can have you replaced with someone cheaper in a heartbeat!"

Me: "Okay then, go ahead, I quit, effective immidiately. Bye."

And then I just left. My remaining collegue, upon hearing me quit, also quit immidiately, leaving our former bosses wide-eyed with no employees to run their store. I had also taken the liberty of informing the board of health and labour about our working conditions, as well as getting myself legal counseling for some issues related to bonusses not being paid out. The store ended up having to completely shut down for about 2 weeks until they had a skeleton crew back together to run it.



The kicker? About a month after I quit and with my lawsuit for unpaid wages now pending, I got a call from Boss 1, telling me he wanted to accept my offer of doubling my salary to become the store manager. He said noone was willing to take the job now that word got around how awful things are in the store. The following conversation ensued:

 
Me: "Frankly Boss 1(I used his first name here, just to piss him off), I don't much like getting laughed at, so I'm afraid if you want me to come back, you're gonna have to quadruple my initial pay."

Boss 1: "What?! Are you insane?! We can't afford that, how are we supp..-"

Me: "I don't give a fuck Boss 1, I really don't. But I've got an idea! How about you pull your head out of Boss 2s ass and just do your fucking job?"

*Click*


EDIT: Wow, reddit gold? Thank you, kind stranger(s)In the sixth grade, I bore witness to a stunning example of malicious compliance.

Several grades of classes from our elementary school were called to the gymnasium for some lessons on self-defence.  We were to be given some very rudimentary examples of how we, as children, can fight off an attacker if there are no other options. The instructor was a man who had a long martial artist title and was unbearably smug about it. Sure, he'd made some big accomplishments, but he would take every moment available to deliver his lengthy champion title verbatim. Damned if I can remember what it was; it might have been a wilful effort on my part to erase it.

He was instructing us on how to basically go belly-up like a distressed turtle and kick off an attacker. We weren't really understanding how this was feasible, and we were asking a lot of questions about it. He got tired of the questions and called up a volunteer to demonstrate the self-defence technique. He called upon Alice, a girl in my class.

He didn't just tell her how to get into position, however. He was putting his hands on her and getting her to lie belly-up on the waxed gymnasium floor in a way that was truly creepy and invasive, even to children who might not understand why. He gave her long stares and made some quiet remarks to her that we couldn't hear, but the expression on her face said, "Yuck." I was only 11 years old, but I got the gist of the situation and thought to myself, "This guy is fucking gross."

She had her legs up to kick, was making kicking motions but clearly swerving away from making direct hits to this man. It wasn't enough for him to just have the kids understand the technique. He needed to demonstrate his martial arts prowess. He said to her, "No, go ahead and fight me. This works on an amateur, but I'm a (insert his lengthy and proud title here)."

He could not have known, but my entire class knew, that Alice was a competitive swimmer. She had swimming skills beyond her years and all the medals and awards to prove it. Complete with the muscular development of someone who has spent years mastering their sport, particularly in her legs.

Alice seized the opportunity to fight off a man who was already throwing up some problematic indicators of his own predatory nature. She kicked him a few times, clipping a shin or a thigh as he artfully dodged her full-on attacks with a big grin on his face.

She then triumphantly planted her sneaker directly into his crotch with a force that made both her and this man red in the face.

He let out a strangled yelp before crumpling to the ground. He dry heaved a few times, too. He was in medical distress and some adults rushed to get him help. To the children, though, we just saw a guy get kicked in the balls by a kid, and that's comedy gold in elementary school. He was helped out of the gymnasium amid the roaring, bellyaching laughter of 100+ children.

Astoundingly enough (to me, at least), Alice was facing punishment for what had happened. Detention was already assigned, suspension was up in the air. Thankfully, Alice's mother rose up with the fury of a thousand women scorned after hearing Alice's testimony of events. Alice faced no suspension, and to my knowledge did not attend any after-school detention sessions. For the rest of the school year, she was recognized as the ultimate badass, and reigning queen of justice-by-testes.

TL;DR: Self defence assembly was called by my school, the instructor was both smug and creepy. He called up Alice to demonstrate a self-defence technique and insisted she fight him off, she crushed his reproductive organs and chaos ensued.

Edit: I understand why anyone who hasn't had the lived experiences of myself nor Alice would doubt my retelling, and it's your prerogative to feel however you want to feel. While it happened, there is little I can do to convince you of that. Please read Rule 3 of this sub before you leap to the opportunity to express as much. Thank you.I posted this story years ago, but it just occured to me it would fit in well with this sub.

For a little background: I used to work in a call center selling vacations for a major hotel chain. My boss was a huge douche. All he did all day long was walk around and make sure everyone had their shirt tucked in. (and generally be a negative prick who everyone hated) No customers ever saw us, and we were secluded from every other department because we were really loud (if you have ever worked in outbound sales you know what i mean) There was literally no reason to tuck in shirts, but the boss for some reason thought this would help us sell better? (I was the top salesman on night shift, and 3rd overall in the company. It didnt help at all)

So I come into work on my birthday, and my friend runs up to me and yells "redditingwhileworkin!!! happy bday!!!" right in front of my bosses office. He looks up and says "redditingwhileworkin!" I'm thinking hes going to say happy bday since he no doubt heard her, instead he said "yeah go ahead and tuck your shirt in k?" and he does the hand signal like he's tucking in an imaginary shirt. So I say "ok no prob, I just have to put my stuff down real quick and I'll take care of it." So I walk over to my desk, which takes approx 7 seconds to get to. I go to put my stuff down, and as I am he comes up behind me again and says "hey I said to tuck in your shirt!" So I quickly tuck it in, and as hes walking literally right by me i say "sorry i just had to put my stuff down first" and he walks by like I never said a word.

Immediately, I bust out my HR manual, and check out the rule on tucked in shirts. Turns out you must tuck in all shirts EXCEPT a Hawaiian shirt or a "Guayabera" shirt. So right after work I take my ass to walmart, and buy 10 of those fuckers, and wear the most obnoxious Hawaiian looking shirt the next day. The second I walked in, he looked me up and down, glared, turned around and walked away. When everyone asked why I was wearing such a ridiculous shirt, I told them about the loophole, and within a week half my office was wearing hawaiian shirts. It drove my boss crazy...all within the guidelines outlined by company policy =)

As an update to the story from the last time i posted it, the boss eventually got fired for getting a blowjob from one of the girls in the call center while he was in his office. I had already moved on to another company by then, but when i heard i got a nice chuckle out of it.This is a xpost from /r/LegalAdvice. Edited a bit for this sub. I was told y'all may enjoy the story :)

I'm transgender, MtF, 23, and I was born and raised in Tennessee and they're not so lgbt friendly. Neither are my neighbors. Tennessee refuses to let me change my gender. Sucks, maybe one day I'll move somewhere else. idk if that'll let me change it since I have a TN birth certificate, but that's a question for another time.

Tennessee also has laws prohibiting women from going topless. Now, first off I will not post pictures for science. Second off I definitely have boobs. For all intents and purposes, when I go out jogging I pass as a woman. Someone recently outed me to my neighbors, and they have replied with several nasty letters and other such stuff, calling me a gay man and other bigoted garbage.

So my revenge was to jog around the neighborhood, topless. I don't see the problem- they're calling me a man, the state is calling me a man, walking around topless is allowed for men. But see, I win, because now they've called the cops saying a woman is running around topless in their neighborhood, oh god cover the childrens eyes boobs are evil. Suddenly I'm a woman. Nice logic you got there.

Aaaannnddd then I got a call from the cops, and they wanted to talk to me. As I was so well informed due to Better Call Saul and the top of all time page from /r/legaladvice, I told them I was busy, and I hung up. I later got another call and did not answer. This whole thing was actually kinda obnoxious I prefer a sports bra to hold them in place.

In the end, I talked to a lawyer, who thought it was hysterical, and we talked to the cops, who also thought it was hysterical, and we all agreed I wouldn't do it again. Apparently it technically is against the law, somehow, though my lawyer said he was sure the charges would be dropped. I decided not to fight it, cuz honestly I didn't want to end up being held in a men's prison. A couple of my neighbors actually got my point, surprisingly, and I've made a couple friends.

The rest of those grumpy bigots probably told their kids I'm satan :)Not me, but my spouse's grandmother "Frankie"

After my spouse's grandfather "Bill" died suddenly of a heart attack, my spouse's grandmother "Frankie" was understandably devastated, but went about closing his estate with a stiff upper lip. Until she got to one bank account that was only in Bill's name, not a joint account with both of them.

Despite having the death certificate, will, and other documentation required, the bank absolutely would not let Frankie close Bill's account. But for whatever reason, they would allow her to withdraw money.

Being the type to not suffer fools, Frankie withdrew all but $0.01 from the account. The next day, she got a call from the bank's branch manager explaining there were minimum balance requirements, and the bank account would be subject to a service fee if it didn't have a certain amount of money in it at the end of each month.

"No problem," Frankie tells the manager, "just let me close the account."

"We can't let you close an account in someone else's name," the manager says.

At this point, Frankie realizes that it doesn't affect her if a bank account in someone else's name goes negative because of service fees. The manager won't budge and neither will she, so the next month, the account goes negative after the bank assesses a $2 service fee.

That was 17 years ago. The bank still calls her from time to time to ask her to bring the account back into the black, but when she asks about closing the account and they tell her only Bill can close it, she promptly hangs up on them and goes back to playing bridge with her friends.One of my law school professors was a public defender (an attorney who represents poor criminal defendants) in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, before he came to my school. He told me a story about a particularly uptight (read: sexist) male judge and a fiery female public defender who did exactly what he asked.

Court begins. The attorney walks in, wearing a conservative pantsuit that wouldn't be out of place in any courtroom in America. The judge, an old man, raises his voice, points his finger at the attorney, and says, "Do not come back into my courtroom until you are properly dressed. Women do NOT wear pants in my courtroom."

The attorney does not respond. She simply walks out of the courtroom.

A few minutes later, she returns, wearing her suit jacket and...that's it. You see, her jacket was cut long, so by itself, it fell to a little bit above her knees. She simply walked into the restroom, took off her pants, and came back to court.

The judge never enforced that "women cannot wear pants" requirement in his courtroom again.This just happened last night. 

I work at a small mom and pop pizza place in a small town. We’re the only not-gas-station pizza place in town. Friday nights get busy. So my boss is cooking and I’m waitressing. The cook cooks and the waitress does everything else. It would be nice to have 2 of us but we manage and the people of our town expect it and respect it after all these years. 

It’s busy, I’ve got several tables and the phone has been ringing off the hook with to go orders. I’ve got piles of dishes, someone is constantly at the register and food is constantly ready to go out. My customers are being great! Everyone is smiling and laughing and not worried that things are taking a bit longer than a Tuesday night. I was busy but not stressed yet.

TheN he calls. Some guy from out of town (there was a high-school game so we had a few out of towners that night). He orders a large thin crust (our thin crust is very thin, about as thin as a cracker crust but it’s not crispy like that) pizza with pepperoni. Easy peasy. He wants it well done...can do! He wants us to put it in the oven for an extra 5 minutes...I say ok with zero intention of doing that. 

We have a brick oven, our thins go in the oven for 3-4 minutes, 4 and a half for well done. That’s total. This guy wants 5 extra minutes on top of that. He wants a 16 inch charcoal hockey puck. I assume he thinks he knows what he’s talking about and just put on the ticket “well done”. We do our thing. His pizza looks beautiful. 

He comes to pick it up and before paying he opens the box to inspect his pizza. This is normal and I’m not worried. 

Him: “I asked for my pizza well done!”

Me:”this is how we make our pizzas well done. Any more than this and your pizza will burn.”

Him:”I’m not paying for this, I’m not eating this, I want a new one and I want it how I ordered! Put it in for 5 more minutes!”

At this point my boss taps me on the shoulder and tells me to take over the cooking while he handles the customer. Our kitchen abuts the register counter, I’m literally making pizza 5 feet away from the interaction so I get to hear the whole thing.

My boss tries to tell the guy how long we usually cook the pizzas, what’s going to happen to his pizza etc etc. customer is having non of it. He wants this pizza cooked the normal time plus an additional 5 minutes. After a few minutes I can tell my boss has had enough of this guy. 

Boss:”sure you don’t just want this pizza?” (Meaning the one we had already made)

Guy says no so my boss brings it out to one of our regulars and let him have it. He comes back to the guy and informs him if he wants his cooked for 9 minutes he needs to pay first. Guy seems satisfied and pays.

I hop back to waitressing and boss takes over cooking and making this guy his pizza. It goes in the oven looking beautiful. Boss sets the timer for 9 minutes and makes sure to show the guy the timer, he just smiles and chuckles a little.  I’m bussing tables and checking people out and answering the phone while we wait on this guys pizza. 

The timer goes off for his pizza. Guy comes closer to the counter. It’s my job to cut the pizza as soon as boss man puts it in the box. He lifts this solid black, hard ass charcoal hockey puck out of the oven and sets it in the box. You can barely tell it’s a pizza anymore. I attempt to cut it but it is so over cooked it more or less just cracks and crumbles. My back is to him so I can’t see his face but I can imagine.  I close the box, turn and hand it to him with a smile on my face. 

Me:”enjoy your pizza sir!”
Guy: stutters a bit “I can’t eat that!”
Boss:”we made your pizza to order, if you want a new pizza you’ll need to order a new one and pay for that.”

The guy has this completely broken look on his face. I was actually almost looking forward to a blow up (my boss is a force to be reckoned with if you curse or disrespect us). He left his pizza on the counter and left. 

This is why I love my boss. Recently discovered this subreddit, and love it. First time poster, English not my native language, etc.

&#x200B;

When I was about 16 or 17, like any other kid at that age, I desperately wanted to go to a party all my friends went to. All of my friends were older than myself, so they had no curfew, or were allowed to stay very late. My dad, however, was a pain in the ass at that time. Or at least, that was my perception. He wouldn't let me go anywhere, and when I was allowed to go, he'd give ridiculous curfews that held no account with the nature of the event. E.g. going to the movies at 8, but demanding to be back home at 10... that kinda limits your choices, right? And you don't want to be *that* friend who puts constraints onto the group.

Sorry, I digress. Anyway, that particular day, I negotiated for him to give me a later curfew. After a while, he stated that 2 AM was the absolute latest I should be home. That sucked, because most of my friends had a 3 AM curfew AND the party was at least a half an hour bike-ride away. So this would mean I would miss more than 1h30 of the party (yeah, severe case of FOMO here). I tried to negotiate some more, but then I realized what date it was. Enter Malicious Compliance.

You see, it was the last weekend of October, on a Saturday. I don't think this is the same everywhere, but in the larger part of Europe *this means that Daylight Savings Time ends.* At exactly 3 AM, clocks are set back one hour. So I went to the party, not by bike. I asked for a friend to drop me off, making sure that I would be there exactly on time. I made sure that my dad didn't hear me a minute too soon (because then, I would be almost an hour late!). At exactly 3 AM (or better: 2 AM for the second time), I opened the door and got in.

Needless to say he was furious, demanding an immediate explanation as to why I was an hour late. When I said I was exactly on time, pointing at his own radio-controlled watch, I could see his face turn all kinds of red, and an awesome mix of defeat and anger in his eyes. He sent me to bed, knowing I was right, and I complied, knowing I was very wrong.

Nevertheless, it was an awesome victory!

Edit: Some context on the curfew. 2 AM was definitely a reasonable curfew. Not exceptional though: it's very often something like 1AM for 16yo, 2AM for 17yo, and as of 18 you're legally an adult, so do whatever the hell you want.

Edit 2: Thanks for the awesome reactions (and for the silver, wow!)! I always assumed this was the kind of story where everbody would know somebody who pulled this off.

Edit 3: Holy \*\*\*, this kinda exploded overnight. Thanks for the replies, upvotes and even my first gold! And to all those commenting what a sh\*tty kid I was to my dad: of course this was an inconsiderate move to make. But first: kids will be kids. Second: this subreddit is called r/MaliciousCompliance. Not r/GoodyTwoShoes  ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯

Edit 4:   
I live in Belgium. Judging by most the comments, the curfews mentioned in the story and in my first edit may look ridiculous for the average American, I didn't realize this. But really: these are pretty average for a European country.

As for the "18, do whatever the hell you want": this comment obviously applies to curfews. Once you reach the age of 18, a lot of parents here don't give curfews anymore, yes, even when you're still living in their house. Basically: "Bring breakfast when you get home by morning, and don't do anything stupid".I like to keep fit. So after my work day, I usually go for a run in the nearby park. (I have stayed away from gyms, especially during COVID.) When my day is over, I slip into the women’s room to change and then leave immediately. Except there was this one day, a few weeks ago, when someone (“Becky”)  on another team was having trouble running macros in Excel. I don’t know the specifics of the document, but suffice to say, it was the final piece of the puzzle for a big account.

So, having changed and on my way out, I hear Becky call me over and asked for some help before I left. She’s a good kid, new to the company. So of course I stop to explain a few things. That’s when her team leader (“Louis”) stops me and says that I shouldn’t be in the office working in my workout clothes. I’m not wearing anything too immodest, but I am wearing clothes suited for running, so sports bra and shorts. I don’t want to brag, but I am in good shape and rather...well endowed. Louis is sort of a middle manager who isn’t powerful enough to be a kingmaker, but just powerful enough to cause a stink about company policies. He’s also a repressed prude.

I explain that I was on my way out, not just hanging out to work, and stopped to help Becky. Louis is nearing none of it. He insists that I either change back to my work clothes or leave the premises immediately. I’m not going to let Louis push me around, so I apologize to Becky and leave the building.

Later on, I learn that night was a deadline for some client deliverables and Louis’s team didn’t make it, costing the company the account and lots of money. (Low six digits annually.) Louis was fired for losing the account—and for making Becky do a part of the project that she wasn’t qualified to do, and that he was supposed to do himself.

Becky’s still with the company, and she and I are now paired in a mentorship program. I wish I could say that I jog past Louis sitting on a bench in the park every evening, but things don’t always tie up that neatly!This happened several years ago, and I am forever relieved I don't work in a restaurant anymore. Solidarity to all kitchen workers for the endless bullshit you have to deal with.

***

At the time, I was working in the kitchen as an "assembler". This can be one of the most clutch positions on the line, as you take all the food being prepared by the other cooks and organize it into tickets that can be taken out into the dining room.

Accordingly, it is often a bottleneck for food leaving the kitchen - if you have a slow assembler, cooked food dies under the heating lamps. Grilled salmon dries out, fries become soggy, linguini alfredo hardens into concrete, really horrific shit. It is **imperative** that food not sit in the window.

I was working a weekday lunch shift, which is normally pretty slow. We must have provoked the wrath of the restaurant gods on this day though, because out of nowhere the store got hit with a tsunami of customers.

I could just barely make out the other cooks through the clouds of shrimp scampi, fryer grease, and cheddar bay biscuits flying through the air. I knew the shit blizzard was headed my direction, and began putting empty plates up in the window with the "shape" of each ticket that was to leave the kitchen, a technique I had learned to help survive bullshit like this.

On the other side of the window, coordinating the servers, was my manager, Cuntface. Shouldn't use his real name, actually, let's call him "Bob" instead.

Bob was a bit hyperactive and had an irritating tendency to micromanage kitchen processes, a problem compounded by his not knowing how the fuck to run a kitchen. When I began putting empty plates in the window so that the incoming, Interstellar-sized wave of seafood had something to land on, he stopped me.

"What are you doing?" Bob asked.

"I'm putting the plates and their sides in the window because we're about to have a very high volume of food coming through", I replied.

"Well, this is Red Lobster, and here we do the things the *Red Lobster Way*. We plate the food when the food is ready, and we don't put sides on early."

I tried explaining that the *Red Lobster Way* was designed by sentient suits and ties physically incapable of holding a spatula; that our sacred *Way* (as dictated in the Good Book of Employee Training) had died in the trenches of last year's endless shrimp special; that, while I appreciated the job, I wasn't prepared for an honorable death at the hands of this rush to uphold its most obscure tenets - but he wasn't having any of it. Bob insisted that I take the plates out of the window and *only* pass him plates and tickets that were 100% completed.

Knowing full well that Bob was flying us by-the-book into a storm of shit, I put on a feces-resistant raincoat, rubbed some Vick's under my nose, and braced for impact.

30 minutes later, the window was chaos. Finished food was left dying in the wings of the window, while I - swiftly enough to avoid reprimand, but with the fatalistic, mechanical motion of a flood pump removing water at a fraction of the rate at which it's arriving - plated up one finished ticket at a time.

Bob was equal parts confused and furious, like a toddler whose toy was suddenly taken away. "What's this food waiting on?!", he cried, gesturing towards a shriveled up steak and its associated sides.

"Well, that order is waiting on some fried shrimp, and I need to wait for the ticket to be complete before I plate it up."

"*Why* is the ticket missing fried shrimp??"

"Unfortunately, I'm not manning the fryer, sir, so I don't know."

This continued for the better part of an hour. It seemed like every ticket was missing one little thing that kept it from leaving the kitchen.

After the rush had passed and I was dumping its precipitated, liquid shit from my galoshes, Bob approached me with the twitchy, nervous energy of a coked up boxer. Well, that, or a hyper-caffeinated, insecure manager who needed to assert his dominance over the underpaid crew of some bunk ass seafood restaurant.

"Can I, uh, speak to you in the walk-in for a moment, /u/namesrue?"

"Sure thing."

We walked to the cooler as I struggled to remember how to fight off an attacker armed with a kitchen knife from my days in dish.

"So...what happened back there?" Bob asked, arms folded, shifting his weight from one foot to the other.

"You said we should follow the system, and we did", I replied, mentally noting that he was standing in front of the walk-in's only exit.

"But there were a lot of missed items on those tickets. We had food dying in the window."

"I saw it, yeah. It was pretty bad."

"So why was the food missing?"

"I don't know, I wasn't cooking the food, I was assembling it. I am the assembler."

This line of questioning continued, with Bob trying to somehow pin the catastra-fuck of the last hour on my willingness to comply with his orders, while I blithely insisted that I did exactly what was asked of me. After not being able to move past this point for several minutes, Bob made some sweeping statement about "doing better next time" and left.

Incidentally, the next time I was assembling and Bob was on the other side of the window, nothing was said about the *Red Lobster Way*, and the rush went smoother, albeit with some hotter plates and servers having to return for delayed items. I guess we ended up doing better, after all.The Customer Is Always right, right?

The was the attitude of all upper management at the company I used to work for. Despite us warehouse workers having the entire system down pat... the customers who would pick up their goods always seemed to know better.

At first it was small things:
- telling us how to bag a lounge properly, as they watched and corrected us
- demanding that we open up an item, exposing it to the dirty elements in the warehouse , then throwing a tantrum and expecting us to clean that item we just unwrapped and re package it

Which became bigger things like customers abusing us if we wouldn’t load up a product, or hurry up with unloading something... usually resulting in an injury for one of the warehouse workers.

Naturally I would always try and reason with customers, which would result in customer complaints, which resulted in the Area Manager realising a company wide email detailed that-

In every scenario we could imagine, we had to do what the customer said.

Especially when it came to picking up their goods at either a store or warehouse.

The email finished with a morale boosting statement that - if any feedback or complaints against a worker involving correcting or contradicting a customer made it’s way to the AM , that worker would be written up with an official warning.

A few weeks later we had a transfer from our interstate warehouse, included in that transfer was a stack of customer pick ups.

I signed off on the transfer paper and the sales associates began calling customers and organising pickups.

Most of the pickups go smoothly until we get to the douche with the white pants , or white pants McGee (WPMc).

WPMc rocks up in a battered flat bed truck.... with his polo with popped collar and his slicked back hair.

He scans the warehouse and clicks his fingers at me.

I reluctantly walk over and he stares at me expectantly.

Me - yes sir ?

WPMc - you have my sofa

Me - are you picking up sir ?

WPMc - well I won’t be picking anything up... you boys are going to load it.

He chuckles as he says this.

Me - well sir, as the sales associate would have told you, warehouse staff are unable to load anything up, and it’s the customers responsibility —-

WPMc - ( cuts me off ) yeah yeah yeah I’m sure your manager would be pissed knowing you cost them a $9,000 sale

I sigh and check the paperwork... this guy has a four seater sofa bed... heavy, cumbersome, and will definitely be too big for the vehicle he’s selected.

WPMC see’s me checking the paperwork and smirks

WPMc - just do what I say and it’ll be easier for all of you

Me - and what would you like us to do?

WPMc - load it up, and I’ll take it from there 

Me - okay sir, just sign the paper work

WPMc signs off on the pickup and that he’s taking responsibility for transporting his goods.

Myself and four other guys grab this monster of a sofa and load it up with a little difficulty.

I make an attempt to see if this guy needs any more help and he snaps at me -

WPMC - I got this chief. Let me do my thing.

I shrug. 

The guy “salutes us” jumps into his car, without strapping anything down.

I go to stop him and offer him some straps. But he slams the car into drive and begins driving at break neck speed towards the exit area and towards the main road.

Me and the boys watch, holding our breath as the jackass takes a turn at full speed, the sofa kicks up a bit, slams into the side of the truck. 

WPMc slams on the brakes as he nears the main road, the sofa kicks up, hits the roof of the truck and flips off, hitting the gravel road hard.

The warehouse erupts in laughter, as a sales associate rushes out to see what the commotion was.

A few minutes later the AM is on the phone wanting to know what happened.

I politely explain that the customer asked us to load up and only load up... and that he was happy to take care of the sofa once it was in the back of his truck.

There was a pause and I also happily pointed out that I could bring the signed off / completed customer pickup form to the AM’s office.

Another long pause and the AM said ... don’t bother 

In the end... the sofa was damaged and there were no repercussions as we did exactly what the customer instructed us to do One day at work for my lunch break I decided to run around the corner to McDonalds.

The drive through was packed so I decided to just go inside. There was a homeless fellow out front who wasn't asking for money, but some food. I could tell he was legitimately in a bad way so I told him "Yeah no problem man, sit tight and I'll bring you a couple McDoubles."

I ordered 2 for me and 2 for him, and as I'm waiting for our order to be called I noticed an employee had gone outside to pester him and tell him he can't be there and has to leave, etc. I go out and explain he's waiting for me, I was going to bring him some food. The worker adamantly stated that he cannot stand out front because it's bothering other customers. Well I wasn't about to let them run him off because he's hungry and actually about to get some food.

SO, I decided instead of taking my food back to my office, I'd go ahead and eat in the restaurant, with my new friend as company. Like 2 minutes later our order is called, and while we ate we had a nice chat. He told me about why he's homeless and why he doesn't trust the shelters here etc. After we finished eating we both left the restaurant and parted ways, never saw him again but he seemed like an alright guy.

TL;DR Bought a homeless guy lunch, the staff didn't want him waiting outside for it, so I brought him inside as my lunch guest.Back in the early 2000s I was a management trainee for a manufacturing company in the UK, and I was responsible for quality control and production management. I was 22 years old, keen as punch and ready to change the world.

About 11 months into the role, I got a new boss, let's call him "Fred". Fred was also the company owner's son, and was basically a 45 year old fuck up who had only ever been a drug dealer/DJ and now stood to inherit the entire company. His management style was, let's say, 'interesting' and he would deviate from "screaming at you for the most benign thing ever" to "I can't deal with the pressure so I'll go home for the day" in a matter of hours. He also thought he was a manufacturing GENIUS. His ideas were batshit crazy, but he would scream at anyone who questioned him.

There was a 52 year old machine operative, let's call him "Roy", who has worked on the same machine for over 30 years. Roy could tell when his machine was 2 weeks away from a breakdown, just because it sounded different. He was truly at one with his machine.

Fred decided that we would modify Roy's machine so that we could extend the range of products we could manufacture. In order to do this, he decided that we would add an additional spindle to the machine. The problem was that each product would finish at a different time and you would need to remove a product from the machine while the other one was still spinning.

Roy protested and said he'd never use it, but Fred went ahead and modified it over the weekend with a subcontractor.

On Monday, Roy said "you must be joking, I'm not using that". Fred said "you will use it, or you'll be looking for a new job tomorrow." Roy said "it's not safe and I won't use it. If you try to make me I will report you to the HSE." And then Fred said "if you report me, I'll make sure you don't find work ever again".

So Roy smiled and said, "ok, fine, I'll load the next job but you can run it first."

Roy loaded on his next job, and took two steps back...he also looked at me and said "stand back".

Fred started the machine and all went well.... for about 30 seconds. 

The first job had reached the diameter required and Fred pressed 'stop', however he now had to lean over the other job that was still running at 2,000 RPM. I didn't see it happen but I heard an awful scream and then saw blood squirting everywhere. Fred fainted onto the machine, narrowly missing the spindle with his face and greasy long black hair. We pressed the emergency stop and picked him up, and it was then I spotted his fingers in the machine. I picked up two middle fingers and gave them to a colleague to put into a freezer bag, which was a waste of time because they couldn't reattach them, they were too mangled.

Fred never came back to work. Apparently he told his father he wasn't cut out for running the company and I also left about 6 months later. I saw recently that it was bought out in a management buy out and good old Roy was the operations director. Good for him!I used to work for a marketing company that serviced small and medium-sized businesses across America. It was a multi-billion dollar revenue company. The CEO was a true rags to riches story. He joined the company right after he got out of jail in his early 20s for a small drug charge and worked his way up over 20 years to eventually become the CEO of the company.

The CEO strongly believed that the success of the company did not come from the brilliant and intelligent minds that he hired for his executive team, but the hard work, sweat and tears of the infield sales reps, service reps (made sure the customer services where properly installed), collection reps (chased after customers who fell behind on their payments), and sales managers.

He would often say, without sales we don't have the revenue to pay your salaries

Without customer service customers will drop us faster then we can bill them

Without collection reps we'd lose too many accounts due to non-payment

And without sales managers to hold it all together we'd fall apart

And he had a rule

EVERY SINGLE EXECUTIVE team member would spend 1 full week of each quarter in the field with a Sales Manager, Customer Service Rep, Collections Rep, or Sales rep. In addition when they are in the field they are to SUBMIT to whoever they've been assigned too and they may not pull rank. 

This rule applied to EVERYONE to include the CEO. I know this, cause the CEO personally road along with me for 5 days in the field. He was a legit cool guy (I got a story at the end about this)

So...apparently we had hired a new VP Of Marketing from a major brand that I'm sure everyone in this sub would know of. Anyway apparently the first time he went in the field the VP Of Marketing pulled rank on a sales manager and the sales manager reported this directly to the CEO.

A new quarter went by, and I got an email stating that the VP Of Marketing will be joining me in the field on such and such week. Ok cool, not the first time I had some higher up come out and ride with me.

But about an hour later I got a call from my CEO.

CEO: PJ the VP Of Marketing is going in the field with you

Me: Yes sir, I got the email...

CEO: PJ I picked you cause when I was in the field with you, you seemed like the kinda guy that wouldn't be bullied or let someone run all over you

Me: Ok, well thank you

CEO: This VP is new to the company, and the last time he went in the field he pulled rank. I've told him not to pull rank again, and if he does I want you to call me as soon as you can.

PJ: I understand

CEO: Thank you

The VP meets me up, honestly for the first two days everything was fine. However on the 3rd day I was meeting with an existing client. This client was a difficult to please customer, he would always say we weren't worth the money, but I knew we were cause I could see his results, and over the years this clients business had grown alot. Said client would beat us up over pricing I'd stand firm, give him a 3% price increase, and offer him upgrades on top he'd haggle me down to a 1.5% price increase and we'd sign the contract.

Now I told the VP what would happen, that it would be a long sales call, and a difficult high tense one. But to let me handle it, I've dealt with the client quite a bit and was well prepared.

Now this meeting with the client lasted 2 1/2 hours but I'll get to the point. The client wanted a discount and was threatening to go to our competitor, he wouldn't. That's when the VP  spoke up and said "I'm the VP and I'll personally give you a 15% discount on your current plan if you agree to sign a 1 yr contract" the customer said "20%" the VP said "Spilt the difference 17.5% and we have a deal" they agreed I was mad as hell.

One thing to mention my commissions depended on me generating MORE REVENUE and this VP just fucked me over.

We get in my car, and I go "You pulled rank you shouldn't have done that" he said "I got the deal done" I said "Had you kept your mouth shut I'd have gotten more money, not given 20% back" he goes "We got the contract signed" I said "We gave away tens of thousands of dollars that we didn't need to" he goes "Look I'm the VP..."

I then called my CEO, he saw the name pop up on my cars bluetooth

CEO answered

CEO: PJ, how are you doing?

PJ: The VP pulled rank on me and gave my customer a 17.5% discount on his current plan right as I was about to close him for more money

CEO: That's not right, where is the VP?

PJ: Your on speaker, he can hear you

CEO: Excellent, hey VP

VP: Yes sir

CEO: Tell me what happend

VP: Told his side of the story, which he admitted the truth but also admitted to pulling rank and giving the customer a discount

CEO: Ok, thanks for your honesty. Your fired.

VP: Excuse me? 

CEO: Your fired, you have a 1 yr probation clause your done you don't pull rank when in the field

VP: You can't do this

CEO: I just did, you are to get on a plane come back to your office and clean it out, PJ take Mr. VP back to his hotel and drop him off.

PJ: Sure, no problem

And for the next 20 minutes I had an awkward car ride back to my former VPs hotel.

Later in a all hands on meeting, the CEO made sure to talk about how if an executive is in the field and pulls rank its a firable offense for the executive and he wants all the sales reps, sales managers, customer service reps, and collection reps to know that.

**Side Story on this CEO**

The company had a data plan, which gave us 4G on our Ipads, Phones, and Laptops. Well the company changed the service plan, and our data plan went down to ONLY our phones and we had to hotspot off that. They said this move would save us $80,000 a month (we had like 4,000~ employees in the field)

Well 2 months later we had a conference (we had 3 conferences a year) and after the conference, everyone went to the hotel bar. That's when I approached my CEO with another sales rep and talked to him about how much of a PITA it was to hotspot all our devices and how much it drained our phone batteries and blah blah and that I get it saves money, but it also costs producitiy.

The CEO nodded and said "Tell you what, in 2 weeks the CIO is supposed to go in the field, I'll have him to go in the field with you and if he agrees that its costing our reps productivity and causing to many workflow issues I'll bring back 4G data to all devices

The CIO was there and said "CIO, your going to XYZ area and you will be riding with PJ, pay attention to how he uses his 4G data and if you think we should go back to the old plan where all devices had 4G" 

The CIO went into the field with me, on the 3rd day at breakfast he said "Last night I called the CEO" and I said "yea?" and he said "I made a recommendation that we go back to our old data plan and ensure all your devices have 4G data, its obviously creating productivity issues and when you look at the cost per user, its not that great"
**FAQ**

**Do you still work there? If so why not?**

No I do not work there I was much better at maintaining and growing existing clients than acquiring new ones. The company ended up buying another company and started laying people off, and made acquiring new business more important then maintaining the current business meaning I was going be let go so I quit and switched jobs before ethey fired me.

**Sounds like a great CEO/he's what I wish all CEOs would be comments**

He's still a ruthless business person, I'll give you an example of what he did to a lot of managers. When he bought out his competitor. He had a lot of redundancy and a lot of managers on rock-solid employment contracts which he couldn't just "lay off" so he took the managers with those contracts and turned them into phone reps. Imagine being a sales manager or even a VP and getting a call and being told you are no longer a manager or a VP and your demoted, not even an outside sales rep but an inside phone rep.

Those managers obviously didn't perform very well after being demoted and would be written up for poor performance and let go. I know of a VP in the company who was demoted to a phone rep position. And literally got written up for poor performance for his first month. O and he was still getting his VP salary (per the contract, they could change his position/duties but they could not pay him less and the only way they could fire him would be through poor performance)

Also another thing he did, he invested a lot in automation during this time so he could lay off even more people. I had a talk with my manager one day, and he said the CEO was obsessed with revenue/per employee number and was determined to drive that number up.

**I want to work for them, can give me the company name/etc**

No, for two reasons

First reason, the company is currently not hiring and actively laying people off. Their primary revenue comes from small, and medium-sized businesses. As you can imagine due to the economic circumstance those small businesses can no longer afford to pay their bills, which includes my former employer. As a result, they've had to downsize. I'm sure the company will survive, they had crazy healthy margins, and I heard right before the economic downfall they had a lot of cash on hand for another acquisition of some competitors which they didn't go through with cause I bet they are using that cash to survive. 

Secondly, I don't want to be doxxed. 

**What's my opinion of this CEO**

Honestly nothing but fucking respect. The dude is inspiring. He is also not someone I would not want to be, he's an obvious work alcoholic, his personal net worth is in excess of $100+ million and he doesn't need to work ever again but according to all the VPs/Managers I spoke to the dude literally works 7 days a week at all hours of the day.

Put it this way, he travels SO MUCH in his biggest markets he keeps a car that he bought since its cheaper then buying a rental everytime he flys in

**What did I take away from my time with them?**

Honestly, I think a lot of companies could learn a lot from this company. Seriously why more companies don't force their top leadership to work within the ranks on a regular basis is beyond me. Its one gripe I have with my current employer.

**This is how he reduced his sales staff**

When he bought out the competitor he removed all sales objectives. He then made maintaining current/growing current client worth 1x he made acquiring new clients worth 5x. Also losing revenue cost you 1.5x Everyone was ranked against everyone, and he placed everyone in quadrants if you fell in the bottom 25% for 2 months in a row you got laid off.

And this created for some interesting results. Example I had a family emergency. I took off for one week. For that one week I did $0 in business. however because people who were ranked ABOVE me lost revenue I rose in ranking. And the first week I came back I closed on a new business, increased revenue, and fell in rank because others around me did more.

It created for some depressing performance reviews, a co-worker of mine closed decent sized new business and he thought for sure that'd save his job. It didn't, because another person sold more then he did, and it kept him in the bottom 25% and he was fired. Thursday evening he was so excited about his new account, thinking it saved his job. Friday afternoon he let go.Hi, my first post on Reddit, so please excuse any formatting mistakes/any other mistakes.

*Obligatory statement that I'm on mobile yada yada yada*

TL:DR at the bottom for you lazy cows /s

So this happened a couple years ago when I was fresh at high school, in year 7 (I was in the grade for 11 year olds for international peeps).

One important thing to note with me is that I'm profoundly deaf in both ears, and cannot hear a single thing without the use of my cochlear implants (CI). However I can lip read pretty accurately so I'm not completely  lost without them. Another thing to note is that my CI run on batteries and these need to be replaced every ~2 days (this will be important later on). 

Most of the teachers were pretty understanding about this and would often go out of their way to make sure that I could clearly hear what they were saying (such as seating me towards the front of the class, and standing directly in front of me when addressing the whole class). 

Except for one teacher who was a hardass about it. She also happened to be a music teacher, she will be known as Ms O. Also this is probably the worst combo because music is also my weakest subject (for obvious reasons).

*Enter malicious compliance*

My and my form (we're a pretentious school and like to call the class that we register and go to lessons with our 'form'), are off to our music lesson, and this happens to be a double period (yes we're pretentious and period means lesson) which is about 1 hour and 30 minutes long. 

Anyway so we start the lesson, and pretty much 2 minutes after we sit down, the batteries in my CI had run flat (remember how I told you earlier that they go flat every 2 days), and so I needed to change them. However as my bag (which had my batteries in it) was in the room next door, I decided to raise my hand (like an obedient little boy) and ask if I can go and grab my batteries. At this point I could still lip read, and understand what the teacher was saying, but I'd much rather be able to hear lol.

Anyways she pretty much ignores the fact that my hand is up, and after a couple minutes I pretty much get the hint that she doesn't want to answer my 'question'. I thought 'Whatever' I can still lip read and understand most of what she's saying.

So Ms L basically asks the whole class to go on the computers, listen to an audio file she'd sent us via email, and then use that as inspiration to digitally create our own piece of music. She also wanted us to show it to the class at the end of the lesson.

Now because I didn't want to get into trouble, I raise my hand again to try and ask if I can get the batteries from my bag, but she ignores me again.

So I'm like ¯\_(ツ)_/¯, I don't even like music anyway so no big deal. As a result, I pretty much sit in front of the computer screen doing nothing, as I can't hear the audio file or make any somewhat decent piece of music (remember this is a a double period, so a pretty long wait). 

After 5 minutes, I get bored and I decide to start talking to my friends (did I mention I can lip read?) And basically let them in on the joke, and we're all trying our hardest to not laugh too hard. Pretty soon, word gets around the class and now they can't wait until the end of the lesson to see what Ms L is going to do.

End of the lesson rolls around, and when it's my turn to play my piece of music, and I pretty much sit in silence, and the whole class starts laughing but trying to stifle it at the same time.

This is how the conversation goes between me and her at that point:

Ms L : Can you not hear me???? I asked you to play your piece of music. 

(Ironic, ikr)

Me: *sits in silence, and the laughter is getting louder*

Ms L: Are you even listening to me????? Are you trying to disrespect me by not listening to anything I say???

Me: well...

Ms L: Honestly, just play your piece of music, it's not that hard.

Me: *trying to stifle my laughter at this point* I can't... 

Ms L: *cuts me off* This is how your treat your teachers???? Get out of the class right now!

So I get out and pretty much wait there until the lesson is over, I think she was expecting an apology from me (which was never going to happen) because after a couple minutes she pops her head out of the door and barks at me:

"YOU HAVE ABSOLUTELY NO RESPECT FOR YOUR TEACHERS, MEET ME AT THE CITY VIEW AT LUNCHTIME!!!

So I'm like yea yea ok whatever.

At lunchtime, I meet her at the principal's office like she said.

Another important thing, is that I'm pretty friendly with the headmaster.

She opens the door and the conversation is as follows:

Ms L: this guy was giving me an attitude during my lesson and wouldn't listen to me. I would give him a Friday after school detention but I feel that he deserves to get a Saturday detention.

Headmaster: *turns to me* what happened?

Me: well my batteries for my CI died and I raised my hand to ask if I could get the replacement batteries from my bag, but she proceeded to ignore me.

Ms L: *looks like she just had an epiphany*

Headmaster: We'll are you sure about this, because he has not prior record about being disobedient?

Ms L: *looking a bit flabbergasted* Yes I'm absolutely sure he was disrespecting me.

Me: Sir, you know that I'm deaf and that I would never on purposely do that to a teacher.

Headmaster; We'll I'm inclined to believe the student here, if you have no proof otherwise, there is nothing to discuss.

Ms L then goes extremely red as she realises her mistake and storms out of the office

The headmaster gave me a slight smile before ushering me out of the office as well

Ever since then, she's never ignored me whenever I've had my hand up :)

Thanks for reading this ♥️, I know it was extremely long.

TL:DR I'm deaf and need cochlear implants (CI) to hear, batteries in my CI go flat, and music teacher gets mad at me cuz I didn't do any work cuz I couldn't do/hear anything. Proceeds to embarrass herself in front of the headmaster 


Edit: wow I didn't realise I'd get this much of a response, thank you so much for the gold and silver and also the general response has been largely positive 🤠

Edit: stupid spelling mistake in my original edit 

Edit: spelling mistakes This took place during the first summer of lockdown where I live. 

Some context for you- My town is basically on the edge of nowhere. We have a medical centre for basic stuff but a full hospital is 30 - 40 minutes in any direction depending on where you chose to go.  With that in mind, we get people from a huge surrounding area that go to our town centre for tests , simple medical exams , etc. Maybe as many as 50 small communities use our centre on a daily basis so it is constantly busy. The centre itself is quite small compared to hospitals in the city. The various clinics and a basic ER take up most of the space with an area by the front doors for the public to sit in if they are waiting for a ride or someone visiting a doctor. It is that waiting area that is the cause for my story today.

One day during the first summer of lockdown here, I had to go to the medical centre for tests. Some things to know about me. I am challenged with multiple disabilities. I am legally blind, have significant mobility and balance issues and a rather severe heart condition. As such I use a walking frame and travel using the cities provided disabled transports.

That particular day, I had finished my tests early and had 45 minutes to wait until my transport was scheduled to return to pick me up. I figured - no problem, i will just sit in the waiting area and - well - wait! haha. I shuffled over to the seats with my walker plainly evident and was confronted by a new sign. STAFF ONLY.  Say what now? I looked around at all the empty seats and vacant tables and turned to the clerks at the entrance. 

Me- Can I please have a seat in the waiting area until my transport come back?

Clerk- (coldly) NO its staff only. YOU need to wait outside! 

Me- uh I cant stand for 45minutes waiting for my transport (gesturing to my plainly apparent walking frame that i was clearly leaning heavily on) 

Clerk- Not my problem! There are benches to sit on outside . 

Me- The benches are full and we are supposed to be social distancing not cuddling up to random strangers on a park bench!

Clerk- If you want i suppose I could let you take a wheelchair out and sit in that. 

Me - And how am I to manage a wheelchair AND my walking frame at the same time?

Clerk - again , not my problem. If you want you can call centre management when you get home. Are we done here?

Me - I guess we are done huh. And went outside to find a spot to wait.

Well I stood outside for the 45 minutes while the sun beat down on what turned out to be 104 F day. As I stood there , I noticed that there was a line of patients growing steadily longer also standing outside in the heat waiting to be let into the building. Some looked fit but lets face it- nobody comes to a medical centre because they feel 100%! Most of them looked quite ill and some were looking pretty faint by the time they got through the doors. By the time my transport arrived, I was badly sunburned , thirsty as hell, exhausted and feeling more than a bit faint myself! My driver was shocked and insisted on walking me to my front door when he got me home to make sure I was ok. (shout out to all transport drivers you guys ROCK!)

The rest of the day was a complete loss. I spent it drinking water, sleeping and nursing the burns on my shoulders and face lol. I was a right mess! The next day, however, I was pissed. I had plenty of time to recover and to think and I kept coming back to that line of patients standing in the heat. The more I thought about it, the angrier i got!

Malicious compliance.

The words the clerk so smugly said- you can call centre management when you get home if you want- danced through my sunbaked brain like a mantra. I called centre management. What followed was a half hour conversation with the SWEETEST lady . She was SO nice and so upset when I told her all that went on the day before. She was especially concerned when she found out about the line of people waiting outside one what turned out to the the hottest day we had that summer. After our talk, the manager promised to look into it and get back to me. Now normally that's sort of a brush off, right? Not so with this lady.

Two days later, she called me back. Turned out, she had spent the day before sitting at the clerks desk observing things that went on. Things like

\- Patients being forced to stand in the rain waiting to get into the centre

\- Patients being poorly spoken to by the same clerk.

\- And the cherry on top? At one point a tiny, elderly lady tried to sit down in the waiting area and the SAME clerk ran over and rudely shoved her aide and snapped STAFF ONLY!  With her boss sitting right there!

The Manager went over , tore down the signs, apologized to the lady and helped her to a seat then took the clerk into her office for a - chat. 

The Results

The centre was immediately restructured.  Staff were moved into an unused gift shop , the waiting room as returned to the public and best of all? The registry desks were moved so patients no longer had to stand outside waiting to get into the building! 

I never saw that clerk there again. 

I know this isn't as exciting as most stories on here but knowing I was part of making things so much better for so many still makes me happy !

Dangit I am proud of my mini- coup Hahaha Vive La resistance and all that crap!

EDIT to add- THANK YOU all for all the positive feedback and awards!  You really make this human feel loved. 😊I might not be in the right sub, my art teacher said i wasn't good enough so i worked my damn hardest to prove him wrong is the summary.

Context:

The  school i go to is well respected in my country, so it was not uncommon  for venues to request to display a students work or to ask for students  to sing live for them. On the occasion in question, the largest art  gallery in the country (gallery X) had asked my school to submit  'inspired art' to be out on display. The school agreed and said that  they would submit 5  pieces of work (one piece per year for years 9-13).

Back to the story:

I  hated art growing up but it was a mandatory subject until you got to  choose your subjects in year 10. Needless to say, I dropped the subject  ASAP. Despite hating the subject, i still put effort into my work and  some of it wasn't that bad. However at the same time i would not hide  away from expressing my views when we were given a task that i didn't  see a point too, even if the teacher was in earshot. Needless to say my  relationship with the art department faculty wasn't the best. My teacher  at the time particularly had it in for me. He was one of those teachers  that has the view that their subject should be your most important  subject, regardless of your future ambitions. If he thought that you  weren't prioritizing art then he would make your life hell. Yet again, I  **hated** art as a subject, he knew this, but i would still do any work set to the best of my ability.

We  had just finished a project where we had to mix different pigments to  create our own unique colour. Being colour blind i struggled a lot as i  literally could not differentiate between half of the pigments. I gave it my all but ended up giving up half way through the project. My  teacher hated me for giving up. in his defense he had tried to make it  as easy as possible for me, but i hated the subject and saw a way out so  i took it. My teacher was beyond mad. When we went to hand the project in he gave me a lecture about how i need to put in more effort and work harder because of the quality of work was unacceptable. Remember, i literally couldn't see half of the project.

Once that project was  finished, my teacher told us that gallery X has asked that we create  some 'inspired art'. We were basically shown 5 different paintings that  we were supposed to recreate in our own way. There was a big fuss about  this. People were saying that art schools would be giving out  scholarships, that there was a  $10,000 reward and other nonsense that  14 year olds make up. But never the less everyone wanted to be the one  have their painting in gallery X.  So for the next month and a half in  my art classes we would work on our piece. After the first week of  working my piece, the excitement of the new project wore off and so did  my eagerness in lessons. My teacher noticed this and went from  complementing my work to yelling at me about what i was doing wrong. By  the 4th week i was over the project and just wanted to be done with this. With 2 weeks left on the project my teacher pulls me aside to tell me that my work isn't good enough and i need to improve it. I tried to improve but he kept on belittle me. So out of arrogance and spite I made art my most important subject until the end of this project.

I drag myself to each lesson, quietly working my self to the bone, counting down the days until the deadline of the project. After what  seemed like a year to 14yo me, the second last lesson arrives. This  lesson was not for final touches or anything like that. My teacher had  decided that he should review what each student has done well and where  they could have improved. He walks round the classroom, complementing  everyone's work, until he gets to mine.

I  don't remember exactly what he said but I'm pretty sure none of it was  positive. I do remember however how he finished talking about mine. 'You  can tell that OP hasn't given this any thought and hasn't taken this  seriously.' That stung like a bitch because yes i had lost interest in  it, but i had still worked hard in lessons and given it my best shot.  The bell then went and i sulked out of the class with my tail between my  legs.

The last lesson finally  comes and i cant wait to be over with this stupid project. This lesson  was the big one too, the judges from gallery X were coming to school to  judge all of the work. They come into our class, do all the formalities,  'These all look so good! i have no idea how we can decide on only one!'  ect... Then they start walking around the room muttering to each other.  The whole class is stood silently at the back trying to hear what they  are saying. They do a full lap of the room, then walk back over to my  spot. I don't even notice this as i had tuned out after they had looked  at the second painting. They then ask the teacher whose work they are  stood over, he looks at them almost in disbelief as he gestures to me. I  snap out of my daydream and just smile politely with no idea what is  going on. The judges then confer for a while, whilst my teacher and i  frantically try and figure out what is going on. Finally after about 5  minutes of mumbling, they say that they want to shortlist it to  potentially be shown in gallery X.

I  look on at them in shock, then yet again smile politely and say thank  you. i cannot begin to describe the look on my teachers face. I don't  think i have ever seen someone more confused, angry and disappointed all  at the same time. My teacher then begrudgingly thanks the judges and  walks them to the door. He thanks them again as they leave then stumbles  back to the class. He doesn't even congratulate me on my work he just  defeatedly says, 'Good work everyone. as a reward ill put on a  documentary for you all to watch.'. And he did just that not saying  another thing until the end of class.

later on that week i got an email from gallery X asking for my permission to display my work, of which i happily said yes to.

To  sum it up, the work that he disrespected and said that no effort into,  was selected from 192 others, got featured in the biggest art gallery  in the country.

hope you enjoyed.

Edit 1:

spelling + grammar mistakes

Edit 2:

Here's a link to the piece i was given for [inspiration](https://www.google.com/search?safe=strict&client=firefox-b-d&sa=X&hl=en&sxsrf=ALeKk03aX2pJLYRezYJZAYo3T5SO2vFm_Q:1601473549760&q=Morning&stick=H4sIAAAAAAAAAONgFuLSz9U3MKoyjjcyV-LVT9c3NMxKtzA2TEs201LITrbSTyxKzsgsSU0uKS1K1c8tLU4tzbUqzy_KLo4vM1rEyu6bX5SXmZc-gY0RAALuoaZMAAAA&ved=2ahUKEwivurPwgZHsAhXLXisKHTUTCGsQ-BYwSHoECCkQcA&biw=1920&bih=915) ill update if i can find my version.

&#x200B;When I was a freshman in college I had a maths teacher who was very strict about how she taught and how she expected us to learn. For example, she would force students to take notes and if they didn't she would make them leave. 

During our midterm exam, someone asked how much time was left and she said 5 minutes. At this point I was only about halfway done with the test, so I rushed and finished it barely in time. Me and most other students delivered the test and left the room. When I checked my phone, I realized there was another 20 minutes left. The students who hadn't finished in time told me that after we left, she realized that she read the clock wrong, and gave them another 20 minutes that me and the others didn't have. 

I've always been pretty good at math, but obviously, after rushing half the test I didn't get a good grade. The part I didn't rush was perfect though. 

The next class, after showing us our results, she said that we needed to develop a strategy to improve our grades. She said that if we created a plan, stuck to it, and provided evidence of us doing it, she would give us some extra credit. What she expected us to do was say something like "I'll practice every week" and submit pictures of us doing it as evidence, or something like that. 

Now, while I didn't blame her for reading the clock wrong, I did blame the fact that I thought I only had 5 minutes left for not doing well on that test. I was confident that I could have gotten a perfect grade on it if I had the extra 20 minutes. And so, what I said I would do is "bring a watch to the next exam".  Was it an arrogant thing to say? Yes, but I also thought it was stupid to follow along with her plan to micromanage our studies. She got mad at me and said that if I didn't do anything else I would fail the final for sure, but I assured her that the watch was enough for me to do better. 

A few months later, on the day of the final, I submitted a picture of a watch on my wrist as my evidence for sticking with the strategy. I got a perfect grade on the final. Since my strategy for improving my grades worked, she had to give me extra credit, not before arguing that I didn't deserve it, of course.This popped into my mind recently. I used to work at a retail tropical fish store, and weird as it is, we were very well known. We used to provide the aquarium with rare fish and people used to drive from 2-3 states over if they were true "fish people" to come buy from us. 

I (at the time 17F) was an expert in tropical fish and koi. In fact, it was my job that summer to be the koi and outdoor pond point person, and my job was not only stocking the ponds, but managing all the plants, caring for them, and knowing every bit of information and all the prices of the various koi and goldfish we had. I knew diets, temperature ranges, places of origin, special breeds, I knew it all. They even would call me with questions on my days off. 

That clearly did not matter to one customer though. He came inside the store and asked for some help with koi outside. I happily agreed as I was the only person not on my lunch break. 

Now this guy frankly seemed put off by me offering to help. So instead of buying anything, he decided to quiz me for 20 minutes about the koi, goldfish and pond plants to try to get me to admit I didn't know something. I answered every single one of his stupid questions (some really were stupid) and at the end of the 20 minutes he had the balls to say ""Can I talk to someone who KNOWS THINGS? Like a MAN?" Full emphasis in tone on those words too. 

"Sure you can," I say with a fake smile "let me get 'John' for ya" 

Here's the malicious compliance. "John", name changed, was 75, retired, annoying as hell and batshit crazy. My boss didn't even want him to be hired but he owed John a favor. Now John is an expert in goldfish, but he hates koi and outside ponds. John also like I said, is really annoying, and crazy but he had a soft spot for me so we always would chat. 

I went inside to find John, and explained to him that this customer wanted a man to talk to. John asked me why he wanted to speak to a man when I was the pond point person, and I told him that he clearly just didn't like that he was speaking to a girl. John nods knowingly, gets this EVIL grin on his face, and goes to help the customer 

5 minutes later I hear a man yelling in the parking lot. I run outside and find the customer screaming at John and cursing him out 

"What is WRONG with you? Does nobody f*ing know anything around here? I WILL NEVER COME BACK! You're all horrible and know nothing about fish, and you're a terrible employee" (or something to that effect) 

I watch the guy hop into his car, slam the door & drive off. 

I ask John what happened. He said "oh yeah no everytime he asked me a question I said 'hm, not sure... good question though, I could go get OP and ask, she's really our pond expert' and apparently he DID NOT like that" 😂 

Customer, if you read & remember this, FU. Thanks for reading 



TL;DR I (17f) am expert at fish store. Older male customer doesn't like this, asks "Can I talk to someone who KNOWS THINGS? Like a MAN?" So I get the most annoying man who works there to literally annoy him into leaving the store & vowing never to come back

Edit: THANKS FOR THE AWARDS FRIENDS! I hope you all are being safe & being kind to one another, I'm glad so many people got a kick out of my story!This happened when I (F, 20 at the time) was a junior in college. Here's some context. I had taken a long weekend trip to Florida with a friend of mine to visit her brother and go to the Universal Studios Fright Night Halloween event (which was awesome, by the way). We had an amazing trip, and we were on the plane about to head home. This was only my second ever time with air travel. We didn't have much when I was growing up, so vacations were not a regular thing, and the ones we took were low key.

So, there I was, just excited to be flying in my coach seat, waiting to take off. And we kept waiting. It became clear that there was a problem with the plane when the flight attendants started calling various passengers to exit to be placed on different flights so they'd make their necessary connections. Eventually, after around 40 minutes, it was just my friend and I plus around 6 other people. And then it was our turn to leave the plane. We were sort of near the end of the group tromping back out into the waiting area. One couple, probably in their mid-fifties, had stormed up ahead of us; and by the time my friend and I emerged from the gate entrance, the rude husband was already berating the pair of attendants, who, to their credit, remained poised and calm.

They tried to reassure him, but he was talking over them. "This is unacceptable. You better get me the same seats we had on that flight." (He had the first row in coach, the one with no seats in front of it and therefore with extra leg room.)

By then, the rest of us had gathered around, and the attendants began addressing the whole group, offering reassurances, filling us in that there was a critical problem with the plane (which made me very glad for the change, despite the inconvenience). The rude husband was going off through all of this, and when the attendants left to make arrangements for us all, he and his wife sat there and he continued his commentary to his poor wife "... unacceptable ... how dare they ... better have same seats ..." and so on.

Shortly, the attendants returned, and the man practically rushed them. "I demand you make this right."

The attendant smiled and said. "You guys are all set. Sir," and she smiled at him specifically. "I'm very happy to tell you that we have a flight leaving shortly, and we were able to give you and your wife the exact same seats as you had booked on the previous flight."

Rude husband: "I should hope so. That's the least you can do." And he huffily returns to his seat.

Meanwhile, the rest of us are just waiting. The attendant then turns to us, and she says, "And I'm happy to let everyone else know that you'll all be flying first class with us today."

Rude husband was furious and immediately jumped up to demand why they weren't flying first class while the rest of us just sat there in a state of stunned glee. The attendant just informed the man that she'd given him his request, and didn't stick around for more abuse. The wait wasn't long, and soon my friend and I were boarded into the unicorn, fabled place that is First Class. As a poor, air travel newbie, it was like some fantasy land: huge seats, real hot wash cloths, and though we were underage and couldn't partake of The Free Cocktail, we did get to choose from a basked of "Distinctive Pepperidge Farm" cookies. And the food! We got a whole meal, which was truly delicious, with real crystal salt and pepper shakers at each place setting and actual metal cutlery.

Meanwhile, rude husband is irate. My friend and I were in the last row of first class, which only had around 8 seats, and we could hear him heaping abuse on the coach attendants, going off on how those "kids don't deserve" first class and how they "should have gotten them, they're older, they should be respected, not some kids." Someone else who was in first, not from our original plane, caught on and was quite tickled with the man's ire.

Then, the best part of all happened: the flight attendant in our section overheard rude husband's tirade, with language specifically directed at my friend and me, "who do those kids think they are?!" as unworthy of the honor he should have been granted. The attendant shook his head and addressed me and my friend: "I'm sorry about that. Let me take care of this for you." And he closed the curtain to the coach cabin. Rude husband realized what was happening, which makes it even getter. I got one last look at his red, irate face before he was gone forever. It was **glorious**!Five years ago, I was hit by a car while riding my bicycle.

The 'driver' turned across the front of me, pretty much into me and I had absolutely nowhere to go. I hit the passenger door of the car then tumbled over the front of the car, still clipped in to my pedals, taking it with me !

The car was pretty damaged, I dented the door scratched the paint in many places, ripped the door mirror off, smashed the glass, cracked the windscreen (windshield) and dented / scratched the bonnet (hood). My bicycle emerged fairly well (I think I broke its fall mostly), the front wheel was bent, the saddle torn and the pedals / bar tape damaged from hitting the road.

I broke my collarbone and lost a lot of skin in various places that hit the road, I trashed my helmet and my shorts too.

The driver said 'Sorry mate, I did not see you'. Which was pretty obvious.

The car was his daughters, and he was taking his grandson out for an ice cream (the poor little boy got covered in glass from the door window that exploded inwards when I hit it, but seemed to be OK.

The 'driver' gave me his phone number and I took a photo of his driving licence and insurance details along with a pile of photos at the scene. I crucially I got the details of two witnesses too before I passed out from the pain.

This all happened on a Friday.

I got patched up at the hospital and my partner was able to get my bike home. Because of my broken collarbone, I was in a huge amount of pain while the doctors could figure out if it needed to be pinned or not, over the weekend.

On the Saturday morning I called the driver and his phone went straight to voicemail. I had taken a good look at my bike and figured out it needed about £350 worth of parts (wheel, forks, saddle, new bar tape etc) and something for my cracked phone screen (I guessed £150). On the message I left him I said that I was not sure if he wanted to pay for the parts, or go through his insurance.

His Daughter called me back and shouted and swore at me for damaging her car.

I explained that he has turned across the front of me and it was his poor driving to blame.

I mention that I was sitting on my sofa with a broken collarbone as a result of him and all I wanted was to get my bike fixed.

**'You will never get a penny from me, talk to the police if you want to, we will tell them that it was not my car, you will never get a penny from us...'**

OK - I can comply with that....

I called the local police station and they sent a constable down to see me. I carefully explained what had happened and showed him the photos from the scene, the damage to my bicycle, phone, helmet and shorts, gave him the details of the witness and several cups of tea and he advised me to get a solicitor on the case too, so I did just that.

My bicycle insurance has legal aid cover, so I used it.....

Long story short, I had three surgeries on my shoulder over the next 18 months or so, the insurance details that the driver gave me was fake. The daughters insurance company did not cover her father as a driver. The driver had six points on his licence already, but crucially the police found he had insurance with a company that did cover him on her car, but only for 3rd party cover. He only admitted this when they threatened to charge him with driving without insurance and documentation fraud.

The Police eventually convicted him and gave him enough points to ban him from driving for a year and fined him £1500 + costs.

The insurance company that he was with was one of these 'we only cover really bad drivers', obviously did not pay out for the damage to the car - this was probably another £1500 or more.

The insurance company paid for my bicycle damage - £550 once assessed by a local shop.

They also paid for my clothing and helmet - £200

And my phone screen - £180

Then finally the insurance company paid compensation for my injuries and time off etc - £nn,nnn.

I would have been quite happy for them to pay for my initial assessment of my bicycle and phone damage, but as they wanted to make my life difficult, it cost them thousands, got the driver banned and the resulting compensation was a massive bonus for my savings account.

Edit:  thank you kind strangers for the gold and silver ! 

Edit 2: for those asking for a TLDR 

TLDR; Driver with questionable insurance driving his daughters car hit me while I was cycling and broke my bike and my collarbone, When asked to fix the bike his daughter called me and told me to go to the police if I wanted as she would deny everything and I would not get a penny. I went to the police who suggested a solicitor too and four years later the court awarded me about 100x more than I originally asked for.   

Edit 3. Yes. Bicycle insurance is a thing. My bicycles are insured though British Cycling. My cover includes loss or damage and 3rd party cover plus legal.Concrete mixers are big, ungainly things.  Trying to maneuver them around a crowded jobsite is like trying to play miniature golf with a tennis ball.  The biggest problem is, of course, other people, specifically other people's cars.  Nobody is going to lug 50 pounds of tools any further than they have to, so if there is an open space near where they want to be, they park there, never mind that it is right next to a sidewalk or directly across from a driveway that a crew is obviously prepping.  It only makes things worse when it's done by people who should know better (and done intentionally).  
  
So, we're pumping a grout walls in the late afternoon, which already has me in a bit of a mood.  Grout jobs tend to be very slow.  Each cinder block has two cells, and the crew [pumps the grout into those cells](http://www.asilo.com/house/pictures/pouring-grout.jpg) filling them all the way to the top of the wall.  Grout is really just a term for a weak concrete mix that is pumped super wet.  It has to be that wet to make it all the way to the bottom of the wall, otherwise it sticks to the sides of the cinder blocks (or gets caught up on steel reinforcement).  There is a lot of stopping and starting, as well as a lot of moving the pump.  It all takes time, during which that concrete starts to go off and stiffen up.  Things only get worse on a hot day, and the subs will do anything to get more water in the load (heroin addicts looking for a fix have nothing on grout pumpers eyeballing your last 20 gallons).  
  
As we move to a new street, we find a line of cars parked all along the side of the street we are working on, just far enough apart to take up as much space as possible without leaving enough room to get the pump in there.  Turns out it is another concrete crew setting up to do patios.  No problem, we're all concrete guys here, and they know how it is.  We ask them to move.  That I am writing this post tells you what their response was.  It turns out they are waiting for their own pump and mixer to show up, and they intentionally blocked the street because they don't want us to be in their way.  Their crew chief tells us we can wait for them to finish and move on, or we can just work around them.  
  
It's pretty obvious he expects us to wait.    Waiting is, of course, going to make the concrete go off even more and will rack up standby charges for the customer, but trying to work around their cars is going to mean blocking the street and rolling up the hose every time we move (normally the crew just drags/carries it down the sidewalk, but we can't do that with the cars in the way).  It would take much longer; depending on when their pump shows up, it might not even save us any time.  Still, Todd the pumper rolls his pump right up next to the lead car and feeds his hose out around it.  
  
At the best of times, a concrete pump farts and sputters like a nervous chihuahua, flinging small globs of concrete out the hopper.  If the driver isn't paying attention and *accidentally* lets the concrete level get too low, the pump sucks in air.  Feeding a concrete pump air is like feeding a hippopotamus Olestra; shit's not pretty, and it gets everywhere.  We probably end up moving that pump twice as many times as we have to, but it ensures that every single one of those cars gets to spend some quality time next to the hopper.  
  
We finish are done with the job and are washing out the pump when the crew chief (whose own concrete and pump still haven't shown up yet) storms over to complain about all the concrete splatter on their cars.  I point out that we told them we'd be pumping there and asked them to move, but they refused.  At this point he sees that I have a truck wash bucket strapped to my water tank and demands I let him use it to clean off his car.  
  
I tell him that is a terrible idea, smoking lounge on the Hindenburg levels of terrible.  The stuff we use is designed to dissolve dried concrete, and it will probably damage his car.  The concrete is fresh enough that he can probably just rinse it off with water.  He isn't having it.  He tells me to stop lying; if it doesn't damage my truck, it won't hurt his car.  Besides, he's done this before and knows what he is doing.  
  
Now, keeping a concrete mixer clean is a downright Sisyphean task.  No matter how hard you try, chutes overflow, pumps splatter, and plants huff cement powder all over your truck.  There are a variety of chemicals used to clean off concrete, and most of the modern mixes are relatively safe (for something that can dissolve concrete).  Our plants provide a phosphoric acid mix (relatively safe isn't the same as actually safe) to any drivers that need it, so it quite common for there to be a bucket of it stashed somewhere on the truck.  
  
Of course, part of what makes these chemicals safer also makes them somewhat less effective.   That's why some of us will bring in our own cleaning products to fortify the company mix.  These are not the friendly chemicals that will just leave you with a mild chemical burn; my bucket of fun dips down to the good old days of leaded gasoline, asbestos and red dye no. 2.  Still, I warned him, and he assured me he knew what he was doing.  Besides, he's intentionally being a jackass and expected my sub to pay standby for his convenience.  I let him have the bucket.  
  
I half expect him to stop when he pulls the lid off.  The witch's brew in the bucket smells like Walter White's bathtub.  Somehow, the fact that his nose hairs are curling up like a spider in a flame doesn't seem to faze him.  Brush goes in the bucket.  Brush comes out of the bucket.  Brush slams onto the hood of the car with a wet slap.  I can only watch in mute horror as the man proceeds to not just clear off the concrete, but bathe his entire hood in hydrochloric acid, rubbing it in to get out all those nasty water spots.  It's like watching an orphan unwittingly skin his favorite puppy.  None of us stick around long enough to see the final result, but it is already apparent that he has scrubbed off the clear coat and is in the process of etching brush marks in the paint.  I don't want to be anywhere near him when that hood dries out.  I let him keep the bucket.
  
TL/DR:  Another concrete crew tries to preemptively block us from our job so they can do theirs first.  We take their suggestion and work around them, splattering all their cars with concrete in the process.  The offending crew chief then asks to wash his car with my bucket of hydrochloric acid, and, after warning him that it will eat his paint, I let him.A number of years ago I worked for a small, fairly local outsourcing company. I was assigned to work with a particularly high-profile client of theirs. The client's office was just around the corner from my employer, but my employer insisted that I remain within their own offices to work, so the client provided me with a laptop to use that connected to their network remotely. It's important to note that whilst the client were decent, my employer had a totally fear-based management culture. The managers wanted eyes on the employees at all times because they assumed people would slack off given half the chance.

After almost a year of working there, I got a call from the client notifying me that my client-given laptop needed some critical updates, and I would have to bring it in so IT could apply the updates locally. All sounded very reasonable to me. 

I brought this to the attention of my manager and advised I would be out of the office for a while so I could take my laptop to the client site around the corner for critical updates. No bueno. My manager ignored everything about the 'critical updates' part and focused instead on the 'out of our office for 2 hours' part. They insisted that they knew I had a remote connection to the client's office, so any updates could be applied without me needing to leave and take my laptop anywhere. I got the impression they thought I was lying to get some free time off. 

I decided that this had the potential to teach my employer / the managers a great lesson about not trusting their own employees, so like the model employee I was, I shrugged "you know best boss", and complied with their request, continuing working as usual. Until the following morning, when I switched on my laptop and nothing would work. The machine refused to connect to the client's remote network. The various software applications I used for my job also wouldn't run due to the lack of connection. Error messages flashed up on every file I tried to access, warning that my credentials had been blocked. I was left holding a very expensive brick.

My manager was livid when I explained I couldn't do any work. They clicked around on my laptop trying to fix it themselves, but there was no other solution to be had. They sent me around the corner to the client's office so I could hand in my laptop to IT. I took my time enjoying a coffee and breakfast in the client's onsite cafe whilst IT worked on my laptop, but when I went to check on it after an hour I believe the client IT manager's words were "it's fucked." The critical update mentioned before was intended to repair something wrong with the way the remote connections worked. When my machine didn't get the update, it lost connection with the client's network and immediately locked me out of everything, effectively blacklisting my credentials. IT manager explained that they would have to build me an entirely new machine and set up new accounts, a process that would take about a week to ensure everything filtered through correctly and could be tested.

The client was fine and understanding about it, but when I returned empty-handed to my employer's office my manager got extremely snotty with me and insisted I still had to work somehow. I pointed out that I had no client laptop to work on, so instead of sending me home they forced another employee to share her computer with me. For the next week, me and my colleague shared her computer, one hour each at a time. As I had no access to any of my files, client data etc, all I could do was the barest minimum of work, sending a few emails from my colleague's account. 

After a week I got my new client laptop and things went back to normal, but the week of sharing meant my employer had lost around 40 hours of productivity from 2 employees. The shared pain of the experience with my colleague brought us closer together, and when my employer lost their contract with my client a few years later, she helped me get a new job with my employer's competitor. 

TL;DR: Manager doesn't want to let me out of the office for 2 hours to get critical updates applied to my client laptop. They lose 40 hours over the next week instead when my client laptop bricks itself.So my roommate's sister is some kind of religious tyrant and apparently doesn't let her kids say common words and phrases including "oh my God", "oh my gosh/goodness", "awesome", "good", or "great". Because only God can be those things.  
Cue me being a bit of an asshole.  
My roommate and I went to his sister's house to drop something off and I made sure to use words like "venerated", "sacrosanct", "sublime" and "pietistic" when talking about the most mundane things. I got a couple of half-awkward smiles, clearly showing she had no idea what I was saying.  
TL;DR A heathen with big words confuses overzealous religious nut.This happened about 10 years ago now, and I have a good chuckle about it every time I pass the place in my car. I'm a pretty meek guy, so this is probably the only rebellious thing I did in my entire teenage life.

My Dad owns a farm, and, being his son, this meant that I had a job when I was a kid whether I liked it or not. 

Mostly I understood this, but that didn't mean I had to like it. I resented having to spend entire days of summer vacation, dawn to dusk, in a tractor when it came time to harvest alfalfa, which we did ~4 times between spring and fall. Basically imagine a teenager with ADHD forced to sit in one place for 14 hours, and you'll understand how it felt. Honestly, if I wasn't a total introvert, I might have snapped sooner.

So anyway, it's the second day of harvest, and it’s getting to be late in the afternoon. I've spent about 20 hours total in a haybine by this point over the past few days, and I ask my dad which fields to cut next, and I ask him when I'll be done, hoping (in vain) that I can leave and go play video games or whatever. 

This is where the titular line comes in: "I'll pick you up at dark." Little does he know that my little teenage heart is clenchijg with rightous anger for all this wasted (paid) time.

So several hours pass, and I'm understandably getting pretty irritable. It starts getting dark, and guess what? No sign of my dad. At the time, it was becoming a bit of a recurring joke in my family about how my dad was always late, so I knew I was in for the long haul.

Then it occured to me, and the malicious compliance begins. My dad said he'd pick me up at dark, and he wasn't picking me up, so that must mean that it wasn't dark yet. And what *don't* you need if it's not dark outside? That's right. Headlights.

So I continue going back and forth on this wide, empty field, squinting as the light continues to fade after sunset and stubbornly refuse to turn on the headlights. I can easily see the edges of the field of course, but everything else is blending in pretty well. I start purposely amd accidentally leaving some sharkfins, which are what we call the mistakes that haybine operators leave between rows when the don't get any alfalfa. A few small sharkfins per field are fine, even expected, but these are on a whole new level.

My dad shows up after about 30 minutes of total darkness. I forget our exact conversation, but I do remember the result. After asking me why I didn't turn on the lights, and me telling him why, he laughed uproariously, and I still remember it fondly to this day.

I mever did get any punishment. I'm not even sure he understood the extent of the missed alfalfa, it was dark after all and it was hard to see in the dim moonlight, but whatever, it was just a few rows. I, however, like to think he was a little proud of me, because I was the type of teenager who *never* got into mischief.

I asked him about it recently, and unfortunately he has no memory of the incident. Oh well. I, however, will probably remember this little bit of malicious compliance fondly for the rest of my life. It might have been pretty insignificant, and motivated by laziness, but it was also the first time I really stood up for myself against am authority figure.This happened at work some time ago.

Vendor is legal services company we are required to use with one or two of our clients. We'd prefer anybody else as they are pretty slow, expensive, and have been jerks to us for years, apparently because we have the audacity to not use them exclusively.

We missed paying one bill for this vendor on a case, likely got misplaced in to the wrong stack. As soon as we noticed this the next day, we paid it. Even hand delivered the check to their office.

It was a few days later they call us, demanding that we need to also pay the court mandated late payment fine. These vendors are to be paid for their service within x days of date it was rendered or there is a fixed small fine paid to the vendor.

By this point we figured out that in our rush to pay them that other morning, we accidentally also mailed them a second check, paying them twice. We tell them this and to just consider that the fine payment. They did not care for this and that they were going to take this to court to have a judge make us also pay them the late fee.

We agree, because "this is going to be funny", and get a hearing date calendared.

It ended up being a 5 minute hearing. The judge agrees that we need to pay the fine since it was indeed paid late, but because we had accidentally paid them twice already, he orders them to pay us back the difference of $200 and some change. Judge then spent the next 4 minutes berated them for being petty.

So instead of getting paid double, they needed to be jerks and spend time and money for their lawyer to go to court for five minutes to then be ordered to pay us back most of an over payment.

Edit for clarity since there were a lot of similar comments:

Legal bills are separated by case, client, copy job, etc, and not one single bill for everything at the end of the month. This is because everything gets expended up the chain and the money will come from various accounts, because insurance. So for this vendor, we had paid x-1 of x bills, where x could be anywhere from a few to several hundred.

The actual amounts of money here are trivial compared to our billable hourly rates. This is what made the whole thing even more silly.

The check that got mailed was likely automatically generated from our billing system, which probably means that that specific bill came in late to us. We manually made the check that was hand delivered. This entire thing really didn't matter and wasn't worth any effort to figure out what exactly caused it happened as something like this happens maybe once every few years.

As I understand it, this particular fine here was a recent regularly change because some of them were not getting paid for years and the entire process of them trying to get paid was one many leaking holes in this system. One of the lawyers explained it to me in excessive detail, but I have mostly forgotten all of it, that was months ago and not something that even evolves me. lol

They did not sue us over this, it was something like a procedural hearing. I'm not a lawyer, I don't know the correct terminology here. It was still a laughable overstep by them as what they did is the sort of thing for when you haven't been paid for months/years, not 12 hours.

Would be nice it there was similar regulations on our bills to clients. Its pretty much our industry's standard for the last several years where every bill is automatically cut 15-20% by 3rd parties handling "bill review". Often takes 2-6 months to get mostly fully paid. if you'd worked in medical billing before, you likely know this sort of thing well.I was telling a friend this story and he told me to post it here.

So in high school I worked as a Certified Nurses Assistant at a local Nursing Home, I only worked on the weekend because my parents wanted me to focus on school during the week. Anyone in the health field knows you can NOT work with the elderly when you are sick because some elderly people can die from the common cold. 

When I was 17 I got really, really sick. I got sick on a Tuesday with a light cough and by Friday I was going into 10 minute coughing fit. The next Monday was Labor Day, my regular doctor was closed all weekend. My parents decided we couldnt wait until Tuesday and went to the ER. I had a bad case of Bacterial Pneumonia! 

For those who dont know, regular pneumonia usually results from a bad case of the flu or another illness. But a perfectly healthy person can be in Walmart (for example) and walk by another person with BP who sneezes and breathes it in. Its extremely contagious. 
I was admitted to the hospital and hooked up to tubes, turns out I was also dehydrated from being so sick.

Around midnight I realized I needed to call in since I wont be able to work the next 3 days. So I called the nurses desk and told the RN on duty that I have been diagnosed with Pneumonia and wont be able to work this weekend and most likely the weekend after due to the possibility I will still be contagious. 

She told me "If you wanted a 3 day weekend you shouldnt have volunteered to work. You cant fake a cough to get out of work in the real world sweetheart."

Then hung. Up. 

I asked my dad what I should do. He took my phone and took a picture if me in the hospital bed, then we got a signed note from the doctor and took a picture of that. He then told me to email those to the Director of Nursing for the facility. I did that and also told her what the RN had told me. 

Thing is at this facility any calls through the nurses station are recorded to protect the facility from lawsuits and/or protect the residents from negligent caretakers. 

She was on record telling me what she did. 
When I returned 2 weeks later i learned she had been suspended for 8 weeks without pay for negligence.

Edit: There are a lot of people asking how this was MC, during my CNA classes we are told to protect the residents no matter what, even if it costs our positions. I went over many heads, directly to the DON, which could have gotten me fired.My best friend does park maintenance/habitat restoration in an urban park. She finds all sorts of wild stuff, including drugs, drug paraphernalia, and occasionally hypodermic needles. There used to be a city task force that would come collect them, but it was discontinued. My friend would pick them up and dispose of them as safely as possible to reduce risk for park users. Eventually, she decided to ask the building manager (not her supervisor, but the person in charge of the facilities for the building she works out of) to install a sharps container in the bathroom (which park users have access to). He refused on the grounds that it would "encourage drug use." Counter arguments to the point were unsuccessful, as was pointing out that NOT having a sharps container endangered her and the custodians who took out the trash.    
So, she started bringing the needles to him whenever she found one, and asking him to dispose of them. It only took about five needles before he installed a sharps container in the bathroom.For context, my family and I recently moved into a rental house while our new house is being built.  The rental is in the back of a gated community on a mostly undeveloped street.  

Yesterday, I received a letter from the home owner's association informing me that I'm not in compliance of the "strictly enforced by towing" restriction stating that vehicles may not be parked on the street overnight.  In the letter was a picture of my project car (old BMW) parked beside our house on the street.  I decided to look up the HOA's restrictions (which I haven't seen before since I'm a renter) and discovered I'm living in HOA hell.  The street parking rule is just the beginning of a long list of restrictions including one warranting a hefty fine for "leaving the garage door open when not in use".  

This came as a huge surprise since several of my neighbors have parked their cars on the street without problem since I've lived here, so I assumed it was okay.  I can only imagine that they've singled me out because my car is 30 years old, however, in my defense, it's very presentable and by no means junky.  

Being singled out made me incredibly frustrated to the point where I started doing legal research.  It turns out my HOA has every right to tow my project car since it's parked on a private street in the neighborhood.  The good news for me is that the street just outside of the neighborhood is public, and it's 100% legal to park on it for any amount of time.  

Unfortunately for the HOA, the closest section of public street to my rental house is right in front of their nice gated entrance.  Ironically, my old BMW has now become part of their image, and there's nothing they can do about it until I move out in a few months.  


TL:DR: my new HOA threatened to tow my project car.  My compliance was to legally park it just outside of the neighborhood directly in front of the main gated entrance.My employer decided to convert all of a certain class of our records from paper based files to digital.
There were three immediate problems. 
Our company was not going to buy a generic system, but develop our own unique, tailored system.
It was to be done on the cheap, with net savings for record keeping from Year 1.
The guy in charge (let’s call him Genius) always (and I mean ALWAYS) thought he was the smartest guy in room. Believe me, he wasn’t.

Anyway, one of the girls I worked with took on the project on the condition that she could have the next July off for her wedding and honeymoon. She worked hard, and the project was actually making progress. One of her duties was passwords, none of which could be written anywhere because Genius knew this was ‘bad’. She periodically reminded Genius about the July wedding and he told her it’d be fine, but never signed off the paperwork. 
Come mid May, the project is WAY behind, mainly because Genius told management it could all be done in house at negligible cost, and Genius kept changing the design every time he read a new magazine article on IT.
My friend was then told 6 weeks out from the Wedding that her leave was cancelled. The project took priority and she’d just have to reschedule her wedding, honeymoon, the works. Genius could not see that this might be a problem.
So she did her job, updated the passwords as required, never recording them anywhere, as required,......and resigned without notice the last day of June.

On her honeymoon she gets a frantic call from Genius demanding all the passwords.
“Sorry, I don’t work there anymore “ click.

That’s why a decade later our company still has a few hundred electronic case files we can’t access.About four years ago I worked for a company that provided behavior services for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities. We did individual counseling, parent trainings, data analysis, etc. Think highly specialized mental care and support in home and community settings.  Anyway after two years of working there and getting another certification, I asked my boss for a raise. I was newly divorced and raising 3 kids, so I really needed the money. I had been working 10+ hours a week of overtime to stay afloat. My boss also knew about my situation. My evaluations were great and I had been told I would be moved up to supervisor soon, so my boss had to have known this conversation was coming. This man looked me dead in my eyes and said that he knew I wanted to make more money and my reviews were great, but he wanted to make sure I was “loyal to the company mission”.  He told me he can tell when people are “just looking to make more money. And we tell those people to go work somewhere else.”  He wanted to make sure that the new supervisor would “put the company mission and families they support first.” He told me that he couldn’t offer me a raise at that time but he would get back to me. No date was set for a follow up meeting or anything. 

I started applying for new jobs that day. Within two weeks I had found a new position making double the salary for only 40 hours of work a week. As it turns out, I was being severely underpaid (shocker I know).  The day I handed in my notice, my boss and the owner were in a meeting about my new position within the organization. Of course no one said anything to me about it beforehand. They sent me an offer, which I politely declined because it sucked. Then they tried to hire me on as a contractor at a rate that was at least 25% lower than every other contractor rate in the city for my position, so I turned that down too. My boss and the owner were both shocked that I rejected their offers, especially since they were willing to offer me “so many perks,” they were giving me the opportunity to “become a leader in a great company” and believed I was “a great clinician” who would do “so many great things within their organization,” etc. I reminded my boss that he is the one who told me to go work somewhere else and then I stopped responding to their messages.I was reminded of this story from my work by one of my coworkers. It's been maybe 5-7 years since this happened.

Where I work there is a semi-strict dress code that needs to be adhered to so we look presentable when going to customers houses. The minor details are more or less negotiable depending on who's our manager that day. We have a normal manager we see almost daily, but if he's off or it's a weekend someone else subs in.

The day this happened was a Saturday and our regular manager was off so the duty manager for the day happened to be "Mr. Hardass" whom no one liked and he made it his life goal to make all the techs miserable. When we walked in the door we had to pass through the managers office to get to our meeting area. 

My coworker Tim (name changed) walked in the door that was to the managers office with everything looking right on his uniform but his shirt untucked. The following conversation took place:

Mr. Hardass: your shirt should be tucked in.

Tim: absolutely, and I will do that when I set my gear down and go to the bathroom

Mr. Hardass: No, you need to show up for work ready to work. Not show up and get ready on "my time"

Tim: ok, let me set my stuff down and I'll go right to the bathroom and tuck it in for you.

Mr. Hardass: NO. You're going to tuck it in RIGHT NOW before you walk another step into MY building. 

Tim: Right now?

Mr. Hardass: RIGHT NOW!

So, my coworker did as instructed, un-buttoned his pants and pulled them all the way down to his ankles and proceeded to smooth out his shirt and then reach all the way down and pull his pants all the way back up and re-buttoned them. 

From there he immediately walked outside and called the HR hotline and told them his manager on duty just forced him to undo his pants and semi-strip in front of him in his personal office and wouldn't allow him to go to the bathroom to tuck his shirt in. That he felt weird and uncomfortable to be around Mr. Hardass and didn't know if he had any ulterior motives.

None of us are privy to what exactly happened from that phone call on, but we do know that he got "laterally moved" from being a tech manager to the safety team where he was no longer in charge of any subordinates.





***I'll make an edit to iron out some details or important things I forgot:

Our job is very much union based and as such the union book is the law of the land so language and actions have to be very specific as to not draw ire from the union nor the business. "Tim" was raised in a union household by someone who was VERY involved in their union so he has a very keen knowledge on how to manipulate things well within the trappings of the union handbook. 

He did this whole thing not next to the bosses desk but within line of sight of the door coming in and the door to the meeting room so there were visual witnesses from the meeting room and people who trickled into work behind him who literally walked through the entire ordeal. So, there were plenty of witnesses to corroborate.My brother reminded me of this story today and I thought people here might like it. 

When I was seven, my family moved from Reykjavik, Iceland to London, UK for my father’s work. He was an Icelandic native, but my mother was born in England, so I was raised completely bilingual from birth. It’s also not uncommon for Icelanders to speak English (and often other languages too - I also spoke passable Danish at this point).

At my primary school (basically elementary school, goes up to age 11), they put me in regular classes, because I spoke English as well as someone raised in the UK. But at my secondary school (11-16), all immigrant kids got put in ESL (English as a Second Language) sessions. You could earn your way out of these extra classes by completing the evaluations and an exam, but the fact I had to do these extra assignments and go to these classes at all pissed me off.

My brother had just gone through them when he went, two years before me, and been allowed to stop going after a month when he completed all of the set work. But I didn’t want a month of extra classes and extra work, and the ESL tutor who ran the classes when he had them had left, so the new teacher didn’t know him and therefore didn’t know me either.

The school decided I didn’t speak proper English. So I didn’t. The ESL tutor didn’t speak Icelandic and though the work I was given was mind-numbingly easy (think how they teach phonetics and basic sentence structure to four year olds), I stuck to my pretence of not speaking a single word of English in those classes for two full weeks in protest.

In my third week, my history teacher assigned us homework which I didn’t feel like doing, and since my ESL teacher had put a note in my file that I wasn’t fluent enough to be given homework, I decided to refer my history teacher to that and tell him (in fluent, unaccented English) that I don’t speak the language well enough to complete homework, according to Mrs ESL tutor. Luckily enough, he found this incredibly funny and didn’t punish me since I was right, my file did say that. 

When my ESL teacher found out, she gave me a detention and yelled at me for using ESL to get out of work and for wasting her time. So I agreed, having me in ESL WAS a waste of time and that must mean I didn’t have to go anymore. She tried to argue, but I had my history teacher on my side and he managed to convince the school office to change ESL into an opt-in class for people whose parents and teachers felt needed it. 

I didn’t have to go back to ESL and didn’t even have to complete that homework.so i've posted a few stories about my "wonderful" old manager. let's just call her Samantha. this story is about a coworker we will cal Joe - and from day one it was obvious that joe was one of the hardest working people on the team; and Samantha could not stand him. 

so this is a few years into Joe's tenure with the team and for whatever reason or another Samantha decides to put Joe on Performance  Notice; which is basically an HR notice that you have six months to get your shit together...or your fired. the reason on the paperwork: "improper attitude"

Joe was the type of guy to ALWAYS speak his mind...and while management says they live this, brutal experience shows this is a lie. the problem with notice is it also comes with penalties: no WFH (they literally take your laptop away and bring you a thin client) , no approved OT, and no learning new things or assignments....oh and no raise or bonus. you have to prove you do your job well and then after the six months if you're not fired, the manager can extend with an additional probation period of another six months. 

january of every year is when we find out about our raises and bonuses from the previous year, and to put it delicately, that january they fucked us...to the point that one person walked out and two older employees(30+ years) took packages. come february, we are drowning, and Joe can't work OT and joe can't learn new things...managers orders, remember? well this is the middle of joe's probation period, as Samantha predictably extended his notice...so this is where we find ourselves mid march, 2020. cue malicious compliance.

during the lockdown, they send the whole company home...everyone is Working from home; except Joe. he is home....just not working. he technically can't. and about two weeks in to the lockdown is when Samantha finally notices

she goes ballistic. "why aren't you working ?! blah blah blah, on a team email with everyone cc'd! he replies all; "as you know, i am on coaching and cannot work from home."

tries to get HR to fire him, to which they reply, "Samantha, you elected to continue the notice, which still has 4 months...we can't issue him a laptop until it expires."

turns out the only way to rectify it ASAP was to petition formally with the head of HR, that putting Joe on a performance notice was done in error and have all parties sign, including Joe. all this happens except joe refuses to sign. he won't sign until them give him his bonus and raise...which they do. the whole thing took a month...a month of joe basically on a free vacation lol

TL;DR: a coworker on notice can't work from home because of company policy..and thenCovid happens

EDIT:  well i didn't expect this one to blow up like this!!! but there have been some questions that i feel i need to add some context to. first is the work we do...it's easy. like a stereotypical corporate job, a concerted effort of maybe 3 hours a day is enough to do your job. most people screw around, chit chat and milk the day; some people go even further and milk the work so much that they "need help" with their workload. we have a coworker who would literally watch netflix all day.
management either never figured it out, or didn't care.

i've had days where i've done all my work before lunch and took it easy the rest, and then i've had days were i didn't do a thing all day - incompetent management creates gray areas....as long as the work gets done, they don't look too deep into who is doing what. and people get away with minimal work, knowing others will pick up the slack. this is where joe found himself when the pandemic started...the company, which has never had all of its employees (or even a good amount) remote at the same time was unprepared on how to handle the situation and our managers were even less prepared. joe literally just found himself forgotten; and didn't raise his hand to tell anyone for a bit lol.Been saving this story for a while now, just thought I'd share something light and funny to start the weekend off.
The usual warnings; long time reader, first post, mobile etc.

Years ago I worked for the big Canadian coffee and donut shop, mostly working the evening shift. 
If you aren't familair with Canadian brand coffee shop, the cream and sugar are dispensed by a machine that is calibrated to ab amount determined by corporate. If you are used to ordering at the fancy green place, or the running donut place, the number of sugar and creams you order may need to change depending on how much you actually want.

One night, we had these 3 bikers drive in, and you could tell they had been on the road for a while. 
Their ringleader was your stereotypical biker; tall, wide shoulders, big beard, covered in leather. 
His friends were were shorter but otherwise still had the whole tough but tired look going on.

My coworker was in the back working soup and sandwich, but Its only three people and it's been a slow night. No worries. Just need to get these tired boys some caffiene and wish them a good night. 


Ringleader: I want an extra large 12 and 12. 

Me: Are you sur...

Ringleader: Did I stutter?

Me: Okay but that's only...

Friend 1: Did he stutter!?

No. No he did not... So off I went to make him exactly what he asked for. Grabbed a cup and put it under the sugar dispenser while I pressed the times3 button 4 times. 12  XL shots of sugar.
Then I went over to the cream dispenser and did the same thing.
Now, fun fact. The cream and sugars are measured to dispense 1/12 of the cup size you are selecting.
So by the time all 12 shots of creamer were dispensed, the cup was basically full.

I stirred the creamy sugar mixture around before I poured an itty bitty splash of coffee in his cup, just enough to bring it up to the saftey line on the cup.
I tried asking him if he wanted me to heat it up or anything, but I basically got the same exact run around from him and his friend.

Obviously the guy knew what he wanted and he didnt need me to tell him what he was ordering.
They grabbed the rest of their order and drove out into the night.

Now, you would think that was the end of the story. The big angry biker man got his nasty sugar cream drink and left me sitting there wondering if the rest of the world had been drinking their coffee wrong this entire time.
But no, I was lucky to be working the next afternoon when he came back in! Mr. Ringleader came back in all by himself the next day and shuffled up to the counter.
I could tell he must have been embarrassed because his voice was a lot softer this time, he knew he fucked up.

The glorious aftermath is that he apologized and confirmed that the drink had been utterly disgusting.
Turns out he was used to ordering from the fancy green  coffee place and they use way smaller measurements for their creame and sugur.
Once I knew where he was used to ordering from I made him the approximately same drink using our measurements (roughly a triple triple) and sent him on his way.

I only wish I could have seen his face when he took that first sip.


TLDR: Mean man offers a cup full of creame and sugur, tastes disgusting.In high school my standard outfit included a backward flat rim baseball cap. One teacher—in the middle of class—called me out.

“OP, you need to take off your hat. It’s distracting.” 
“What about the 13 other guys in this class with a similar hat?” 
“Well it’s distracting when a girl wears a baseball cap.” 

I was fuming. Baseball caps on girls are distracting? Fine, I won’t wear one. The next class period, I wore a 3-foot-tall, red and yellow joker hat that featured bells...so that if I moved my head *at all* 16 bells shook.

At the end of an hour and a half of bells, the teacher pulled me aside to ask that I go back to my baseball cap; apparently it was no longer distracting.I posted this in r/pettyrevenge and a lot of people thought it would fit well here.  I just copied and pasted right from my other post. 
Obligatory I'm on mobile so forgive me for formatting.



So my last relationship was beyond bad, he was all sorts of abusive and controlling.  At one point I had the strength to break up with him but then we got back together after we discussed some things.  Stupid I know, but yeah love and all that.  Well anyways one of the things we agreed on was that he and I would stop drinking alcohol because he was beyond crazy aggressive when he drank, and I wanted to support his sobriety.  This is REALLY important.

Fast forward about eight months or so and we got into a huge fight and I not only broke up with him, I kicked him out of the house and told him he wasn't ever allowed back inside. We'd been living together over a year at this point so his mom got in touch with me about getting his stuff.  While on the phone with her I could hear him in the background saying, "make sure they get everything I own or bought.  I want it all back.". Apparently even stuff he gifted me he wanted back, but honestly I didn't care, I was happy to get rid of anything related to him.  While cleaning our room up and gathering EVERYTHING I started to come across numerous bottles and cans of alcohol.  It seems he had been drinking again for a while and was hiding the evidence in the room. I mean he was hiding them under the bed, in his guitar case, rolled up in his clothes, in some old backpacks of mine and so on and so forth.

He had said he wanted everything of his, so any bottle and the few unopened cans I found went straight into one of the garbage bags of his stuff.  By the time I had gathered everything up, I had 3 bags of stuff and one was basically all just the alcohol.

Dropping them off was just so satisfying.  He actually called moments after I left his parents place ranting about how petty and immature I was being.  My response? "Well you wanted all of your stuff back, and those definitely weren't mine.  Plus I figured you'd probably need a drink to deal with the breakup.". I promptly ended the call and blocked him on everything.  Most satisfying thing I've ever done.

Edit:  Firstly thank you everyone for the words of encouragement and everything.  This happened years ago, but knowing people are still proud of me for leaving means the world to me. 

Also there's definitely a lot about this story that didn't get posted, such as cops having to be involved and other things.  I didn't put open cans or unscrew and bottle lids just for the fact I didn't want to risk ruining his stuff as that'd be a huge headache and everything.This happened some months after I got my drivers license. I (at the time 19f) was driving through an 8 lane roundabout when a car struck me.

This is a horrible roundabout with lots of traffic, very fast and there are no lines on the ground to see who crossed who. 

Anyway, I get out to see the damage and the guy driving the other car comes out screaming at me, cursing and yelling that I am a „stupid girl“. It’s my first accident and I‘m scared and almost want to cry from the shock of the accident, but my little cousin is in the car and I don’t want to scare her.


As I‘m walking around trying to take pictures of the car, the guy keeps yelling at me that it is my fault. He threatens to call the police and „have me arrested“ because I am a „danger“. He says how he will tell them that he was „going straight“ and I was turning!! He keeps repeating it until I realise what he is saying: driving straight… on a roundabout?


Cue malicious compliance: 
I tell him not to worry with the police, he is completely right, he was just going straight and it was me who was going around. Lets sign an accident statement!

He is inmediatly on board, writes it and signs!

Later at the insurance office they told me they don‘t normally have such easy cases. My damages were paid in full and they even gave me a replacement car while mine was getting repaired! Such a stupid girl!


EDIT: Hi guys! Thanks for the comments and awards! I thought I could explain a few things that keep coming up in the comments:

-He didn’t go straight through the middle on the roundabout, he sort of went tangent to the inner circle, if that makes sense, the shortest route crossing all lanes, which could have ended much worse (came in straight to the inner lane and then  tried to leave straight out) I know it’s hard to imagine if you’ve never seen a 6-8 lane roundabout.

-No, I’m not going to post the sketch. Sorry, guys, I think the comment section would turn into a traffic debate about who was at fault, etc. 

-It is not in ParisRather minor, but cashiering doesn't offer many opportunities for MC, so I'll take what I can get.

One of those very loud customers came up to the counter and tossed a round battery onto the counter. "Hey! You have that battery?" I check the size, and confirm that we do sell 2032s. "Well, are you gonna go and get it?" I walk over to the battery rack, pull one out, and return to the register.

As soon as I step back there, and no earlier: "I need four of those!"

I go back out, and instead of putting it back and grabbing the four-pack, I pull down three more single packs and once again return. All together they cost about twice as much as the multi-pack, but you can't put a price on shaving ten steps off your shopping trip.Long time lurker first time poster.

English not my native language, mobile bla bla

Some context. Working in an outsourcing company. Before I joined job there were 2 people doing my job, both left before I joined. I was alone doing the job of 2 people. Weekly reports being sent to client "head" and client would visit job site once a year. 

So here goes. As a means of control and reporting there a general mailbox to where client should send all requests that needed to be addressed. Had to deal with 30 to 40 different people from the client side plus client"head". They didn't give a shit about said mailbox, would always email my inbox ignoring said general one almost always. 
Since I was alone doing the work of 2 people, I was almost always behind on the workload and would get the idiots on the other side constantly complaining to the client "head". Who in turn would complain to my managers, how is it possible that OP can't deal with 7 or 8 daily emails and be behind on his work. Weekly report stated I was only getting 7/8 emails from the client a day, completely ignoring the fuckin phone, personal inbox, Skype chat which were the ways people were contacting me every day. 

So client "head" complains to managers and escalates me for being a lazy idiot that can't even handle a handful of emails a day. 

Managers setup meeting to grill me. OP  you always look so busy and you're only getting a handful of emails a day and constantly behind on your work. How is this possible? Client isn't happy and you either improve dramatically or client wants us to replace you. I explained that general mailbox wasn't the only thing I did, mentioning all other means through which client idiots were requesting things. 
So solution to show client "head" what was being done, I was told I needed to register on an excel sheet everything, EVERY THING I did during the day. I asked for clarification, you mean emails and calls right? No, no EVERYTHING. And email the excel at the end of workday.

So here goes my malicious compliance. 
I did exactly what I was told, wrote down everything I did during the workday, even including bathroom, smoke and coffee breaks. 
Client writes on Skype, I write down timestamp when client asks for something and timestamp of each and every reply, 
All adding to an excel at around 500 lines every day with my personal favorite of adding a line at the end "time wasted to fill in sheet, 1 hour"

1 manager laughs when he sees my full compliance, other one not so much but knows can't do shit cause I did what I was told. A few months later when client "head" visits tells me he fuckin loved it.

Was told to stop doing it on the 3rd day. They were now aware of what I did during the day :)Apologies if there are any formatting issues since I'm writing this on mobile.

Anyway, this grudge has been simmering for almost a year now and has only just come to fruition. It began with my nextdoor neighbor leaving me a passive aggressive note for having trash outside my door while I was cleaning my apartment. Two important points here:

1. I was deep cleaning because the landlord sent a note saying the adjoining apartment (my neighbor's) had roaches. I needed to clean so the exterminator could see if my apartment was infested as well.

2. The trash was by my door for 30 minutes at most. I was trying to save a trip to the dumpster and doing a final sweep of the apartment before heading down.

Now, prior to this incident, this neighbor had already pissed me off by constantly blaring their loud music to the point where my apartment walls vibrated. Fortunately for them, I prefer to avoid confrontation so I never called them out on it. After the passive aggressive note calling me a pig though, all bets were off. She wrote that I should "read my lease" since I left my "nasty trash" everywhere. Ok bitch, it's on.

I read my lease like I was snorting coke off it. Every time they played their music loud, I filed a noise complaint. When I got a whiff of pot coming from their apartment, I filed another complaint. The lease says tenants must comply with the state's drug laws or risk eviction so, hey, another win for me. Finally, they brought a dog into the apartment despite the no pet policy's exception only being for service animals. This was obviously not a service dog since it howled day and night betraying no semblance of training. I'm pretty sure I'm not the only one who complained after that final stunt since my landlord said the noisy dog problem was being taken care of through litigation and my nextdoor neighbor's lease would not be renewed. Guess she should have read it. :)I was at the doctors office today and had to bring my 15 month old twins with me. These kiddos do not enjoy being cooped up in a stroller but letting them wander around isn't an option since they both will immediately bolt in opposite directions. They have clean nappies, they've been fed and hydrated, so at this point any fussing is just stroller related crankiness. In preparation for having to wait a while and wanting to be considerate of the others who were in waiting room purgatory with me I packed the diaperbag full of endless snacks and sippy cups. Sure enough 5 minutes in they lose their mind so I instantly start giving them snacks and also walking back and forth in the very very large waiting room. I am at the back area and not even close to being in anyones way and as long as I am pacing the beasties will quietly munch away on their cheerios.

At one point I stop pacing to hear the doctor mumble the next patients name in another barely audible whisper and this is where cranky old lady decides to weigh in on my parenting. I hear a huffing noise and look over at her and the second we make eye contact she says "Oh my gawd you have got to stop walking up and down that back area. You're making me dizzy. Also you really shouldn't be feeding them that much, just SIT DOWN and they will relax too. Watching toddlers really shouldn't be that hard hun." Thanks. Firstly, while my girls are very healthy, they were preemies born at 3lb/1.5kg and are still very tiny so I will feed them all the damn cheerios I want. Secondly I am doing all this not for myself or the twins but for the benefit of all those around us. Finally I was waiting to find out if my scans showed cancer or not (hurray scans were clean) so I was all out of fucks to give at the moment.

Now for the malicious compliance. I take her advice and sit down. Right next to her. Tons of empty seats everywhere by the way. Instantly they start screaming their heads off and what do I do? I pull out my book and start reading. Anyone who has ever been seated next to a strangers baby having a meltdown, close your eyes, imagine that shitty moment and now double it to account for twins. Within 5 minutes she is looking like she is about to snap and suggests they might want a snack. To which I calmy respond "Nah, I really shouldn't be feeding them that much" and calmly turn the page of my book. Ten minutes later my name is finally called and this lady looks like she is ready to give up on life. I however have read my first chapter in ages. I guess watching toddlers really isnt that hard after all.This happened years ago at what would turn out to be my last year at a Catholic school, for reasons that will become obvious. I don't have anything against people of faith, but it was not my thing, very early on.

I was 12 years old and in 7th grade. I was becoming disenchanted with my Catholic upbringing. I had so many questions, and it might have saved my faith to have them answered reasonably. The adults didn't want to reason with a curious 12-year-old. They wanted to see a nice Catholic girl who didn't feel compelled make so much distasteful noise.

Sex ed was still a part of any Catholic curriculum, and as it turned out, my religion teacher, Mrs. M, was also my sex ed teacher. When she opened up our first sex ed class with, "Now, I'm just as embarrassed to be here as you are," I didn't see it as an expression of empathy. I saw it as a grown woman, humiliated to be teaching basic biology. It made me sad. 

Junior High sex ed wasn't just biology, though. It was an effort to shape our view of the world. Mrs. M taught us sexual health as per Catholic doctrine, and also peppered in some of her own weird, personal viewpoints--shaped by her own history, I guess. We had this box at the front of the class where we could discreetly write down and drop off the questions we were too nervous to ask out loud. Someone asked what orgasms feel like for women--we knew men ejaculate, but what do women do? Mrs. M did not explain, perhaps because she hadn't had one a day in her life. She said, "The women's orgasm is not a necessary part of sex. It is not necessary for procreation, and sex is for the purposes of procreation."

That sounded very dodgy to me. I brought her statement home to my mother, who had always been very open with me about these things. I asked her if women really weren't supposed to enjoy sex all that much. She was horrified. She told me lots of men like to make women feel good, and sex should feel good for everyone. Then she said something that would be lastingly valuable, "Ask questions in that class. Teachers are supposed to answer your questions, and if they can't, maybe they shouldn't  be teachers."

The next class, Mrs. M taught us that homosexuality was a sin. This was too much for me--I had a gay uncle who had been a huge fixture in my life, I felt attractions to girls in my class, and I refused to believe God would think who you love is worthy of hellfire. She went on to say gay marriage was both impossible and wrong. I raised my hand and asked her plaintively, "Why is gay marriage wrong?" Her answer was, "Because they cannot procreate, and procreation is the purpose of marriage." I sat silently. I didn't demonstrate agreement nor dissent. I went home and thought about that for awhile. I needed to come back to sex ed class with an inquiry that was going to properly fuck Mrs. M's shit up. It didn't seem like an easy task, but I came up with something I thought was worth trying out.

The next sex ed class rolled around. Mrs. M taught whatever stuffy, deplorable lesson she had in the plan, then she opened up the class to questions. I raised my hand, she called on me, and I said, "If a woman is infertile, but she really loves the man she's with and wants to share the Sacrament of Marriage with him, does The Church approve the marriage?" It was a no-brainer for her. Of course. 

I followed up with, "But she can't have children, and marriage is for procreation. Why can she get married, but two men or two women who can't procreate can't?"

Anyone who is seasoned in Christian apologetics can explain this one pretty easily. But I had hit Mrs. M somewhere deeply personal in front of 30 other children. Mrs. M was a married woman of around 50 or so, with no children of her own--very unusual for a Catholic woman who doesn't believe in birth control. Mrs. M was infertile, and to her, I was questioning the sanctity of her marriage, and its validity in the eyes of the God she'd dedicated her life to. It was a sucker punch, and she couldn't collect herself to punch back. She instead flew into a rage. Her face became a deep shade of red as she said, "This is NOT a debate class," and sent me to the office. 

For context, I didn't know Mrs. M was infertile, it's something my mother told me post-office battle. An apology letter was determined to be insufficient by Mrs. M. 

My mom came to collect me, and a battle ensued. Mrs. M wanted blood by way of suspension, and my mother was having none of it. Curious kids don't get suspended for questioning what they're taught. The only thing that worked in my favour was my history of being a nerdy, non-disruptive child with good grades. A compromise was struck. I wouldn't get suspended, but I could not participate in sex ed class, nor religion class. My grades in those classes would be determined solely by the written portions. These written portions were completed at a desk positioned outside the classroom, which Mrs. M smugly carried out for me every class.

I didn't mind working outside of the classroom, because to me, it was a good example of the ease in which an adult can collapse under a child's questioning. I decided that religion and sex ed would become my specialty classes. I would master the curriculum, I would get the best grades I could, and Mrs. M would have to watch it happen. I worked very hard, harder than I had in any other classes. I studied at length and did additional research online. I finished out the semester with about 95% in sex ed, and 98% in religion.  

The final exams for both classes were entirely multiple choice. I was permitted into the classroom to be supervised for the exams, and there was no room for her biases to creep into her grading. She passed me the scantron sheet back from my religion exam. 100%. I thanked her with a saccharine smile. She fixed me with a grim expression before moving on to the next classmate. A few days later, it was the scantron sheet for the sex ed exam. 100%. I said, "Thank you for all you've taught me," as I smiled up at her. She said something under her breath and moved on. 

Mrs. M hated me with a distinctly unchrist-like passion, and she found other ways to express it in the following semester. It warms my heart a little to think of her having to grade all my schoolwork, one correct answer after the other. The relentlessly curious, heretic nerd-girl was a pain in her side that wouldn't go away. Worst of all, she demonstrated that she understood what you were teaching. She just didn't believe in it.

TL;DR: My Catholic sex ed teacher tried to punish me for questioning doctrine, a compromise punishment was struck, and I in turn resolved to ace all her classes. She hated me with a passion, had to grade all my assignments correctly, and watched me get honours.I used to sell pool and hot tub chemicals. A part of the job is testing customers pool/hot tub water to see what chemicals they needed.

If you don't take care of your pool or check it often, you need a lot of chemicals to fix the mess you've made. Particularly if you use chlorine pucks. They generally have such a low pH level that it burns away at your heater coil and causes you to have copper in your water.

Well a couple years ago a customer came up to me to test their pool water. It was a complete mess and it had a bunch of copper it in. This isnt the exact conversation because it was a while ago, but this was the main points.

Me: Yeah the main issue is your pH is so low its making your chlorine less effective, and you have copper in your water.

Customer: Yeah just get me the stuff I need to fix it.

I go and grab all the chemicals he needs and put it on the counter.

Customer: How much is all of this going to cost?

Me: Around $250

Customer: I'm not paying that much. Is all of this really necessary.

Me: Yes. You won't be able to hold chlorine. And you need to get the copper out. If you oxidize copper with a shock, it's going to stain parts of your pool and can even tint you hair green. (If you have recently dyed blonde hair)

Customer: my daughter is having a pool party next weekend and I just want the pool to have chlorine for then.

Me: Yes, and you need all of this to make sure you're good to go.

Customer: Can you just put everything away and only give me the chlorine?

Me: Fine. (I'm not going to argue. I don't work on commission.)

Fast forward a couple days and the customers wife came in. It was subtle, but you could tell her hair had a funny tint to it. She asked for all the chemicals that I recommended to her husband and she paid with zero hesitation. The husband never came in ever again and his wife took care of the pool from that moment forward. The next time the wife came in, it looked like her hair had been dyed the original blonde colour she used to have.

Tl;Dr: A customer ignored my advice and his wife came back with her hair tinted greenMy younger brother has just been helping my dad with his computer. As is often the case, an argument ensued and my brother withdrew his IT services. In an act of spite, my father instructed my brother to turn off everything in his bedroom. If he won't help with my dad's computer problem, then my brother can't use his own PC. There's some logic there, I suppose. 

However, he seems to have forgotten that the router is located in my brother's bedroom. He's been in the study for 10 minutes. We don't know what he's doing on his laptop without an internet connection but my brother is practicing his shit eating grin for when he eventually emerges.This was originally posted as a comment, but someone suggested I make it it's own post.... So  I've edited it slightly.

I once hosted an event in a bar - It was a kind of celebration for police trainees. New recruits that kind of thing.

Anyway, as I was busy slaving away, pouring drinks etc, this one woman who was absolutely full of herself was watching me pour measures for another customer, making comments about the amount of ice in drinks, how I was using the wrong glass (I wasn't) and other obnoxious comments about how she was waiting to be served and she was here first (she wasn't). I was pouring some spirits (and for those who don't know, they come in standard sizes of 25ml for singles / 50ml for doubles etc) - I reached the end of the bottle as I was pouring the whiskey and there was a tiny drop left, so I just poured those few extra ml into the glass. Which you shouldn't really do, but who cares, right?

Anyway, she gets up in my face about how it's technically illegal to pour extra measures and that the law is the law and I should follow the law to the letter. I tried to brush it off and ignore her and carried on serving other customers. But there she was commenting on pretty much everything I was doing and as everyone who has worked in customer service, you know how annoying it is to have everything scrutinised and commented on as though you're nothing but a useless piece of shit.

It comes to her turn and she asks for an alcoholic beverage. So using my limited powers I ask her for her ID. She goes bright red in the face and stutters something about... Being old enough to be in the police.

I tell her 'sorry. If you don't have ID, I can't legally serve you. The law is the law after all'. Lo and behold, she didn't have ID and had to settle for lemonade.

EDIT: Thanks for the rewards :)

MEGA EDIT: Holy shit, thanks for the rewards and upvotes. Love you all :)  


SUPER EDIT: Please no more rewards - Go do something nice for someone, buy a stranger a coffee or something.Many years ago (more than 15), I worked as a programmer for an Oil and Gas automation company. This means we would design and build the computer systems for oil and gas plants, commission them, and support the operators during day to day operations. Because of this, my company ran a 24/7 support phone. Every week a member of my team would get the phone and be expected to be available to answer calls 24/7.  We had enough people on the team that it would roughly equate to getting the phone twice a year. Most of the employees of this company were salaried, and the 24/7 phone was written into their contract. For every phone call they took, they could charge a minimum of 1 hour in banked time. This was a good deal for them, and made the 24/7 phone easier to handle.

&nbsp;

I was a little different than my coworkers in that I wasn’t a salaried employee - I was an hourly contractor. My coworkers would bank their time but I was just paid out biweekly. My contract also stated that if I was being paid by the company, I had to be available exclusively to the company. This was added by their HR department because a few years before they caught an hourly contractor running side jobs for other businesses at his desk. This also meant that if they wanted me to be available exclusively to the company, they had to pay for my time. 

&nbsp;

For two years I knew the 24/7 phone existed but had never had to take it because according to my contract, if they wanted me to be available they had to pay my hourly rate after normal work hours to ensure that I was available to answer the phone when it rang.

&nbsp;

Then, as in most corporate stories, my completely awesome manager left for greener pastures and was replaced with an absolute tool. After a month of being in the office, he decided it wasn’t fair that everyone took turns on the phone except for me. He declared that I would be put in the rotation effective immediately.

&nbsp;

I didn’t want to cost the company a ton of money, so I tried to explain that if I’m on the 24/7 phone that means they have to pay me 24 hours a day for 7 days. He scoffed and told me I obviously didn’t understand how business worked. I told him he didn’t understand how my contract was laid out and that I’m an hourly contractor, not a salaried employee. He insisted that to be a team player I had better take the phone or look elsewhere for employment. 

&nbsp;

I didn’t want to seem like I wasn’t a team player, so I accepted the phone..and started my clock.

&nbsp;

7 days later I handed the phone off to the next guy, and submitted my biweekly invoice. It came out to just over $10000, with $8400 being just that one week of having the phone. 

&nbsp;

I waited about 15 minutes before I was pulled into the manager’s office. When I arrived the manager, the head of HR, and the manager’s boss - the head of the department - were there with my most recent invoice sitting on the desk. The department head just looked at me and asked what the hell I was thinking when I gave them that invoice. 

&nbsp;

I explained that the new manager insisted I take the 24/7 phone even though my contract clearly stipulates that if the company wants me available 24/7, they have to pay for every minute I have the phone.

&nbsp;

The new manager became redder with every word. When I was finished, the department manager turned to him and asked him why he didn’t know this, since it’s common knowledge that no contractors are ever put in that kind of position. 

&nbsp;

As he was stuttering for an answer, the department head dismissed me and told me to expect my cheque at the usual time.

&nbsp;

The best part? During the entire week I had the 24/7 phone, it only rang twice - both during work hours and both calls asking for a specific person in the department. All I had to do was give them a phone number. Those two 3 minute phone calls cost that company $4200 each.

&nbsp;

After that the new manager pretended I didn’t exist and refused to talk to me for 3 months until he was moved to sales in a different department. I was at the company for another 2 years and never saw that phone again.I work as an administrative assistant at a major sporting goods retailer. Part of my job is to track attendance and regularly upload a report to corporate. 

My store manager just recently (in the last 2 years) got hired by our district manager who she has been friends with for years. They managed to push out the old store manager who had the store running like a ticking clock. Ever since then, it has become abundantly clear that she has no idea how to run the store, and we have all suffered for it. She constantly screws up the store schedule, bullies employees she doesn't like, and has hired incompeted friends to management positions. We all dislike her and think she should be fired, but it seems like everything she does in the store makes us look bad while making her look good, until recently. 

Like I said above, part of my job is tracking attendance. Yet for years, it has been common knowledge that those in my position are expected to fail to upload attendance records to corporate because the company's policies on attendance are extremely harsh and many employees fail to meet attendance due to factors out of their control. For instance, employees who come in before we open to process our freight often clock in late because the managers on duty take their sweet time opening the front doors for these employees. It is not their fault that they come in late. And on some occasions, certain employees have been left outside for upwards of 30 minutes after ringing our doorbell because the only person who could open the doors was busy or didn't hear the doorbell which is soft. Anyway, if I should upload the attendance record to corporate, many of these employees would probably be fired on the spot by our regional manager (through email because these things are automated and mandatory).

As a side note, the store manager is one of the managers who likes to take 10 or 15 minutes to open the door for freight employees. We all hate her for this because when it is winter we have to wait those 10 or 15 minutes outside the door in the freezing cold and she acts like it is no big deal. 

Anyway, her district manager friend recently moved to another district and we got a new DM who is looking to move up in corporate. To do this, she has to make all of our metrics look awesome, including attendance. She sent an email to our store manager demanding an attendance record. I told the store manager that this could get many employees fired, but instead of realizing the implications, she told me to run the report anyway. I tried to tell her that this could result in most of the employees who had availability before we open (who are very valuable and rare) getting fired and she completely blew me off. She literally went as far as saying that I was not thinking straight. I told her that she could adjust the attendance on her end as the DM \*clearly\* wanted her to do (this has been common procedure due to the reasons for poor attendance) and she told me that she was the store manager, she would figure it out, and I should just do my job as I was told. 

So I ran the report, and immediately got a \*furious\* email from the new district manager saying that I should have run the report by my store manager (to adjust the records) before uploading it to corporate. The next day, corporate sent an automated email with the names of all the employees that should be fired, which is not an email that our manager can either respond to or contest. She had to fire all the employees on the email. And as it turned out, every single employee with availability before we open got fired. 15 people. And every other employee in the store is a student with no ability to work before like 10 am, so there is nobody to process our freight (which is a massive job).

I got an email from a friend in corporate yesterday that said the regional manager was lining up a replacement for our store manager due to incompetence. None of us are surprised.Small MC this morning

I live in an apartment above another apartment. Since we first moved in, we got regular noise complaints from our neighbour below, saying that the noise of my son (4) jumping off furniture is driving them crazy. He's not jumping off furniture (he's tripping and dropping toys because he's 4 and he's clumsy) but we apologised and encouraged him to be more careful.

The complaints kept coming in regardless, so we bought thick foam mats to cover half of our floor to deaden the noise. They're ugly looking and I hate them, but we want to be good neighbours. The complaints stopped, we didn't hear anything for months until this morning. 

This morning I was dressing my son for school. He had gotten new runners that light up, so obviously the first thing he did was stamp his feet to activate the lights. He happened to be standing on the half of the floor not covered in foam. I also happened to knock over my sweeping brush on the bare floor too as I rushed out the door. When we got downstairs, the neighbour leaned out her window, yelling about how the noise woke her up and it's ridiculous that we're so loud etc. I apologised and explained about the shoes but she cut me off and said it didn't matter and that we were being inconsiderate. I started to get annoyed and was explaining about the efforts we made to reduce noise and she cut me off AGAIN and snapped "well OBVIOUSLY it's not working". So I said "ok, if it's not working then we can stop putting the effort in, thanks" and left. When I came back I took up all the ugly foam mats and put them in the attic. Screw her, when she comes knocking to complain again I'll tell her to invest in earplugs.A few years ago, I moved back to the city in which I was a university student. As I was now 'a young professional', and had experienced significant issues with housemates in the past (non-payment of bills, having to do all the cleaning) I decided that I would rent a small flat from a reputable agency which specifically catered for 'young professionals' such as myself. 

I went and viewed the property, which was quite messy, and needed to have a few things addressed (ie the vinyl flooring in the kitchen was ripped, one of the drawers in the freezer was broken). But seeing as tenants were still living in the property, and the agency assured me that between tenants the landlord would clean the property, and resolve any small issues prior to moving in, I happily signed a contract, and wrote a cheques for the deposit, and first month of rent.

Two months later, I moved into the property, and was welcomed with the following issues (note, I just happened to stumble upon the list I made at the time when clearing out an old hard drive a few days ago):

**General:**

* The entire property had not been cleaned
* Fire door wouldn't close (breach of fire regulations)
* The previous tenants had left much of their belongings behind, namely clothes and bedding
* General waste was present in all rooms (bins had not been emptied)
* Batteries had been removed from all of the fire/smoke alarms (by law, they were meant to be hard wired in rented property)
* Half of a lightbulbs had been removed from the property

**Hallway:**

* Mains supply & circuit breaker ripped from wall (incredibly dangerous)
* Carpet soiled

**Bedroom:** 

* Slats on bed broken (so would not have been able to sleep on it)
* Mattress torn and ripped
* Vinyl floor ripped up
* Window jammed closed 

**Bathroom:**

* Faecal matter on light switch
* Mirror broken
* Toilet had not been cleaned (still had faecal stains in bowl)
* Shower door broken off hinges
* Vinyl floor torn up

**Kitchen/Living Room:**

* Washing machine broken
* All draws in fridge freezer absent or broken beyond repair
* Gas cooker, missing burner caps and pan rail (therefore unusable)
* Two cupboard doors hanging off
* Vinyl floor ripped up
* Curtain pole ripped down

It was very clear that two things had occurred here. The first being that the previous tenants had done a bit of a number on the property. That they had not respected the property, and had left quite a lot of damage in their wake. They did not even have the decency to empty the place of their contents, and at bare minimum, take the rubbish out before leaving. The second issue however, is that the landlord had evidently not made any significant attempt to bring the property back into a habitable state prior to me moving in. 

Being the reasonable guy that I was, I called the landlord and asked if he could resolve these issues immediately. Primarily as the property was genuinely in a dangerous, and non-inhabitable state. I did not want to be a dick about it, however, at the bare minimum, the flat should be safe to inhabit.

The landlord dismissed all of my complaints, and stated that his wife (he was on a business trip to Dubai) had inspected and cleaned the property a few days before, and all was fine (a blatant lie). I told him that I was extremely unhappy with the situation, and he told me to 'adhere to the contract which I had signed'. He subsequently put the phone down. Any sympathy I had for the landlord evaporated at this moment. He was happy for me to live in a dangerous property.

So I went through my contract line by line, and found two key pieces of information:

* If a property is deemed to be in breach of fire regulations and/or is deemed uninhabitable **by a suitable representative**, it is the responsibility of the landlord to resolve such issues immediately
* If the landlord cannot resolve such issues immediately, it is the responsibility of the landlord to provide alternative accommodation to the tenant until the property is returned to a habitable state. 

Fortunately, a close member of my family at the time was a Fellow of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors. Within the hour I had a formal letter stating that the property was uninhabitable, and dangerous. I had this emailed to the landlord (address helpfully listed on the contract). Within 10 minutes, I had a call from him arranging emergency accommodation at a local hotel until he returned from his business trip, 3 days later. 

On his return, he drove directly to the property from the airport, and returned the cheques for my deposit and first months rent to me, and asked me to move out. Which I gladly did. Unbeknownst to him, a copy of the letter had been sent by my family member to the Housing Ombudsman, and the local authority. The last thing I heard is that this bloke ended up being investigated, heavily fined, and had to sell the house. 

TLDR: Landlord rents me dangerous property, and tells me to adhere to the contract.
I adhere to the contract, and get a weekend in a hotel, all of my money back, and he is heavily fined and sells the property.

EDIT: I don't know what Gold & Guilded means! But thank you!About a decade ago when I was fresh out of high school, I got a summer job working at a lakeside boat rental/bait & tackle shop. My boss, Joe (not his real name) inherited the shop from his father and took a massive amount of pride in keeping the family business going. Still, he wasn't one to give into bullshit, and clearly took it personally when a customer complained about anything to do with the shop he loved so much.

Our lake was a pretty popular trophy fishing destination due to how large the local mackinaw trout got. Bossman wanted to reward people who planned ahead by never charging "summer pricing" (approximately $150 more per day) on reservations. Naturally this resulted our boats getting booked out weeks in advance. The catch was we did require a completely refundable, $100 security deposit (we said in case of damages, but was mostly to guarantee they returned the boat). Of course, every year, many people took issue with this policy.

In three years I saw this happen dozens of times - Boss had his malicious compliance down to an exact science. When a customer would refuse to pay the security deposit, Joe would state the deposit is non-negotiable. Almost always, the customer would then declare they're canceling their reservation, they'll never do business here again, generally recite the whole Karen manifesto. Joe would cheerfully agree, feed their paperwork into the shredder, and send them off.

You see, dear reader, of the three marinas on the lake, we were the *only* ones that rented out boats - the other two only rented out space for boats to dock. They'd never ask about our competitors, so Joe never had any reason to inform them. Without fail, within the hour the customer would be back, having realized that they couldn't get a boat elsewhere.

Usually at this point business would be picking up, meaning I'd be (loudly) answering questions about boat rentals for other guests, and the customer's fishing buddies or antsy kids would be pushing them to get the boat already. Grudgingly they'd ask for their boat.

Joe would fake concern and tell them that unfortunately, all the boats have been reserved for weeks, so we're usually unable to accommodate walk-in rental requests. As luck would have it, we had a cancelation earlier today! Since they don't have a reservation, however, we have to charge the summer holiday pricing!  Oh, and, just FYI, we require a completely refundable, $100 security deposit for all rentals. I hope that's alright with you!

Edit: Clarifying, because it keeps coming up in comments, customers were notified of the deposit requirement when they made the reservation, but they didn't need to pay anything until the day of rental. We didn't require the deposit in advance to secure the reservation, but we'd only honor the reservation until noon if no payment had been received (which we also told them about). Most folks chose to pay day of.Do you know that guy at work that every one hates? The rude, obnoxious, lazy one that no one quite understands how he still has a job? Well mines name was Bob. For months Bob "partnered" himself up with me with a lovely 90/10 split of the work. Any time I called out on it he got more and more obnoxious, and if it was actually possible did less and less work. 

On top of all of his other charming traits, Bob is an absolute phone addict. This is bad enough in a regular setting. Where we work it's actually very, very dangerous not to be paying attention to what's going on around you. I've mentioned this to Bob repeatedly to no avail, even after he was nearly hit by a forklift and almost had his head smacked by a robot. Our manager at the time said "if you're stupid enough to die because you wouldn't put your phone down, no one's going to miss you" and ignored the behavior. My last straw at even attempting to get this guy to work and be safe was him snapping off "Leave me alone about my fucking phone." 

Well we just got a new manager, partially because of our former managers attitude towards safety issues, partly because of poor performance. The new manager had a quick, to the point meeting at the beginning of our shift and stated very clearly "I see your phone, you're fired. No excuses, no exceptions." Bob missed this meeting because he was running late, again. 

About two hours later I see the new manager walking to our area. Bob as usual was head down staring at his phone. Remember when he specifically said to leave him alone about his fucking phone? Well, that's exactly what I did. Our new boss wound up standing behind him for a solid three minutes before Bob even noticed he was there. Bob was promptly escorted to HR, and I was apologized to by the new manager, because I'd have to run the work area solo until a replacement was found. No big loss. The extra 10% is well worth knowing that guy won't be around anymore. Guess no one at that job will bother him about his damn phone again

Tldr: Work place phone addict snaps to leave him alone about his phone, so I did. Now he's fired and I'm grateful.

Update: A lot of you were very worried that I would be stuck running a two man job solo for an extended period of time. I just want to let you all know that Bob's replacement was less than a full shift away. So far, so good. Not to mention I'm getting trainer pay until he is up to speed. 

Edit: Just for clarity, the no phone policy wasn't new. It is in our employee handbook and we have signs posted around the shop floor about no cell phones in the work area. The only change was a manager that took the rule seriously.I’m not a professional photographer, but I do have decent equipment and portfolio so a lot of friends will hit me up for discounted photo shoots. Most of them pay or at least buy me dinner, but others expect me to do it for free...

I’m close with my ex-boyfriend’s family so I was thrilled when his younger sister asked me to come to her prom pictures earlier this month, until she told me to bring the camera. I did mention to her that I’m doing online school and I have an exam due that week so the pictures might not be ready for another week. She was fine with that. 

Within two hours of taking pictures of half a dozen high-school students, I ended up with 300+ shots because everyone wanted the perfect Instagram shot. Whatever, I can go home, study, and slowly work on sorting through the pictures later. They’re not paying me so I wasn’t exactly motivated either. 

I get a text from her and her mom that night at around 11pm, they want the pictures edited AND uploaded by the next morning so they could be shown off on social media. I tried to explain that I’m studying but they weren’t having it, they said, “We don’t care how you edit it, just make it look nice.” 

Fine. 

I spent the next 3+ hours working on the pictures and editing them really nicely that even I was proud of....then I hid Shrek into the background of every single picture. Shrek with his head poking out between the kids, Shrek posing happily, Shrek had a very nice time at prom evidently. I uploaded the pics and sent them off, no one noticed the extra guest for weeks and I got my ear chewed out because my ex’s sister didn’t appreciate her  900 followers on Instagram seeing Shrek grinning between her and her boyfriend.

They asked me to edit however I wanted, so I delivered. Shrek was one of my best clients I’ve ever had.A few years ago my wife and I purchased our first home in upstate New York. We weren't moving far - just two towns over; about a 20 minute drive. Around this same time, our local internet provider was running a promotion for new customers offering 5x the internet speed for roughly half of what we were currently paying. 

A couple of weeks before our move I called the internet company to let them know that we were moving and to transfer our service.  I asked if it would be possible to receive the new customer discount with the move and was told in no uncertain terms that this was not possible. I insisted that I wanted the new customer rate and even threatened to cancel, but they called my bluff, knowing that they were a monopoly and that I had no other legitimate option. 

Thinking quickly, I asked if it would be possible to get the new customer rate by simply remove my name from the account and adding my wife's name instead. The rep balked at the suggestion and even quoted from a paragraph from my customer agreement outlining how such a transfer from one family member to another is not allowed. 

Then it occurred to me. I asked the rep if he know my wife's name or the address to which we were moving. After a brief pause, he answered "ummmm...no." I then happily let him know that I would like to cancel my service, effective in at the end of the month. He was adamant that any attempt to circumvent their transfer policy was a violation of my contract, but eventually agreed to the cancelation.  

Two weeks later, after our move and a half an hour phone call, my wife signed up for our new cheap, fast internet. They jacked our rates up a couple of years later, but it felt good to get just one over on the big bully.I used to be a bartender/manager at a small family-owned restaurant. We had this one customer who I’ll call D. It’s short for Douchebag. 

Anyways, he used to be a really nice guy. Always fun to talk to, had interesting stories, the works. However, after about 8 months of him being a regular, he asked me out. I (VERY POLITELY AND KINDLY) turned him down. And, my god, you would have thought I threatened his mom with the way he reacted. 

So, following that point, he turned into a giant douchebag. Always snapping at me (both literally and figuratively), complaining about food that he never had an issue with before, etc. A couple months later, we had some changes to our menu and some slight price changes. Notably, his favorite soup (elk chili) was 75 cents more. 

He stormed in and sat and ordered elk chili. I said “of course! I just want to make sure you’re aware that of the change—“ he snapped at me and said “How dumb do you think I am??? I can read!” Ok my dude whatever you can say. So he gets his soup, his meal, a few beers and a glass of one of our higher quality bourbons. I bring him the check and he flips out. 

“This is more than it was before! You never told me that it would be more! This is fraud. I’m not paying this. Fix it!” Ok, I can do that. However, on the check, I had also charged him for only happy hour price beers, which was significantly less than our regular prices. Happy hour ended before he even got there. I also charged him for a lower quality bourbon by the same company (please note, the owner was ok with that since he was technically a regular and had spent a lot of money there). 

So I fixed his check for him. But I fixed all of it. The new check was about $15 more than it was before. He was so mad he was lost for words, and I took that time to show him how I fixed his check. He never came back on nights I was working after that. 

I don’t work there anymore, I wonder how he’s doing.

Edit: I’ve realized my transgression and it will never happen again. I changed it to 75 cents.A similar post got me thinking about my workplace.

I work in a combined IT / AV department for a somewhat large organization, so if there are any events going on, we're responsible for setting it up, which usually involves setting up sound systems, projectors and cameras, and ensuring that when someone plugs in their laptop, it functions as expected.

For years, we got a lot of last minute requests. Some of them were literally along the lines of "we're having a gathering tomorrow with 300 people. We need audio and projectors set up for 9am tomorrow and for you to advance the slides for us, plus this video in my Powerpoint Presentation doesn't work can you fix it up? We know you leave work in half an hour, but can you set it up? We knew about this for weeks but nobody thought to tell you"

So one day we complained to our manager, who agreed it was bullshit and asked us to draft a policy that he could take to upper management and get them to sign off on. We did, and it was very straightforward: You need to give *at least* 5 business days notice for events, presentations / media must be finalized and playable without internet access (one less thing to go wrong) and you're responsible for advancing the slides because we're there to fix computer issues, not read your script and press buttons.

Our manager took it to upper management, who agreed it was a good idea, and they signed off on it and it was distributed to all staff. We had some people slip up, but they were held accountable and promised to not do it again.

One day someone from upper management emailed us. Let's call him Bill. Bill was holding an event for 600 people with a guest speaker (who had to be booked weeks in advance). The guest would need their laptop connected to the internet because they had YouTube videos, the projector set up and wireless microphones set up because they'd hand mics around for people to participate. The speaker was due to speak Monday morning, and it was Thursday lunchtime. Plenty of time to set it up, but less than the 5 business days notice, plus we were double booked by someone who followed the rules, so we said no, even though he was upper management.

Bill was not happy. He demanded to know why we were refusing to set things up when there was at least 12 working hours between now and the event, and all that was required was to power on the projector, turn on the mixer and turn on the microphones and then set up the person's laptop when they arrived Monday.

Our manager heard his complaints and sent him an email:

"Dear Bill, my team have said no to setting up for this event, and I support their decision. Attached is the policy on event support. This is a reminder that you approved this policy and agreed to abide by it. Attached are general instructions on how to set things up yourself, best of luck"

Bill managed to run the event without us, but he had to do a lot of running around and had a bunch of technical issues that interrupted the event. But at least he learned that if you sign off on the rules, you need to abide by the rules, because he hasn't slipped up since.Edit: to everyone saying I'm ungrateful to my boss etc and that we should be monitoring 404s anyway, we had, gtm, yandex metrica and a bunch of other analytics software running on the site. 

Had the boss not insisted on am EMAIL being sent then I would have simply crunched the logs for him, the point of this story is that it's malicious compliance, not "I purposely chose a shit course of action to wind my boss up". Anyway, on with the story:

This happened around this time last year:

I'm a website developer and I used to work for the stupidest buffoon of a man who had no clue about web development (he just ran the company, managed the accounts etc.) but he thought he did. He read articles on web development and forced us to implement the new things he had spent five minutes reading up on almost weekly.

One day, he was messing about on our company's site and because of some work I was doing, one of the pages he was trying to look at was temporarily unpublished resulting in a 404 error (This is just what the website tells you when a page can't be found at the URL you're visiting).

He went berserk and said lectured me on how this was completely unprofessional and if a customer ever saw it we'd lose them. I rolled my eyes and said it was only for a minute and it was fine.

He then told me we needed to be "alerted somehow" every time a user got a 404 error on the site.

First of all, this is ridiculous, you don't need to be alerted every time this happens, second of all sites get hundreds and hundreds of 404 errors every day due to automated scripts trying random URLs to see if they can find anything good, or spiders trying to look for pages that may have once existed but don't anymore.

I explained this to him but he wasn't having any of it, "No, we need to be emailed every time this happens so we can fix it". I was crying with despair internally at this point, but I decided it'd be hilarious to prove my point anyway.

I set up a script on our 404 template that'd email him every time a 404 page was displayed and left it overnight.

I came in the next day to find him sitting there scrolling through pages of his webmail trying to delete the 4000 or so emails that had arrived overnight, the best part was you could search for the subject, but at most only 100 were displayed at a time so he would have had to delete 40 pages of emails :D I also made sure to take my sweet time disabling it so he probably got a couple hundred more before I got round to doing itBit of a warning for the queasy: Descriptions gets a little graphic. The background is kinda long, but it’s important to the story to understand how ridiculous this nurse was being (and how clumsy I am).

**Background:** Way back in the magical year of 2000, I was a teenager attending a summer camp. Usually, it was day-only. Tons of outdoor activities: canoeing, hiking, swimming, archery, the works.

I did not break my arm doing any of these.

For the older two years of kids, they would host an overnight in tents once a month. I was 13 and finally allowed to go and very excited. Got my tent, sleeping bag and friends. The night went as you would expect when there’s 20 13-year olds in tents with the adults nearby. We tried to pull as many stupid stunts as we could get away with.

I got dared to stand on a picnic table and dance. (13 yr olds aren’t very creative). So I got up there and did. In the dark. While it was raining.

I did not break my arm dancing on a wet table in near darkness.

When we’d all had a good laugh, I went to step down (using the bench) and missed. My leg plunged down in the gap between the bench and the table, I went down and forward, hit the bench on my way, pivoted around it *really* fast, and landed on my outstretched hands. There was an audible snap.

My left forearm, bearing my full weight and sudden deceleration snapped in half. Didn’t even break the skin. I remember rolling over, seeing my arm with suddenly two elbows, panicking, and pushing it back into place. (Not perfectly, obviously. It was broken. But it was no longer at a 90 degree angle.)

That’s when it started hurting. A lot.

The ambulance took forever to get to us as they kept missing the turn off for the camp site. I found out later they drove past it for most of that time.

Eventually it arrives, I’m loaded in, and it’s off to the hospital.

When we finally arrive, it’s been about an hour since I broke my arm. I’ve been in intense pain the whole time, and the EMTs hadn’t given me anything for it. (I don’t remember why. The whole ride is very fuzzy.)

**Here’s where the malicious compliance comes in:**

I get brought in to the main desk/triage area. This hag of a woman with permanent resting bitch face starts asking me questions while the EMTs are standing by with me after telling her what they knew. It’s a bit fuzzy, but the gist was this:

>**Nurse:** “So, what happened?”  
>  
>**Me:** “I fell and broke my arm. It really hurts. The EMTs said you could give me something while I wait?”  
>  
>*Nurse rolls eyes and makes a tut-tut noise.*  
>  
>**Nurse:** “We have to get your arm x-rayed first to make sure it’s really broken. We can’t give you anything until we’re sure. Now go take a seat.”  
>  
>**Me:** “I’m sure. It broke in HALF.”  
>  
>**Nurse, smirking:** “Really? You broke it in half? Prove it. I swear, I get kids like you all the time looking for drugs.”

Now, I am beyond pissed.  I’ve been in agony for over an hour, and this woman is treating me like absolute garbage. Even if it were just a sprain, shouldn’t that warrant some kind of pain management? I’m holding my arm, think for a second, and decide:

*Eh, fuck it.*

As the EMTs are about to interject, I raise my left arm, grab the far end of my forearm with my right hand, and PUSH.

It bends. Very, very far.

Her face drains of all colour and she looks like she’s going to be sick. She immediately gets on the phone. I’m now in ten times the amount of pain, but I’m grinning as only a shit-disturbing teen can.

It took them less than 5 minutes to put me in a room, pump me full of morphine, set my arm in a temporary wrap. They then x-ray me and schedule the surgery.

I had a plate and 5 screws put in, along with a full cast that I kept on for about 6 weeks. They took the plate and pins out 6 months later. It was very painful and annoying, but other than a gnarly scar my arm is totally fine.

Thinking back on it 20 years later? Still worth it.

**TL;DR Broke my forearm in half (but still intact), nurse didn’t believe me, so I bent it 90 degrees in front of her. She believed me.**

Edit: A sentence. Remembering 20 years ago is hard.

**Edit 2:** Wow, I can't believe how this blew up! Thank you so much to the kind strangers who gave me my first silver and my first gold (x2!). I've read through most of the comments and I'll try to answer some of the most common questions.

Edit 3: Formatting and a few minor corrections.

First, here's a photo of the scar now: [https://imgur.com/gK08Y9k](https://imgur.com/gK08Y9k)

Here's the plate and screws they put in then took out: [https://imgur.com/q74coAg](https://imgur.com/q74coAg)

**Q: How did you break your arm to do that/90 degrees is impossible.**

**A:** Both bones in my forearm essentially shattered. They called it a greenstick fracture. I don't know that it was exactly 90 degrees, unfortunately I left my protractor in my other pants. But it *did* look like a second elbow. That was freaky enough.

**Q: What about nerve/circulation damage?**

**A:** I was really, really lucky. The doctor told me (after I came out of the surgery anesthetic) that it was a good thing I pushed it back when I first broke it. The position it was originally in WAS cutting off circulation and I probably would have lost the arm. That's what he told me, anyway.

**Q: How did you push your arm like that through all that pain?**

**A:** I was in so much pain I was quite literally delirious. It was a snap decision and really not smart, but I'm also proud of 13-yr old me. He was badass. I don't think I could do that now.

**Q: The EMTs didn't do anything wrong, etc.**

**A:** No, they were really nice from what I remember.

**Q: Where was this?**

**A:** Southern Ontario, Canada.

**Q: Where were your parents?**

**A:** It was about 3am at this point. The camp had been trying to call my Dad the whole time, but he slept through it for quite a while. One of the camp counsellors rode with me in the ambulance. Apparently, he was more shaken up by the whole thing than I was. He didn't come back for a few weeks. My Dad eventually picked up, rushed over immediately, and felt really bad. I was already under by this point, but I woke up to him in my room. He's a good Dad.

**Q: This didn't happen.**

**A:** It did! Sorry if you don't believe me, but that's okay.So my ex-wife and I used to have a great relationship. But she has become petty and somewhat vindictive these last couple months. Our relationship started going downhill after her daughter, my ex-step daughter, broke into my house and stole from me and my new wife while we were on vacation together. Yes, I invited my ex-wife and her boyfriend to come on vacation with us to so it would be a family thing. My (current) wife was completely fine with it. Not only did we invite them, we paid for everything, plane tickets, rental house, meals, activities, etc. We’ve done this before and it was nice.

While we were on this vacation my ex-wife’s daughter broke into our house and stole from us. We had to file a police report because some of the things stolen was medication and we couldn’t get new prescriptions without filing a police report. This upset my ex-wife even though we told her before we called the police and she said “do what you need to do”

Before this, my ex and I would pretty much just buy what the kids needed while we had them. Every once in a while she’d ask me to split the cost of some things and I would. I have never asked her to split the cost of anything prior to this. But lately she has been asking to split the cost of just about everything. Fine, whatever. I usually get most of the things for the kids anyway. 

About a month ago my son needed new some equipment for indoor lax. She asked if I would split. I said fine. When she took him out shopping they couldn’t find everything. So I bought most of it online. I asked her what she bought and how much and I told her what I bought and how much. It turned out she owed me for the split. It was only $40, I would have let it go but she hounded me for a week over $5. This pissed her off. 

She’d be fine when I have to pay her but gets pissed when she has to pay me. I only asked her for the portion of the split because she asked me to split the cost in the first place. 

We argued back and forth and then she came up with a list of things we should not have to split and anything else we would split. So I started keep track of things that I paid for that were to be split between us. So she gave me her list and what I owe her, not a lot, I owe her $80. But when I gave her my list and her share, she now owes me $425.In college, I had a randomly assigned roommate that I did not get along with at all. Our personalities were just on two opposite ends of the personality spectrum and we clashed. The only things we had in common were that we went to the same college and lived in the same apartment. That’s it. 

Anyways, it was a nightmare living situation. The apartment had four rooms and two bathrooms. She and I shared the same bathroom as our rooms were next to each other. We had two roommates on the other half of the apartment that we both got along with. 

After over 8 months of just pure passive aggressiveness towards each other (like, I would put sticky notes on her days old dirty dishes and she would put my wet laundry on the floor), she decided to report me to apartment management for “bullying” her. Honestly, we were doing it to each other. 

However, the apartment management took pity on her because I was tall and athletic and she was 6 inches shorter than me and very thin. She claimed I “physically intimidated” her and she was scared to live with me. She did this because she wanted to move to a new apartment without paying a $500 fee but instead the apartment issued a written warning. 

The warning stated that we were not to touch any of each others personal belongings without written permission. First infraction was a $250 fine. Second infraction was a $500 fine. And a third infraction would result in eviction. I was so scared walking out of the office because I could not afford those fines and she had the biggest smile on her face. I knew that she would immediately report me. 

I went back to the apartment and she left for work. I was mortified. Then I realized she made a huge mistake. Everything communal in the apartment belonged to me and she was a super moocher. I told my other roommates what had happened and they were shocked. I asked if I could use their bathroom temporarily and they said “of course.”

So, I immediately emptied out everything that was mine in our shared bathroom (shower curtain, toilet paper, rug, towels, soap). I grabbed my magnetic whiteboard and listed out everything in the kitchen that belonged to me (plates, cups, mugs, pots, pans, silverware, coffee maker, toaster, pot holder, towels, literally listed every single item) and said that she is not allowed to use any of it without my written (no texts) permission. I also drew some eyes to remind her that everyone was watching. I popped that whiteboard on the fridge and went in my room to do some homework.

Later, she came home from work and had a meltdown. She screamed!!! Not any words, just a blood curdling scream!!! In the following couple of days, her father came to the apartment to threaten me that they were getting a lawyer (lol), she bought her first roll of toilet paper and a plastic shower curtain, but it was too much for her to handle. She went back to the main office to report my “bullying” once again and was instead told she could either deal with it or pay $500 to move to a new apartment. 

She moved out 7 days after the warning was issued.This interesting encounter happened to my father some time in the mid 90s.

My family is Malaysian and my father worked as a civil engineer (and still is). He led his company's Hydro department and was responsible for contracting supplies for his turbine project. Looking for a supplier, a good college friend of his was the Managing Director of a turbine company based in Texas and he personally invited my dad to meet and survey some products at his company there for his upcoming hydro project.

Now the thing about my family (and most Malaysians in general) is that we are fluent in English (it's our second language). And with my dad studying engineering in Sunderland for 4 years, I could definitely say his English is way above others. So, my father and some of his employees took the trip from Kuala Lumpur to Houston and the first thing they faced when entering the company's lobby was this American lady at the reception. She looked at my father's Asian complexion and condescendingly tried to take on a stereotypical Asian accent to "attempt to communicate" with him. My dad's coworkers behind him were all like "oh no she didn't" and were embracing themselves for the inevitable comeback at this racist remark. Then, my dad smugly decided to play along and conversed with her in "Asian-broken English" for roughly 15 minutes, just to mess with her. 

Just as she was reaching her limit with him, the MD (her boss) came down to the lobby and enthusiastically greeted my dad from afar with "Yo 'OP's Dad'! You made it!". My dad dropped the Asian act and returned his greeting out loud in completely fluent English. Confused and embarrassed, she became speechless and her face turned bright red in silence at the situation. The MD invites my dad upstairs to his office for the meeting while my dad's workers were holding in their laughter as they followed him to the upstairs for the meeting. 

My dad later told his MD friend about the whole situation in the lobby and the MD profusely apologized for her behavior, but my dad was a good sport and had fun messing with her. Later that month, my dad came back for another meeting and found out that the MD took no excuses from her and fired her that very same week for basically insulting their foreign customers.My mother passed away several years ago and this is one of her best stories. She worked as the head of the transcription department of a government agency. Whenever she would ask for time off, her boss would refuse. This went on for years and her leave just accrued. 

One day when she was about to turn 63 years old she walks into her boss's office and tells him she is giving him two years notice that she will be retiring. He is very confused as to why she is giving so much notice. Then she informed him she will be on vacation for the rest of her employment as she has two years of leave accrued and walks out the door.Years ago, I went to a Catholic high school. I was also an atheist. Not an in-your-face, douchey atheist - I just didn't believe in God and wasn't going to lie about it. They offered a solid education, it's part of the curriculum, I had a lot of Catholic friends, so I'm obviously not going to be an jerk about it.

I had no issue showing up at mass and being respectful, taking four years of religion courses, or doing community service.

But that didn't mean I wanted to lead prayer.

I didn't really mind saying a few words, but reading from the Bible never sat well with me and felt disingenuous. Luckily, most teachers were awesome and I could respectfully opt out.

But at least once a year, some teacher would absolutely insist that I get up and read from "one of the many beautiful passages you should know by now!"

"Okay." I would walk to the front, say the traditional greeting, "In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit," and then I would read:

**II Kings 2:23-34**

*From there Elisha went up to Bethel. As he was walking along the road, some boys came out of the town and jeered at him. “Get out of here, baldy!” they said. “Get out of here, baldy!” He turned around, looked at them and called down a curse on them in the name of the Lord. Then two bears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of the boys.*

****

For times I didn't feel like going with 42 children being brutally mauled by bears for making fun of a bald guy, there was another passage that was (somehow) often a more appropriate read:

**Deuteronomy 25:11-12**

*If two men are fighting and the wife of one of them comes to rescue her husband from his assailant, and she reaches out and seizes him by his private parts, you shall cut off her hand. Show her no mercy.*

****

And then I'd finish up with the sign of the cross and head back to my seat. And what do you know? My turn to say prayer never seemed to come around again.This happened circa 2010, so maybe their corporate practice has changed. But perhaps not.

I moved to a new address, and duly called up the only cable provider in the area (Comcast, of upvoted swastika fame). They sent out a guy in a van to install my cable internet service.

Before he left, he said he had to install Comcast's "proprietary software" on one of my PCs, otherwise Comcast wouldn't let him close out the ticket.

Fortunately, I had prepared for this. I have many PCs and computers, all running the relevant Windows or Apple OS. But I kept one special computer running Linux.

I ushered the Comcast tech to this computer and said "this is the only one I have right now, I'm afraid."

He worked on it for about 5 minutes and then gave up. "I got a personal laptop in my van," he said. "I'll just install the Comcast thing on that and we'll call it a day, okay?"

Okay by me, Comcast service guy. Okay by me.In 2018, I lived in southern CA while I was finishing up graduate school. Uber was more popular than ever and given how spread out CA is in general was an easy side hustle to shuttle people back and forth. However, I only did it for a little while because I'm not really the most patient person and eventually got tired of people's BS and attitudes. One of the common tactics for customers looking to screw a driver was to "cancel" their rides in the middle of the trip to avoid paying the fare. They would often say how they did it "accidently" and then ask me if I could just "finish the trip since we were basically there anyway". This happened to me three times. The first two times, I pulled over and told them to get out of my car to which they complied (albeit they called me several names and threatened to kill me). The third time is the subject of this post...….

It was about 430 in the afternoon on a Tuesday when I decided to log on and catch some fares. Most people go into the office on Tuesdays and Thursdays and are looking to get rides home between 4-5 pm to beat the traffic. At this point, I should mention that I was living in San Diego. If you know the area, you'd know that many people work in the city and live in the outer areas (Chula Vista, Imperial Beach, Escondido, Pacific Beach) because its cheaper. The day of the event (oh yes it was an event lol), I picked up a middle aged girl who was a student at the local the community college downtown. Although she was in community college, I could tell she had money by the way she dressed and where she was going (La Jolla). She gets in my car and starts to make conversation with me. I am driving through town and as I am about to get on the highway I hear the cancellation ding. I pull over to a parking lot and let her know that she cancelled the ride and I could not drive her until she rebooked it. She gave me the "it was an accident" excuse. I told her not a problem and to just rebook the route. Well at this point, all those people I told you about earlier had just got off of work and we were in what I call the "Power Hour" of maximum surge pricing. La Jolla is like 25-40 minutes from downtown San Diego depending on traffic. I looked and the trip would have cost her $70. She told me that she wasn't going to pay that. I said fine and I asked that she exit my vehicle. SHE REFUSED and told me to take her home like I was her chauffeur. At this point, I was pissed and wouldn't have done it even if she gave me $100 cash (I didn't really need the money). I asked her politely again. She refused. I had never really gotten to this point before. The other two people were guys and I would have had no qualms about yanking their ass's out by force and beating them in the middle of the highway. However, that wouldn't have been a good look in this situation. I thought about going to the police given we were 3 blocks from the headquarters but I wanted her to feel the burn. Que Malicous Compliance.....

I asked her if she wanted a "free ride"......she suddenly perked up and said "I knew you'd come around, you are such a nice guy". I said buckle up and we got on Interstate 5. Here is the part where I tell you that San Diego is 16 miles from the Mexican border. I also keep my passport in my glove compartment because I did volunteer work in Rosarito every so often. We were about 4 minutes into the ride when she asked where we were going. I turned around and told her "I'm going to Tijuana and I'm glad you could join me. I hope you brought your passport". At first she didn't think I was serious but by Exit 4 she started to panic, I told her she was welcome to get out at anytime but she needed to make a decision soon because after we passed exit 1 there was no turning back. I also told her that I wasn't taking her back. Well she got the message and pleaded for me to pull over. I pulled over and dropped her off at the outlet mall in San Ysidro at the border. Just for shits and giggles I checked the Uber rate from the mall to La Jolla and the cheapest rate was $87 for a pool ride. I didn't make any money that night but that was the richest experience I had while being a rideshare driver. I stopped about 1 month later and sold my car.

EDIT: For those concerned that I was going to "kidnap" this chick.....I communicated with both Uber support and a few of my friends to let them know she would not get out my car after being asked repeatedly prior to driving towards the border. I covered my bases.

EDIT 2: Wow this really blew up lol...Thanks to those who gave the post an award. I can no longer keep up with all the comments but hopefully I've answered the more popular questions in the comments I have made. Thanks Again.Something someone said to me today reminded me of this tale and i thought some of you would appreciate hearing it.

So, this is my grandmother's story.  My family has been telling the tale for decades.  Grandpa himself told it to his daughter's fiance as a lesson in not underestimating his new bride.  Grandma told it slightly differently to my mom when she and my father were engaged.  This is somewhere between the two versions.  It's a lesson in "be careful what you wish for, as you just might get it."  Personally, I've always thought that it was hilarious.

My grandparents were *very* old school.  Grandpa got a job working for John Deere as a teen and worked his way up the ladder to foreman, then manager.  Grandma was a typical housewife in the 1950's and was held to typical housewife standards.  She was to cook and clean and be prepared to entertain Grandpa's business associates at a moment's notice.  It was her job to make sure the children were taken care of and never got in her husband's way.  She was expected to have dinner on the table at 5:30 sharp, when he got home from work.  Her house and herself were to be impeccably kept at all times... etc.

They were progressive and well-off enough that Grandma had her own car.  She was expected to use it to run the household errands and take the (four) kids to appointments and such.  It was *important* that her husband not be bothered with such things.  The household and family were *her* responsibility.  He had a *job.*

Well one day, Grandpa arrived home from work and not only was dinner not on the table, but Grandma wasn't even there.  The kids (teens at the time) hadn't been fed.  Their homework was still on the kitchen table, there were unwashed dishes in the sink, and a dozen other little chores hadn't been done yet.  Most importantly, Grandpa was *inconvenienced.*

He'd been home just long enough to let his frustration stew into anger when Grandma's car pulled into the drive.  He began shouting at her before she'd even had the chance to set down her purse or take off her jacket.  He ranted about all the things she hadn't done because she was out "running around" when she should have been home, taking care of the house and making his dinner.  He worked very hard all day to provide for this family, was it too much to ask for a hot dinner when he got home?  She'd had a very good reason for not being home, but he never let her tell it, accepting no excuses.  But she was a "good wife" so she intended to let him vent for a while, then she would serve him supper and explain what had gone wrong.

Then, Grandpa screwed up.  As sometimes happens when we speak in anger, he began to blame the wrong thing for his irritation.  He began to blame the car and her access to it.  He said something to the effect of, "You don't have any business out *driving* *around* anyway.  You should be *home.* I should never have let you start driving in the first place!  Women shouldn't drive!"

"You don't want me to drive?" Grandma asked calmly, retrieving her keys from her purse.  "Fine.  Then I won't drive ever again."  And she set those car keys on the counter, put her things away, and served dinner.

And bless her heart, Grandma stuck with that declaration not matter how much more difficult it made life.  Grandpa had to take afternoons off in the middle of the week when a teacher scheduled a meeting.  He didn't get a moment's peace on the weekends, between grocery trips and taking the kids to activities or doctors appointments or for haircuts or clothes.  He had to drive Grandma to every Saturday salon appointment.  Previously, Grandma had taken herself and the kids to church, letting him sleep.  Now he had to wake up early on Sundays to take them all himself.

Grandpa was nearly as stubborn as his wife.  He held out, expecting her to apologize and ask for her keys back.  She never did.  Instead she simply rearranged the household schedule so that he could handle all the driving.  Months later, after never getting a single weekend to relax, after having dinner pushed back nearly every day because he had to drive *someone* someplace, he finally gave in and apologized.  He tried to tell her that he was wrong and that she should start driving again.  He tried to tell her that he now appreciated all she did to make his life easier.  He all but *begged* her to take those keys.

I suspect that Grandma had always disliked driving, because she never did take back those keys.  Nothing Grandpa said or did could convince her to get back behind the wheel.  He'd said she had no business driving a car and she was going to hold him to that declaration, no matter what.  For over fifty years, until the day she died, Grandma never drove a car again for any reason.  Not after the kids graduated and moved out.  Not after Grandpa retired.  Even after Grandpa's death in the eighties she still refused because, "my husband always said that women shouldn't drive."

TLDR; Grandpa was mildly inconvenienced and told his wife she shouldn't drive.  So she stopped driving and he ended up *very* inconvenienced for a very long time.

**ETA**:  A lot of people are asking and some seem very confused (I haven't even managed to read all the comments yet.  I'm really glad so many liked the story!)  so I'm copying the answer I gave one of the comments here.  As to the reason for the whole argument and why Grandma was late that day:

>Sadly, as with the start of most epic arguments between married persons, the details of the triggering cause have been lost to time. Grandma, telling the story forty years later, recalled that it had been a "one of those days" for her. She'd been making dinner and had it nearly ready when she'd discovered that she'd forgotten to buy something that seemed vital at the time. So she'd stepped out to fetch it and one thing led to another until a ten minute trip turned into nearly two hours, accounting for car trouble.  
>  
>The only part of said trouble that she recalled clearly was a flat tire and only because Grandpa had to take the car to the shop to have the tire repaired later that week and he'd grumbled about how it was just another example of why women shouldn't be driving.

I'd also remind people that this was a completely different era.  The argument was seventy years ago now.  My Grandparents were children of the Great Depression.  [This comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/nyf37t/my_grandma_complied_with_her_husbands_request_for/h1jyzd5?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) was actually very accurate.  Watch some television from the forties and fifties and you'll get a better understanding of the dynamic.  My Grandparents loved each other dearly for their entire lives.  

Piecing things together long after the fact, the entire family is pretty sure Grandma never liked to drive.  She was less than five feet tall, a tiny woman to be sure.  (Don't forget how cars were built in the forties and fifties!)  Grandpa had initially pushed her to get a license and he bought her a car.  Many women of that era never drove or only learned to drive very late in life, when cars got easier to handle.  

That being said, I do agree that this is hardly the healthiest way to end an argument.  However, that was never the intent of the story.This is from a long time ago, but I thought I would share. 

I bought a laptop from a large fortune 500 company. We will call this company Bell Computers. After about 2 years the hinges on the laptop broke and it was almost, but not quite, out of warranty. I called the service center and they refused to replace it. I called, got the run around, and each time they refused to fix it or even send me the part. 

Eventually I was speaking with a low level customer service manager and I told them I would keep trying to escalate this until someone honnered the warranty. Then he replied "You can escalate this all the way to the CEO and he wouldn't even do it." Well it was at that moment, it clicked. 

See, I used to work for Bell Computer company. I didn't know the CEO, Mr. Bell, but while I was employed there he would occasionally send mass emails out to the staff. The email was also a combination of initials and names, so it was easy to remember. Alright then, let's play. I hung up the phone and drafted an email to Mr. Bell, CEO of Bell Computers, just like the helpful customer service rep said I should do.. I wrote in the email about being a former employee, how the run around with customer service was awful, how I just wanted the part to fix my laptop. 

The next day I got a phone call from Mr. Bell's executive assistant. I spoke with her for about 15 minutes about everything that happened, she took my info and my computer service number and said she would forward it to the VP of customer service. I got an email the following day saying it part had shipped.Many years ago when I was still in school, I was having an issue in one of my classes. The boy who was sitting behind me kept trying to undo my bra. I got fed up and asked if I could move to another seat. The teacher refused to let me, even after I explained why. He said 'boys will be boys, so just ignore it.' Then he told me that if I didn't sit down and do my work I would have to go to the head teacher and explain exactly why I was being disruptive. 

I stayed standing and was sent out. I went to the head and explained everything, just like the teacher wanted me to. This head had only started at the school a few months before and had implemented a policy where interference with another's clothing was not tolerated. This was because of the many girls who had complained the the boys were messing with their bras and sometimes even their underwear.

The head was very unhappy, especially about the boys will be boys bit and she escorted me back to class and told me to sit wherever I wanted. She then asked the teacher and the boy to come out with her. The teacher came back in about fifteen minutes later and apologised to me. I think the head made him because he didn't seem happy about it and he studiously ignored me every class for about a fortnight. The boy hadn't come back into class and in the afternoon assembly everyone had found out that he was suspended for 3 days for what he did.

It was probably a little unseemly how satisfied I was with the end result. I never heard that teacher send anyone to the head again.So, I've spoken about my dogs on here before.  I train search and rescue/human remains detection dogs, which basically means we wander around disaster sites, crime scenes, and wilderness area searches looking for bodies or other remains, to put it very simply.

This story is a couple of years back.  When I was in college, I was required to take a public speaking course.  I have stage fright and social anxiety, so this was basically torture.  My instructor was pretty jaded, and didn't much care that I was having a panic attack on stage.  She suggested I talk about something I'm more comfortable with, and to toughen up.

The final was supposed to be a demonstrative and informative presentation, and 30 minutes long.

Fine.

My dogs have clearance by campus police to train on the university grounds, and I have clearance from city and county police to bring bio waste materials with me throughout the county.  I prepare a fancy Powerpoint presentation, and bring in my big, crazy cadaver dog and scent samples, including a human toe, blood, and bones.  I spend half an hour showing how to train a dog to detect human corpses, along with a few vivid anecdotes about some of my past searches.  We even let some members of the audience come handle my dog and give clicker training a try (audience involvement in the demonstration was required).

I got an A, but the mildly horrified look on my professor's face was far more rewarding.Years ago I worked at a busy, corporate sit-down burger restaurant. One day I’m hustling through the lunch rush and I have six college guys sit down. One guy flags me over and loudly pronounces that they’re ready to order right away.

“What are you guys having?” I ask.

“Guys?” the same guy says with a smirk on his face. “Guys? That doesn’t sound like a very professional greeting to me. I work at a restaurant too and if I walked up to a table and asked ‘What are you guys having?’ my manager would definitely let me know that was inappropriate.”

The other guys at the table look kind of uncomfortable at this exchange, and just silently sit there. The main guy looks around at all of them and keeps going.

“Why don’t you come up to us again and do it right?”

At this point I’m looking around at my massive section of tables and getting the distinct feeling I’m going to be at this table forever. I’m trying not to lose my cool, so I smile.

“Sure,” I say. I take several steps back and walk up again. “Gentleman, how you all doing? Ready to order?”

The main guy smirks and nods. I look directly at him.

“How about you, Chief? What are you having today?”

Some of the other guys laugh. He looks angrily at me but orders his burger and a drink. I get everyone’s order and hustle off.

I return with drinks a little while later. I set everyone’s drinks down and do the main guy last. 

“Here you go, Boss.”

I leave before he can say anything. Through the course of their meal I call him a different nickname every time.

“You need a refill, Pal?”

“How’s your burger, Buddy?”

“Need more ketchup, Bro?”

“Can I get that plate out of your way, Dude?”

“Any dessert for you, Amigo?”

“Need me to split your check, Brother?”

“Make sure to leave me one signed copy, Muchacho.”

So by this time this guy is boiling. His friends are loving it though. As time has gone on, the rest of them keep looking at me expectantly. What nickname next?

Finally, they all get up to leave. Lunch rush has ended and I’m chilling at this point. I casually walk up to them.

“Thank you gentlemen for coming in.”

The rest of the group is smiling. I look at the main guy. 

“And you...you have a fantastic day...Hoss.”

The rest of the guys cheer. They all head out. I grab all their receipts on the table. Surprise, surprise, the main guy left me zero for a tip. I didn’t care. It was all worth it.Some background: 
I started my first, full-time, office job at a corporate America hell hole a week after college. It was an industry I hadn’t worked in before and I needed to be licensed. The company that hired me, we’ll call them Smith Inc., paid for my licensing fees, study materials, classes, etc. for me to become licensed. The total cost was about $500. It was a sweet deal. They gave me approximately 90 days (paid) to study a textbook and pass an online course. I didn’t have to do any work for the company, simply study and pass the licensing exam. It was pretty easy and I passed on my first try. 

My boss, let’s call her Mary, was super excited that I passed and I began training under an associate level coworker who had just been promoted from the position I was in. The coworker, Jen, was super great and helpful. She began training me on two simple tasks that I could do, the only rule was if the client had a question specifically about their contract, I would ask Jen or forward it to my team-lead. Well, I ended up getting an email from a client about their contract and I video called Jen to ask how to handle. She walked me through it as I shared my screen with her. I wrote the email back to the client exactly how she told me and she read the email before sending. 

A month goes by and everything is great. I’m learning and getting more comfortable. Then I get a really nasty email from Mary. She CC’s my whole team into the email going on and on about how I cannot answer contract questions and how she’s gone over this with me before (she hadn’t, Jen was the one who told me I can’t answer contract questions). Both Jen and I try to explain what happened and that Jen was the one who wrote the email, I just typed what Jen said and sent it from my email since the client emailed me and not Jen. Mary then calls the team up in a video call and goes on about how I don’t know anything and I just started and I really dont know how this industry works and that answering contract questions is out of my job description. It went on for about 5 minutes. I say “Okay.” and get off the call crying. 

The next day out of pure pettiness I simply do the absolute bare minimum. I don’t know anything, right, Mary? I still complete all my tasks and everything that’s required of me. Anything more advanced that I would normally try to learn with Jen’s help? Nope. I just forwarded it to our team lead and said “Sorry, Mary said I can’t do anything outside of my job description!” Work was much less stressful after I decided to listen to Mary (and what many others told me before) don’t do anything outside of your job description!

Also: Mary later fired me for being a whistleblower when I reported the company to the health authority for violating COVID protocols. I sleep better at night knowing how much money Mary wasted on training me.Kind of short, but TLDR at bottom.

Long time lurker, first time poster....

This was some time ago (probably early 2000's), but this event is burned into my brain.  I'm sure over the years the story has been embellished a bit, but the core of the story is told exactly as it happened.

I've worked in K-12 Education technology most of my 20+ years in my professional career.  When I first started I was the only technician for a small/medium school district (2500 or so students).  During the time of this event, the Director of Special Education (SPED) was married to the Superintendent.  I reported to the business manager who used to teach technology but was not a technical person.  For the most part I was left to do my work and was not overly micro-managed.  So I got into a habit of taking my lunch whenever I felt like it or even not at all.  If I didn't take lunch and there was no pressing work I would just leave a little early at the end of the day.  Of course I made sure all the schools were out before I left.

As time goes on I got in trouble for leaving early.  So I would take my lunch whenever time permitted - sometimes it was when there was only an hour left from work, sometimes not.  But I would chill at my desk and just screw off.  The others in the office where my desk was reported me for screwing off every afternoon.  When I tried to explain to the business manager that I was taking my lunch she says something to effect of "You can longer take you lunch whenever you want, your lunch is from 12:00 to 1:00."  I say, no problem, message received.  So starting that day no matter what I was doing, at 12:00 I would stop what I was doing and take my lunch.  If I was at my desk I would screw off, if I was at a school site, I would go sit in my car.

Fast forward a month or two latter, at about 11:30 the Director of SPED calls and says his computer is not working and I need to come fix it right away.  I say sure thing, on my way.  When I get to his office, he says please fix it and heads off to a meeting.  So I start in on removing all spyware he has managed to collect (at this time all employees were local admins on their desktops).  About 1/3 of the way through 12:00 hits.  I stand up and walk out of his office and tell his secretary I'll be back in an hour.

Out to my car I go; expecting a phone call any minute and sure enough about 15 minutes in I get a phone call from the business manager.  Here's about how the call goes:

(BM: Business manager, my boss; and Me)

BM:  I hear you walked out of the SPED Directors Office without fixing his computer

ME: Correct, it is my lunch time.

BM: What do you mean, you couldn't fix his computer first?

ME: I could have, but you told me that I could not decide when my lunch break was, that I had to take lunch from 12:00 to 1:00.

BM: Wait, that's not what I meant.

ME: But that is what you said.  If I stayed and worked on the computer and took my lunch at 1:00 or 1:30, I did not want to get in trouble for screwing off when I was supposed to be working.

BM: OK, I'll call you back.

She calls back about 15 minutes later asking if I can please go back in and finish his computer and from now on I can decide when the best time to take my lunch.  And it was never talked about again.  It was nice being able to go home early when I didn't my lunch again.

&#x200B;

TLDR:  I am told exactly when I am to take my lunch.  Until a director (who is married to the Superintendent) wants his computer fixed during my lunch time.

&#x200B;

Edit2:  Thank you kind redditor(s) for my very first awards, Silver and Gold!.Years ago, I was an "inside sales" rep for a simultaneously large and tiny company in a niche market. The quotes are because it was at least equally outside sales, I just didn't go outside except to smoke (I've since quit). They had about 50 branches across the country of various sizes. The smallest was literally one guy who processed local orders and used hot shots for delivery, the largest had about 50 employees. I made 6 for my branch. 

I was literally the first salesman with a background in anything resembling sales that my branch had ever hired (they'd always hired the least socially awkward industry professionals they could prior to me), and they'd had their CSR doing the selling for over a year until I came on, so expectations were high.

When they hired me, we had somewhat heated negotiations over the comp plan. It was a $42k base salary + commission with a $56k OTE and $65k cap. I asked what I was meant to do after I hit the cap; to which they replied, "Continue to do your job?" as if I wasn't going to have a problem with generating new business for free. I said that I was gonna need a bonus structure beyond the cap if they wanted me to do any more hunting after that point. I made it clear that I'd service my accounts when they called, but I wanted to be clear that they were going to be disappointed if they expected me to make outbound calls looking for new business after I'd maxed my comp plan, and that I'd definitely enjoy the extra time at home with my family over the holidays. They said they understood, and we went through the onboarding. 

I worked almost exactly 40 hours for almost 2 months (early October- early December) before I had jury duty and missed a day. My check was about $150 light compared to what it had been, so I complained to payroll (benefits kicked in at 90 days). That's when I found out I was making $21/hr and was not, in fact, pulling a salary. Presumably, this was to force me into the office, as we didn't have remote access to the local network that logged our hours, just the ordering/inventory software. I didn't get even a prorated Christmas bonus because that counts as "benefits," and you have to work 90 days to receive those.

Cue malicious compliance. 

I discovered that if I left the house 30 minutes earlier, my 80 minute commute would take less than 25, so instead of showing up around 8:30 and chilling in my car for a bit so I was working at 9, I was there at 7 with the warehouse guy, sending emails. 

I started working through lunch as I ate at my desk as opposed to burning an hour off campus or in the break room (I didn't even realize I was losing an hour/day to lunch )

I also discovered that if I stayed til 6:30, I'd get home by 7, as opposed to leaving a little after 5 and getting home around 6:30.

So, I spent an extra 5 hours/wk away from home and worked an extra 22 compared to the 35 I was getting paid for before I figured it out. 

With the OT, I was clocking north of $2k more than intended every month, and oddly enough, no one even noticed until the internal auditor verified W2's and noticed that I made significantly more than the branch manager. 

I didn't hit my commission cap until late November, so I spent the rest of the year "training" with the tech and/or warehouse guy. Both stoners.

They tried to put me on the same salaried comp plan I'd originally agreed to, but it was enough of a pay cut to qualify for constructive dismissal, so I got to quit and still collect unemployment for a month before I found another gigMobile, crap formatting and no TLDR (Ok you broke me, TL;DR at the bottom)


I work for a small company in the trades as head of the IT department (aka the only IT person). Truthfully the gig is pretty great. Good pay, benefits and I can come and go as I please within reason. The two people I have to answer to are the VP and CEO and as is par for the course they know dick-all about anything to do with technology and generally leave me be as I’m good at my job and everything runs smoothly.

Being a small company a lot of us don’t take vacations due to A) building the company and B) not having replacements for the time we’re gone but after two years vacationless (we’re in the US) my wife convinces me to use the time I’m given to decompress and take a small, one week, get away. I talk to VP and he gives me the thumbs up to take the time barring I get everything in order and do some minor teaching to other staff incase  of an emergency. Cool, easy.

Enter FOD (Field Operations Director) a man who is an attack dog for the VP for no reason as the VP is nothing but polite and reasonable. FOD loves giving everyone a hard time, adding steps to tasks to make himself look like he’s part of the process, reminding everyone how much of a “boss” he is to the rest of us in management and calling me a nerd any chance he gets.

Fair to say - I dislike FOD immensely 

After making my rounds with other staff it’s FODs time to do some scary computer related learning. FOD refuses to look weak under any circumstances and gets very aggressive when learning new things because “I’m the boss, I already know.” In the midst of learning it dawns on him to ask why he has to learn this stuff anyway, I’m the nerd and it’s my job to do this. I clue him in on the week I’m taking off and this stuff is just precautionary. This worries FOD as he’ll have to retain information, answer questions and do some minor troubleshooting. 

The conversation went something like this, and I wish I could tell you that this guy isn’t this much of a jerk, but he is.

FOD = “boss” 
Me = me

FOD: Who approved your vacation?

Me: VP did as long as I could get you guys comfortable with some small maintenance.

FOD: I only approve vacation time, I’m your boss.

(Side note: he does THIS so much that VP actually wrote out the hierarchy in chart form and we all carry a digital copy with us to remind him who he’s actually in charge of)

Me: You’re not. *shows chart*

FOD: Well fine! But you’re salary so you have to work during your vacation. You’ll bring your laptop and work phone with you.

Me: When YOU vacation you make it very clear you’re unreachable and can’t be bothered even if it’s an emergency.

FOD: That’s because I go to places without service and unless you’re going to the mountains you have to work! You’re salary!

*Malicious Compliance Initiated*

Me: Just to be clear; if I go to a place without service I won’t be expected to work, yeah?

FOD: That’s right, but you’re a nerd you don’t do anything outdoorsy.

Me: Great, thanks for clearing that up.


Fast forward 3 weeks later and it’s vacation time. All my ducks are in a row, people are comfortable with me being gone for the week and are all encouraging me to just disconnect. A close coworker of mine knows of the conversation FOD and I had and asks what I plan to do to about it so I shared my easy but effective plan.

1) wife and I rented a cabin in the woods, 2 hours from the nearest town and it doesn’t have service

2) set up automatic email replies that have all IT questions and concerns forwarded to FOD since “he’s the boss, he knows.”

3) leave work phone on the charger in my office with ringer on, door locked so he has to hear it and voicemail changed to have FOD become IT for the week.

Coworker loves the idea of flooding FOD with questions he can’t answer so much that he gets other coworkers in on it. 

Midway through the week I get a call from coworker with an update: FOD loses it. He can’t keep up with any requests for help and didn’t bother to memorize the simple tasks I showed him so he does what any good “boss” does and puts in a request to take a vacation until I get back. Retreat is always an option. Nothing screams *leader* more than retreat. It’s not weakness and failure if he’s not there! 

My coworkers were able to manage and FOD got his 3 day vacation, unfortunately.

After the week off I’m called to VP’s office to catch up and get things back on track. VP obviously heard of the hardships FOD faced in my absence and laughed at my MC surprisingly. VP struck a deal with me moving forward since it was made clear to him no one else knew how to do my job: I can go on vacation wherever I’d like as long as I bring my laptop and phone and check it once a week. They’ll refund my vacation time for that day even if I only work for 5 minutes. 

I took that but with the caveat of making FOD actually learn some of my duties just in case. VP agreed. Now I do an hour of teaching a week to a very surly FOD. After all, he’s “the boss” he’s gotta know.


EDIT: Oh hey my first ever silver. Is this what it reddit is supposed to feel like?!?! Also, I post almost never and this is by far the most attention any post has ever had of mine. Love hearing about how much better off our EU and AUS counterparts have it in terms of vacation. Drink a beer for me friends.

EDIT 2: My first gold. Be still my beating heart. Thanks internet stranger!

EDIT 3: My god the shiny coins keep rolling in! You guys are wicked nice. I don’t know what platinum or gold does but man, the colors are real nice.

TL;DR: Guy who thinks he's my boss gives me grief for using vacation time. Insists I work even when on vacation. I point out he doesn't do the same. His reasoning is because he goes to places where there is no cell service or internet. I use his logic and become unreachable leaving him with fielding all IT related issues for a week.This happened a while ago, and I've since moved jobs. Basically, every employee in my department was supposed to log their work hours and the project they were working on. When I first joined the company, I noticed that there was an inbuilt timer in the software which you can start/stop to get accurate logs, but I asked my bosses and other employees around, and everyone told me that no one uses it, and everyone fills in the log EOD or first thing in the morning next day. I was cool with that.

So I started logging my time just like everyone else. Things were fine for quite a while, till I started putting in more and more hours to get work done. Fast forward to that fateful day, I get called by management. They tell me that my logging seems "dishonest" and "deliberately misleading". I got told off saying they rely on these numbers to plan deadlines for the future (only on paper, not in practice) and that I'm cheating the company. They instructed me to only use the timer next day on, and nothing else. 

I should probably mention that the way I logged time till then was rounded down to 30 minute increments, just out of personal preference. For example, if a meeting lasted 45 minutes, I'd more often than not log 30 mins. On top of that, I used to remove an hour off the top just as an eyeball figure for lunch and smoke breaks, because on avg that's how long it took. And I should add that everyone, including my bosses, used to log time similarly. The company had trusted us to not be dishonest with it, and generally it worked out fine. 

Anyway, that day on, I started using the timer for everything. 10 minute briefing? Going in the log. 5 minute company call? Logged. Started eating in 15 mins instead of 30, cut down smoke breaks from two to one, etc. Basically, I made sure almost every minute between my in and out times would be accounted for. They also maintained a timestamp of all the times someone enters and exits the office, which they combined with the log to check. I made sure I was not being dishonest in any way, and just logging my actual work times.

As you can guess, all the 11 hour overtime days piled up pretty quick, and at the end of the month, I got called by management again. My boss and his boss were both there. My boss was furious, demanding to know how my overtime hours had nearly doubled from previous months. I just said I don't know, I'm using the timer just like I was instructed to. I told them to go through my in and out times, my breaks, my deliverables, and when the timer was started and stopped to check if I was being dishonest or not. They sent me away after yelling at me a bit more, threatening termination if I was wrong. 

Next day, my boss told me to stop using the timer again, and apologised for calling me dishonest. I stopped using it, but I told him that now I knew more accurately how long my stuff takes, so I'll be logging accordingly even if I do so manually. 

**TL;DR: Comapny assumes I am being dishonest with my time logging because of long working hours, ask me to use inbuilt timer, which actually ends up showing more hours than I was logging before.**

**EDIT:** Wow I've read almost every reply. Thanks to everyone who started a discussion about fair pay, ethics of working hours and how to manage projects. I'd just like to add a couple things, because I don't think I made them clear. I don't work there anymore first of all, and I'm salaried. Hourly pay doesn't happen in these parts at all, unless to you're freelancing, sometimes not even then. The logging was more for getting leaves based on x hours you put in over your usual time.

Also, i found out later why they were this mad at me was because they knew after I'd tell people, everyone's leaves would go up, and us being understaffed at the time it wouldn't have been great for the company. Not sure if I’m allowed to post this story that I just read, but it’s so perfect for this subreddit I have to share it! 

Delete if not appropriate

  [the story](https://mymodernmet.com/june-rivas-cosplay-discrimination/?fbclid=IwAR2-KqpGXtbBYYHLXG3z45ZOg8946ymPp8H03SSmUn4QjMnizNIVV-g11uo)

Edit: OMG thanks for all the awards!!!!My job starts at around 14:00 usually that means i wake up about 9 in the morning. A few weeks back i woke up at 9 feeling sick and dizzy and throwing up. Went to bed fine the day before. Called work at around 10 and said i couldnt get in. Manager immediatly is like: our policy is to call in sick before 6 so you wont get your hours. 

My manager arrives at the building at around 10 so it would have been impossible to call before 6. Anyways we also have to call daily to let them know if we are going to come in if we are sick. Next morning at about 5 i wake up and call. No answer (duh noones there yet) decide to call manager directly. She answers are groggily and is like "what?!" Me: yeah wanted to let you know i am still sick. Her: couldnt you have done that last night? Me: yeah but i could have been better this morning.

Next day in do the same and the day after too. She then sends me an email explaining how the rules been changed and 10 is now acceptable.This incident took place in India, in the early 90s.

The School where my sister & I had studied was in my hometown. We knew almost all the teachers since they were practically our neighbours.

When it came to the time I graduated from school, the Principal had retired and the Vice Principal took over as the principal.

The Vice-Principal was also from the same town and for some unknown reason had some sort of grudge against my father. In local gatherings etc he would always try to belittle my father at all chances he could get. My father would normally let it pass since he knows that getting into silly arguments with such a bully is totally unproductive.

When my sister and I had joined the school, my father was required to pay a refundable deposit of 5,000 per child, which would be returned back at the time each child graduated from the school. 

**10,000 Rupees of 90s was a large amount then and is equivalent to 95,000 Rupees of the present time.** 

I graduated in 1989. When my father enquired about the refund, the VP had informed him that since my sister would be graduating in 1 year's time, both the deposits would be returned together. 

So, when my sister graduated from school, my father requested the school to refund both the deposits. There was no response even after two weeks and my father personally went to the school to demand the refund. The VP, being the egotistical bully, started arguing with my father stating that the school cant refunds the deposits. The Argument became very heated and he outright refused point blank and said

**"We are not returning the deposits. Do what you can. You can take us to court if you want!"**

My father went silent, got up and left the school, came home, sat down with mom, went through all the school-related documents she had kept (my mom had a very meticulous documentation system. she used to save every receipt, bill, stub etc)

He found the receipts for the deposits. he took them to his Lawyer friend. My dad informed his friends (whose children were in the same school) about the issue.

The Lawyer filed the case and took the school to court. The school couldn't provide any reason for withholding the deposits and fighting with the parent.   
My dad won.  
**The school was instructed to pay back the deposits with interest and the court dues.**

My father's friends who were in the PTA took up the issue in the subsequent PTA meeting and got the school's trustee board to ensure that such issues won't be dealt with in the same manner and all deposits will be refunded in time and strictly warned the VP not to bring personal grudges into school business. Other parents who were owed deposits but had forgotten about it, starts claiming them. Cost the school a lot, to pay back the deposits.

TLDR: VP of school informs that they won't refund the "refundable" Security deposits and challenges my dad to do what he can, that he can ever take them to court. My dad does take them to court, wins the dues with interest. VP gets reprimanded by the trustee board and PTA. Other parents start claiming the deposits too.These were the words my HR said to my manager when he put in my annual performance review for this past year. 

To explain a little background I work in a niche part of research agriculture. I'm good at my job, I do it well, and everywhere I've went I've made myself extremely hard to replace. Basically I'm good at what I do and it reflects. 

My manager is very open with me, he is the most transparent manager I've ever had, in fact he shares with me certain details that I'm not supposed to know such as salary raises, bonuses, stupid things that HR says to him in an email. 

After another great year of research and proving myself invaluable, which not only included 2 raises (25% salary bump altogether) a hefty bonus, title promotion, enrolled in a mentoring program, listed as an extremely high performer by upper management, and being put in charge of advancing several Field technology advancement projects (basically incorporating new cutting edge tech in the field of research), all while attending college (company was sending me back for free), I figured I had killed it for the year. 

Reports were done and filed, everything from safety to EHS to the i's being dotted and t's crossed was done. I could not have finished the year any better. Now this was the end of my second year at this job. 

During my FIRST year review I had been marked as a 5 all around by my manager, (there's something like 4 categories you can score in) impressing not only him but several of the upper management seat holders as well as the company VP. That's what led to my promotion and raises. This last annual review my manager was having issues submitting my review, after some emails back and forth with HR, he explained to me that HR had just informed him that "Nobody can have a 5/5 in all categories two years in a row, mark him as a 4/5."  This was the general synopsis of the email. 

So I did what I do best when I get petty. I asked my manager to forward me the email. Informed him I was okay with the 4/5 rating and that I don't expect him to try to fight HR on it. Then let the process stew for a few weeks. 

After the reviews were finished and sent back, they were accompanied with AVIP projections for the next year (salary increases and bonuses) and what do you know, my percentages were marked lower because I had gone from a 5/5 to a 4/5.

Since the report made it seem that my performance had lacked this year from the last because of my score, even though my actual performance never suffered, i was put in a lower category of AVIP. Meaning less money for me, which wasn't gonna fly.

I put together all of the report, the email from HR, as well as the input from both my manager and my peers that are included in my review, and emailed it to my VP, Director of marketing, and Director of R&D, with my manager and HR cced I wrote: (this is fairly summarized)

------"Due to the failure of the company to recognize my growth as an individual and mark me as slipping backwards on a progressional chart when it was obvious I had not, I will henceforth begin taking on only 80% or 4/5ths of the current workload I have been assigned. 

I have been absolutely committed to the work and projects I have been assigned, in fact getting my station ahead on audits, various projects, and coming underbudget for the second year in a row seems to have been overlooked when due diligence was observed for my annual review, all due to the fact that an employee cannot be a 5/5 twice in a row. I believe it to be absurd that this is how my performance is graded when I have had no complaints or issues from my peers, customers, or managers throughout the year, in fact being told the exact opposite. 

I will look forward to my performance review next year to see how HR determines my new score."-------


I sent this on a Friday at 4 pm right before I left. 

I got an email Sunday evening from my VP with HR cced stating that my review has been changed. Monday morning I had my new AVIP projections in my inbox.

Sometimes you gotta go to bat for yourself.

Edit: to everyone asking,  yes I did get permission from my manager to use his email in my email.  He has advocated for me in the past and is all for personal growth.  He has been known to butt heads with some people in the past but as far as I've seen there has been no retaliation towards him.  

The "rule" was one made by our parent company.  The parent company has several thousand employees while the company I work for only has ~150 employees nationwide including the management team. I dont remember the exact number but it's small. Many of the policies are adopted from our parent company but in this few my VP decided to ignore the rule. 

And to those who are claiming my story is fictitious you're free to feel that way but nothing about my profile nor my comments would otherwise point to me making up stories for karma or praise. 

Also if you're being walked over at work or treated badly,  stand up for yourself. Learn to sell yourself and refuse to take mistreatment from employers.  Employers who mistreat and abuse their staff are not worth your time or your mental health.I am a headstone designer. Years ago, a gentleman came to the shop looking to buy a grave marker for himself. He was in good health—just getting his affairs in order. Ordering a headstone pre-need is a good decision for a few reasons, including the fact that you can choose what goes on it.

Our client wanted us to engrave something pretty crude. I can't remember the exact phrasing, but it included an F-word and would definitely cause some backlash in my small town. The cemetery, not surprisingly, rejected our proposal. I'm willing to engrave whatever my client wants on a stone, but we're constrained by the graveyard's regulation: No inappropriate images or wording should appear *on the memorial*. Bummer.

We found a workaround: we engraved the scandalous epitaph on the *bottom side* of the stone. That way, nobody had to know what was under there and my customer "could read it and laugh for all eternity."For months every time I visit my friend in a rather nice neighborhood I've seen this car on an empty street with a basketball hoop in the trunk. I mean the hoop is mounted in the trunk, trunk lid removed, and is standing vertically at regulation height. 

Yesterday, I finally asked him the story. A local dad had put up a basketball hoop on the street (it's an undeveloped dead end street) do his kids could shoot some hoops, safely, since there was 0 traffic on this road. At the end of the dead end, is a fence, bordering a trailer park. The man in the trailer on the other side of the fence reported it and the police had to get the dad to take it down. 

Annoyed that this guy was preventing his kids from playing basketball, the dad bought a car for a few hundred dollars, and had the shop down the road wild the basketball hoop into the trunk. There aren't any parking rules for that street, except a vehicle cant remain in one place for more than 14 days. So every 14 days, the dad moves the car to the other side of the street.

Many folks in the neighborhood now come to shoot hoops nightly. The police have left a handful of towing notices on the car, but have since stopped responding to complaints about its presence. So it seems the basketball car is here to stay!

Photos of the hoop: http://imgur.com/gallery/H104vnA

Edit: holy shit this blew up.. 

Edit 2: car still runs, barely. And there's a mechanic/gas station across the street if needed.I took a biology class my sophomore year in High School and my teacher was pretty cool. She was laid back, funny and didn’t have your typical teacher vibe. She had setup a curse-jar in the room, and the funds were used to pay for supplies. .25 cents if you swore, but $1 if you dropped an F-Bomb. 

One day, we were doing some group work in tables (the ones with the Bunsen burner and the sink in the middle). Behind me was a kid that was particularly annoying and pretty talkative. Patrick was probably the type of kid who later went on to cure cancer, or create Minecraft. Smart kid, but he was basically a 17 year old “Martin” from The Simpson’s. 

Anyhoo... we’re all trying to do our work and Patrick is getting on my nerves. He keeps making loud, bad jokes and poking his head in on our project, telling us what we were doing wrong. I asked him twice to just worry about his own table. But the third time I lost it. 

I walked up to the front of the class, pulled out my wallet, grabbed $1 and put it on the teacher’s desk. Turned around and said quite loudly... “Patrick!  Shut the FUCK up!!!”

I walked back to my table and sat down. The entire class was silent and was staring at me and then the teacher. She looked down at the dollar bill on her desk and started laughing out loud!  The rest of the class joined in and Patrick shrunk into his seat. 

The teacher then said “Well, he paid his dollar!”

And that’s the story of how I told a kid to STFU in class without getting into trouble.While I was putting myself through university (this was in the mid 2000s), I was working at a bicycle shop. I can honestly say it’s the best place I have ever worked; the owners treated their staff very well and so this shop retained loyal, highly-capable employees that made loads of high-end sales. But what was somewhat unusual (for a male-dominated industry in the mid 2000s) was that there was an equal number of male and female employees. And these women were definitely the most qualified people for the job. One was an engineer for a bike company, one was a highly successful triathlete and XC racer, and even one of the owners was a woman. *Almost* having an unrelated university degree meant that I was BY FAR the least impressive woman working at this place. I just liked bikes.

One day, a man (maybe 50-60ish) came in to the shop. I was first on the scene. He said he was looking to buy a bike and so I started going through the usual probing questions to determine what kind of bike he was looking for. Simple questions like: did he ride on the road or trails? Even the most incapable salesperson could use the answers to these questions to point this guy in the right direction. But he seemed HIGHLY resistant to talking to me or answering my questions. He finally said, “is there someone else I could talk to?” 

Maybe he just didn’t like my sales approach or maybe I seemed too young to be knowledgeable. But since he didn’t even give me a chance to prove myself, and seemed to be staring longingly at my busy male colleagues, I had a hunch that he didn’t think a woman was capable of selling him a bike. So I smiled and said, “of course!” Lucky for me, there weren’t any idle male employees in sight. So I grabbed one of the other women that I worked with, quietly letting her know my suspicions about this guy. Before I was even out of earshot, I hear this man agitatedly say, “I need someone ELSE”. Suspicions CONFIRMED. So we purposely seek out yet another extremely capable female employee to help this man. When he sees her approach, he shouts, “JUST LET ME SPEAK TO YOUR MANAGER!!!!” 

So in struts the owner, who is *very* eager to join our malicious compliance stunt, with a beaming smile on HER face. “I’m the owner. What can I do to help you today, sir?” The utter defeat on his face is something I will never forget.



**Edit: Thank you for all of the awards! 

For those of you asking if he bought a bike: he half-heartedly let the owner help him for a few minutes but was very abrasive and left without purchasing anything. She didn’t deem it a loss for the business.

And to everyone suggesting he was looking for a solution for his sore nether regions: I doubt it. Embarrassed people simply aren’t as immediately rude and dismissive as this fella was and we, as a high-end shop, offered professional bike fitting with every sale, including replacement stems and saddles if modifying position wasn’t enough (and it could all be done without discussing genitals). People are treated as incompetent for no reason A LOT in historically gendered jobs/hobbies (MANY stories were shared in the comments) and so you develop a sixth sense for this kind of thing. That being said, if you’re a cyclist and feeling discomfort or numbness, just say so. It has happened to all of us. And it’s ok to want the opinion of someone who has lived similar experiences. But, at minimum, don’t be a jerk about it.Our neighbours can be funny buggers. Nice one minute, moody the next. 

There was a rickety old fence between our properties which I owned. We’d patched it up a few times but didn’t really have the money to totally replace 80 ft of bespoke sized fences and posts at that time. 

The neighbours have complained a few times about our fence, they have 10 dogs and have spent a lot of money on landscaping their garden. They demanded we replace the fence because they need a secure boundary for the dogs but made it very clear they were not contributing to the costs. It’s not unreasonable but the way they demanded rubbed me up the wrong way. 

Generally in the U.K, There are no HOA rules on old builds so I can replace the wooden fence with anything we like as long as it’s on our land and is no more than 2m high. 

So last month we got a quote and arranged for a firm to replace the fencing. I informed the neighbours and picked a day they would be at work so not to ruin the ‘surprise’.  

When they got home they found the wooden fence and wooden posts have been replaced with 6ft concrete posts and a wall of concrete panels. Now they look out of their kitchen onto what resembles the Berlin Wall.  I also made sure the smooth face of the concrete panels are pointing towards us.  (We have bushes along our side so wouldn’t see it anyway, but their side is right next to their patio area). 

They haven’t approached us about it yet but my husband told me he could see the wife in her garden from his office window and she had a face like thunder.

Edited for clarify.
• We got the materials cheap because hubby got a very competitive staff discount as part of contract for his new job. We couldn’t afforded to replace the fence in until now. 

•The neighbours have been nagging for years but we have just been patching up the holes, so decided to finally get it done after one of her dogs got in my garden and wife ranted at me about it. 

•concrete fence was cheaper than bespoke fence sizes but more expensive (and less destructive on the gardens) than standard fencing as it would require repositioning the posts and having more holes dug for more posts.This is a little long. Sorry.

When I was in college, I worked for a mobile carrier in a mall. For a young person, it was great money. I was the assistant manager, which was a fancy way of saying I was in charge of most of the store paperwork.

&#x200B;

\[A few months before\]

One morning, I opened by myself and a guy approached me asking for a specific phone and kept balking at the price, asking if I could "cut him a deal though". I was confident we were BY FAR the cheapest in the area, so I told him "If you bring me a better deal, I'll beat it!". The guy does another lap, talks to other stores, and comes back. "Come on, there is nothing you can do? Can I just get a case?". I smile and say, "Sorry that's the best I can do today, but can I get your number in case we get a sale that brings the price down? (This sometimes actually did work). His entire demeanor changed and he handed me paperwork out of his bag and showed me his Id. He was from corporate LP (loss preventions). Apparently my store ranked top in the state for "excessive discounts" and "excessive waste". He then hands me a document showing all of my "friends and family" discounts. So I flip open my phone (YES IT STILL FLIPPED) and showed him all the names on the list are in my phone, thus ARE friends and family. He thanks me and says he'll stick around to talk to my boss and one other team member. 

Since smartphones aren't really a big thing at the time, the LP guy starts talking to me about my job, and I ask him a little more about what exactly flagged our store. Turns out the other two people he wanted to talk to had more than 30% of their transactions marked with that discount code and our store seemed to "lose" lots of inventory. Store practice was that if you open an accessory and it was damaged  in shipping, you just throw it away and grab another one. Turns out there is a process you need to follow. He showed me the form and said "you really should be between x and x a month to be considered average. 

He then interviews my boss and co-worker who couldn't prove that their discounts were accurate and they were let off with a stern warning. From then on, I took on the responsibility of tracking inventory and warning the team when we were getting close to the monthly limit. Like a miracle, cases stopped breaking for the rest of the month with these announcements.

&#x200B;

\[Fast forward\]

I open by myself again one morning. An older gentleman approaches me and starts screaming at me about being a "heartless bastard" and asking "how the hell can you do this to people?!". I look at him puzzled. "Sir, I have no idea who you are, so you can't possibly be mad at me specifically. Lets go sit over there and have a quick chat". As soon as we sit down I look at him and he starts crying and shaking. "I don't know what to do. I'm gonna lose my house". He goes on to tell me his son had gotten 10 "free" phones from my store and the monthly bill was roughly $800 plus tax. "sir, if your son started an account with us, there is nothing I can do without him coming to the store." The dad shows me a photo in his wallet and explains that his son lives in a home because he's too old to take care of him. He's visibly disabled. He was already barely getting by paying for his house plus his son to be taken care of. My heart dropped as I figured out what had happened. My co-worker had sold the phones to his son while they were on a "mall outing" with his group home. 

Furious, I go back to the store and void the entire order. I instruct the dad to bring me every phone he can find. Anything not in the store that day would be marked as stolen. I write up the inventory report and mark all of those phones stolen for the time being.

Co-worker comes in and I say, "don't bother clocking in. I saw your order from last night. Just know that it's voided. If you pull ANYTHING like that again i'll make sure you're fired. Take the rest of the weekend off". He argues for a moment, but leaves.

25 minutes later (and early for his shift) my boss shows up saying he heard what happened. I show him all of the paperwork and explain what I did to solve it. Irritated, he looks at me and says something like "you know you can't do that right?". He then argues with me that I had no right to void the order and "the contract was the contract". Confused and angry, I say "look, I will not sit by and allow people to be taken advantage of like that". To which he replies, "If you don't like the way we do things here, you can leave." Shocked, I walk back into the store where he tells me HE is taking care of all of the paperwork to "fix" my mess. Quietly I rip up my inventory report with a smile and tell him i'm leaving for the day. 

I call a friend who said, "why don't you just get an IT job (what I was going to school for). He then calls a recruiter and sets up an interview for the next morning. Boss's little push gave me the drive to just go for it. I nailed the interview and get the job. My now ex-boss texted me shortly after and said "Hey OP, you're late." to which I replied, "no, I don't like the way you do things there". Silence.

&#x200B;

\[Fast forward a few months\]

Both the boss and the co-worker were fired for theft. You see, with the unexplained "missing" phones and with no one watching inventory, LP quickly took interest in the store again. Turns out the "broken" cases were actually team members GIVING AWAY inventory to close sales. So when I was there "balancing" inventory and giving warnings, it was letting them know just how much they could steal and get away with it. Without me there they just did whatever the heck they wanted. From what I hear, they were escorted out by security and all. 

&#x200B;

So in the end, I was pushed to start the career of my dreams. They have a record.

&#x200B;

Thanks for sticking with me, sorry it was so long.Many years ago i used to work for bestbuy, and part of the uniform was a black belt. Now, I worked the night shift stocking the shelves with 10 other people or so and no one else. For months no one gave a fuck, but right before Christmas they changed store managers and the new one was a humorless dried up sack that was a dick to everyone. If she couldn't find anything wrong with your performance she'd find *something* to write you up for.  Admittedly, i never followed the dress code exactly, my pants stay up just fine - so fuck wearing a belt.   One night she of course comes up and essentially throws the employee handbook (or whatever the fuck document it was), with the dress code at me. 

"You need to put a belt on"

"I don't have one, I'm broke as fuck"

"Well go buy one before work tomorrow or you'll be sent home"

"Sure, i don't need to eat, I'll get a belt instead of lunch"

She clearly missed the sarcasm and walks away, leaving me with the dress code. Upon inspection i realize it says something like "belts will be worn with all pants with belt loops". Clearly these pants weren't the best quality so i took pleasure in sawing off my belt loops when i got home. The next day I get to work and she comes up to me and asks 

"Where's your belt?" I stare at her and say 

"Where are my belt loops?" 


She was fucking *livid*I used to wait tables at an upscale restaurant that was known to be the place to have your holiday or office parties. Great money if you got the right group. The menus were pre-set, the wine and liquor was pre-set, and it was all auto-grated at 18%. All of it was in the contract the host signed pre-event. Usually the host would make themselves known fairly early on so you would know who to talk to if there was an issue and who to give the check to at the end of the night.

One night, I am splitting a party of 30-40 with another server. This event had top tier food and mid level wine and booze. Very nice. A small group of 5-6 people arrive a bit ahead of schedule. 2 guys and 3-4 women. Not a problem, its actually nicer if they slowly roll in so we can get drinks started. I walk over, introduce myself and the other waiter and ask for drinks. Now this was back in the early 2000's and chads weren't a thing yet, but the 2 guys were the chaddiest chads. If they could have popped their collars in their suits, I'm sure these guys would have found a way.

Superchad1 - "Me and my bro are going to start with a round of Johnny Walker blue, and these ladies are going to have (expensive red wine)"

Superchad2- (turning to the girls) "Once you have Johnny Blue, you just cant drink anything else. It changes you, bro"

Me- "If you like, I can put those on a separate tab, the event contract has Johnny Walker Black, but not blue, and the red wine selection for tonight is (less expensive wine)"

Superchad1 - "This is our party, just get me what I ordered and dont question me again!"

Superchad2- "Who do you think you are? You're just some waiter, we have MBA's. Just get us our drinks!"

I walk over to the other waiter and tell him we are in for a hell of a night, but the check should be nice. For those that dont know, Johnny Walker blue is 3-4x the cost of Johnny Black. So one round of drinks for these people is over $100. The whole night goes exactly as we thought. Nothing was good enough, the appetizers were crap, the food was horrible, not enough bread, too many bread plates, drinks were taking too long, why do some people have food and others dont (its 40 people man, it takes a minute to get that much food out). To make it worse, chads and co are all over the place, moving seats and making others move so they can talk to who they want. This makes serving hell because we did everything by seat number.

Surprisingly, most of the table was normal, not entitled people and who knew that waiters are people too. They were impressed by the food, and graciously ordered the drinks that were in the contract. One older gentleman at the other end of the table from the chads apologized for their behavior, saying "they might have fancy degrees and good jobs, but you cant teach class". Love that guy.

Finally, they are winding down and after drinking almost a full bottle of Johnny Blue along with all the other food and drinks they have a VERY hefty check and the other waiter and I are excited to get paid. We start picking up the dessert plates and asking for last drink requests. The nice older guy at the end of the table says to bring him the check. Not wanting any more interaction with the chads than necessary, I bring it to him. I tell him I can take care of it whenever and go about clearing the table. A few minutes later he calls me over

Nice guy - "Maybe there was a mistake in ringing up the drinks? There is almost $600 for Johnny blue, when the contract I signed only included Johnny Black. And there are some single glasses of wine that are different from what we agreed upon."

Me - "No mistake sir, that is what was ordered and drank." (He is being awesome, and I feel bad)

Nice guy - "Why did you give the drinks to them when we clearly had a contract?"

Me - "I apologize sir, they told me that this was their party and since I was just a waiter to shut up and do as I was told. So I did. Im sorry, I took them at their word"

I point them out and he calls them over. What follows was the singularly greatest ass chewing I have ever been witness to. He goes on about how he was doing something nice but apparently that wasn't enough. About how horrible their behavior was that night and how he is ashamed for them. But my favorite line was how you see a persons true colors in how they treat people that work for them and they had shown theirs. Then he calls me back over.

Nice guy - "Apparently I thought this was my party. Guess I was wrong. This is their party and they will be taking care of the check. Oh, and up the gratuity to 25%. You earned it."

He turns around and walks off, leaving the chads with the check. All in all it was about 3k. I have never seen 2 grown men look so defeated.

Edit: credit to u/beepolai The boss might have been their father. It makes total sense looking back. Thanks!!

Edit2: Holy crap. Thanks for the gold and silvers!!!  Now if someone can tell me what that means!

Edit3: The words have been paraphrased, this was 10+ years ago. The only word for word thing that I remember is "Once you have Johnny Blue, you just cant drink anything else. It changes you, bro". It was such a DB thing to say I still remember it.So my dad used to own his own company that unfortunately went under and vanished due to the UK recession in the mid/late 2000s. He was a joiner and knows the trade inside and out. He has told me a few stories and one of them fits here.

So my dad and his team had a contract to do some work on someone's kitchen. A very simple job for my dad. But there was an antagonist. The neighbor who we will call Karen. So it was 10am and Karen opens her window and shouts to my dad "I am back from the nightshift and I have another tonight. You need to keep it down"
My dad replies "I do apologize but we are currently within trading hours and I have a job to do"
Karen just scoffs and walks away. Roughly 20 minutes later, Karen comes back. "I told you to keep it down. I have the nightshift."
My dad reiterates "As I have already stated, it is trading hours and we have a job to do"
Karen comes out of her house and walks up to my dad. "I want your boss's phone number"
Now bare in mind. This was my dads company. As in, he owned it. He was the boss. But instead of playing the "I am the boss" card, he complied and gave Karen his business card with his work mobile number on it.
My dad thought she was bluffing and he then got a call less than 10 minutes later and he answered. It was Karen. "I would like to make a complaint. You have workers here and they are making too much noise and I have the nightshift tonight and need some sleep. Also one of them was extremely rude to me and needs to be dealt with."
My dad replied with "As I have told you twice already, through your window, it is trading hours, we have a job to do and furthermore, your nightshift is of no concern to me or my team"
Karen just swore at my dad and hung up and my dad was able to finish the work he was given. He told me that he was expecting Karen to come out and punch him in the face but that never happenedI worked for a mid size fashion company with around 150 retail stores nationwide as a maintenance and safety coordinator.  4 months into the job my manager quit and I picked up everything and was doing fine on my own for years and I was the only person in charge of maintaining the stores and the alarm systems in all the stores.  I did get a pay bump but not a promotion in title.

I put my contact number on every store's emergency contact list just in case the primary contacts, usually the store managers, don't pick up their phones in case of emergencies.  And the store managers almost always refuse to pick up calls during off hours, so my phone would ring at least 2 to 3 times every night.  99% of the times are false alarm, usually caused by window break sensors getting tripped by vibration from a big truck passing by or a leaf hitting the window.  I hated it but had to do it because if no one on the emergency contact list picks up the phone, the alarm company automatically calls the police for dispatch and there are penalties for false alarms, ranging from $50 to $200 per incidence after 2 or 3 freebies, varies by location.

In 2017, Department of Labor passed a law requiring all employees making under a certain amount of $$$ to be converted to hourly so they can earn overtime.  My salary was $800 short of making the cut.  I brought it up with HR stating that an hourly schedule would actually interfere with my duties and a $800 raise in pay would make everything easier.  And HR simply said, "well, that's too bad and we can't do anything about it at the moment."

Well, ok.

After that conversation I put my phone on mute and stopped caring about anything outside of my 9-5.  In hindsight, life was actually so much easier and better that way and not sure why I even wanted to stay on salary.  Months go by without any serious issues, except for the penalties for false alarms starting to pile up.  One day Accounting and Operations brought me into the office asking what those costs were. I told them what they were and Operations sent out a memo reminding all store managers that safety is of critical importance and they have to pick up calls from alarm companies.  No one bothered asking why there was a surge of these additional costs and I didn't care enough to remind them that it was because of me.

Few more months go by and one morning I woke up to almost 20 missed calls on my cell.  Apparently, one of our Florida stores was broken into the night before at around 3am.  The store manager tried to get a hold of me because I was the one in charging of requesting/dispatching vendors for things like emergency board up.  After an hour of trying to get a hold of me, she eventually started calling up everybody on the hierarchy for help and I had 6 missed calls from the Senior VP of Operations alone.  Eventually the Director of Constructions was able to get a crew to board up the store but that was almost 3 hours later and everyone was royally pissed.

Unsurprisingly, the second I stepped into the office I was called into the office with all the senior management and HR and were asked why I was not there to take care of it.  And I simply replied "because I already clocked out."  The senior VP of operations was obviously not pleased with that answer and said it was my duty and I needed to be on standby at all times to handle these situations even during off hours.  To which I stated "oh, so I should be on call then.  In that case I'll have to work with Accounting to get properly compensated for my on-call hours once we have a schedule established."

The room went silent.  And nothing came out of the rather short meeting.

Later that afternoon, HR called me into the office again asking whether I'd like to become salaried again with a pay bump.  I said I'll take the pay bump and but I'd rather stay hourly and walked out.

They didn't give me the pay bump.

Edit:  Sorry I didn't provide what happened next.  So here's some closure.  I was put on call for a few weeks because it was summer at the time of the incident and HVAC systems kept failing over the weekends in our Florida stores.  And again, I was the one to dispatch vendors to fix them.  Money was great during that period lol.  Eventually the Director of Constructions was put on as the emergency contact for off hour issues and he absolutely hated it.

I left the company last year.  They had to scramble to get a replacement and hired a maintenance supervisor with an MBA in political science, but no related experience......  My last contact from the company was the supervisor asking me what the log in credentials were for all the 150 stores' alarm systems.  I didn't reply.I live on a long, long, hilly rural road. It has a 45mph speed limit and is a no-passing zone the entire way. It's illegal, unsafe, and nearly impossible to pass someone, no matter how slowly they're going.

Because it's a quiet road and away the town, locals will normally drive 50-55mph. This was fine, until the police started setting speed traps. Because the road is so hilly, it's easy to accidentally go 55mph when going downhill -- this is how they got me, and a lot of my neighbors.

Ok, fine. It is technically speeding. But I leave work around the time they start heading back home, so I either see them fly ahead of me at 60mph or tailgate me the entire way home. It pisses me off.

So I started driving the speed limit. Exactly the speed limit. 45mph down the entire stretch of road. When we come to those sharp turns, I go aaaall  the way down to the 20mph suggested speed. Almost every night, a cop gets stuck behind me the entire way, and there's no way for them to pass me. They also can't turn on another road, because all the others are just gravel backroads that lead to farms. My long, long, hilly road is their only route. 

It definitely pisses them off. They will turn their brights on and weave around their lane to try and get me to speed up. As soon as I turn onto my driveway, they gun it. I've even had one turn his lights on to make me pull over, only for him to speed past me and drive ahead.

It's probably not smart to inconvenience a cop, but what else am I supposed to do? I'm just respecting the speed limit.This happened before I graduated college. I was working a part time housekeeping job for a doctor’s office after closing. The most annoying thing was the blatant disregard from the people who worked there. In particular, the women at the front portions of the office would throw trash *everywhere* and not put it in the can. Under their desk, the floor would be covered in trash (right around the trash can!) and most of the time I wouldn’t even have to change the garbage bag, just dump the very few pieces that managed to get in the can and then literally crawl around under the desk on my hands and knees, picking up all their shit. I’m talking paper thrown everywhere, old folders they’d clean out from closets, candy wrappers, tuna cans (you’re eating TUNA in an OFFICE?) and thousands of peanut shells. To name a few. They just didn’t care. The amount of lazy you have to be to throw garbage right beside the can and not in it astounds me. I never complained to anyone about it because even though it pissed me off, I figured it was less effort to just pick it up. 

That is, until I got a note. A very passive aggressive note from a particular messy woman, letting me know I threw her calendar away and *why* would I ever do such a thing?

Pic: https://i.imgur.com/eWaOZel.jpg

1: the calendar was propped up against her garbage can. That’s usually the universal sign of “hey, this needs to be thrown away” and they threw stuff like that away all the time, why put it there if it isn’t trash?
2: there’s so much garbage all under your desk every single night, how am I supposed to know when something isn’t trash?
3: it isn’t my job to determine what is and what isn’t to be thrown away. 

It *was* my bad that I threw the calendar away because I didn’t pay attention to the dates or anything on it (like I said, there’s always shit everywhere) but when I got this note, I was *pissed*. The NERVE, after I spend so much unnecessary time cleaning up garbage that YOU can’t be bothered to actually put in your trash cans because you’re too lazy? *Fine*. “If its not in my can, don’t touch it!!” You got it! I won’t touch anything that isn’t *in* your garbage can. I left everything that was on the floor exactly where it was and just changed the bags. 

Needless to say, she didn’t like that, and complained to my supervisor. My response was, “but I was just doing exactly what she told me to do *shrug*” 

My petty ass was pleased

Edited to say: My supervisor told the office manager that if they wanted their trash taken out, then they were to put it in the trash can. Otherwise, nothing would be thrown away, with the exception of boxes labeled “trash” that were too big for cansThis did happen about 15 years ago, but I cant help snickering about it from time to time.


In high school, I was a pretty mild mannered kid.  I came from a very strict household, and a call from the school was absolutely unacceptable.  I also wanted approval from authority figures (as I rarely got it at home), so I kept quiet, did good work and was generally well liked by my teachers.

Like I said, it was a strict household and my outfits were closely inspected for "modesty" by my very conservative parents.  If it passed at home, it wasn't going to get me in trouble.  I tried hard to fit in with the other kids though, and found that wearing a layer underneath made regular outfits pass the home dress code.  So I still got to wear the distressed jeans, but you could see black leggings instead of my knees. Not a huge deal, and it helped me feel better about my appearance, at least socially anyway.

As trends were set, leggings became super popular!  Finally, I was ahead and on point with my style!  Some girls did begin to abuse the system though.  School dress code required skirts to be no shorter than 3 inches (1 index card) above the knee.  Standard was suddenly lots of tiny denim mini skirts with leggings.  So the school cracked down and said leggings were no longer allowed under skirts.  Of course, since I had different home rules, I didn't even own a skirt that short.  My skirts had to reach the knees, which was 3 inches longer than the school requirement.  I didnt even mention the new school rule at home because I didn't think it was an issue.

So I get super cute, wearing my knee-length denim skirt and leggings (as it was still trendy, and a bit chilly out), pass home inspection and head off to school.  Nothing was said in my first three classes, but like I said, I was a good kid and always well covered.  One of the super mean teachers (not even mine, just one standing outside her door) spotted my skirt and leggings in the hall, and grabbed me and marched me down to the office.  I knew of the rule change, but I truly thought it wouldn't be a big deal since I wasn't wearing a mini skirt.  She shoved me in and yelled something about a dress code violation and left to return to her class.  

I was called in, thinking the principal (who I didn't know well) would laugh with me about her unreasonableness.  Boy was I wrong.  He screamed up and down how I was dressed inappropriately, and he would be calling my parents to come get me to take me home to change.

Oh no.

Oooohhh nonononoNO!!!!!

As I stood and turned around showing him my clothes, I tried to argue that my skirt met code and the leggings covered more. I even tried to explain that my parents would take it out on me in an aggressive manner.  He wasn't going to hear any of it.  I had to think fast.  Cue malicious compliance.

While he was still looking for the number to call, I kicked off my shoes and began wriggling the leggings down and off, right there in his office in front of him.  Since my skirt was long enough, I shoved my pants in my bag and stated that now he has no reason to call my parents.  I was fully compliant with the dress code of the school.

As he stared with his mouth agape, I could see him turning red while trying to figure out how to deal with me. He ended up just yelling, "Get out of my office! Get to class!"

Never have I felt so relieved.  

TLDR:  Leggings weren't allowed under skirts but I thought mine would be fine since it met regulations.  When I got in trouble, I removed my leggings from under my skirt right in front of them.This happened a few months ago but the problem had been going on for years. 


Every other month, I would get a text message from someone asking for a doctor or to make an appointment. I started off immediately informing them they’ve got the wrong number. Hey, it happens.


When it started happening more frequently, I dealt with the minor annoyance by trying to have some fun. 


‘Is Dr. Lee available?’


Me: ‘There’s no Dr. Lee here. Only Dr. Wong. Dr. Wong Num Ber.’


It was funny until the volume of messages started increasing and I got annoyed. 


A quick Google search led me to the clinic’s page. Their number was indeed easily mistakable for mine. Theirs ends with ‘-013’ and mine with ‘-073’. And the font used certainly made it worse. 


I called the clinic to inform them of this problem and that they needed to do something about it. Change the font, spell the numbers out, or even change their number. I just wanted the messages to stop. The lady just brushed me off and said there was nothing she could do. I asked to speak to someone in charge but was denied. She told me to change my number or just ‘deal with it’.


So here comes the part where I dealt with it. 


After an odd month of peace, I received several messages over a week asking to make an appointment. 


‘Hi, I would like to make an appointment please.’


Me: ‘Sure. The next available slot is next Friday at 10. Would that work for you?’


I made very sure never to claim that I represented the clinic. If anyone asked for a specific doctor, I would say there is no such person here, and if they did ask for the clinic I’d inform them they got the wrong number. 


Basically, I had myself covered and I tried to have everyone’s appointment at the same time.


When Friday came around, I received several angry replies from those people and a call from the clinic. 


(messages went generally like this)

‘You’re a terrible person! Why would you do this to waste my time? Why did you pretend to be the clinic?’


Me: ‘I’m sorry ma’am but I run a PC repair service.(except I don’t take appoinments via sms nor is my personal number listed) I was expecting you at 10 but you didn’t show. If you looked at your message you never asked if I was the clinic and I never claimed to be.’ 


(And the call went like this. CL: clinic lady)


CL: Hi, who is this? Why did you pretend to be us and arranged for all these appointments?


Me: I called you months ago letting you know about this but you told me to deal with it. So I set appointments up for them to see me. It’s not my fault they showed up at your door. Maybe you should change your phone number. *i hang up*



Sure I felt a little bad I made those people travel to the clinic but I‘ve since stopped receiving messages from random people and after checking on the clinic’s site, they now have an online appointment making system. 


Edit: Thanks for popping my gold cherry! I sell phones and everything that goes with phones in a retail setting. The job has gotten frustrating because the people who still go into a retail store are often just people who can't figure out how to work a website and won't bother to read anything. This is true for my customer the other day.

This woman comes in and buys an Apple Watch and wants me to set it up for her. I'm more than happy to do so, but it really just boils down to her needing to configure it to her specifications. Things like deciding which wrist it'll be set for. The lady demands I just do all the set up for her while she gets coffee. I insist she stay because it's going to ask her things that I can't answer if she's not there. She blows me off and tells me to just do it and she'll be back. I set it up and just guess what she wants. When it comes to her height and weight I put 6'2'' 385lbs, and set it to notify her about her daily workout progress as much as possible. She's probably more like 5'5'' 130lbs. 


She came in mad that her watch keeps calling her fat and telling her she needs to walk more.This was my first security gig right out of the military. Good starter job for security work. It was access control at a medium size aircraft engine factory. Friend of mine worked HR there but he also held the title as head of security, so he offered me a job and I accepted.

One of the biggest rules were ID checks. Apparently a few years prior a couple of people had gotten in with photo copied ID’s. So after that we had to physically check the the ID was plastic. We did this by touching it.

Now, do access control enough and you start to memorize people. We didn’t check those ID’s by touching them because we knew them and if they had been fired we would have gotten a notice.   


Well that angered the head of HR so she set some new rules (she wasn’t the head of security, but security fell under HR so she kind of was) All ID’s must be check, no exceptions. No non-employee is allowed through the gate without a noticed signed by her or the head of security, and has to be submitted 12 hours prior to their entry (like for people scheduled for interviews). visitor badges assigned without prior approval can only be done for normal delivers (like the post office or fedex). Anyone who violates it will be reported by security to HR for a security violation.

That was fine and dandy, we really didn’t care. Everything went smooth for about a month until that one day. Here she comes to the gate, but she isn’t driving, he husband is. It is raining and I mean flood level raining. i asked her husband for his ID and he says he didn’t have one. She seen where this was going and tried to stop me. He was only there to take her in because it was raining and she didn’t want to walk from her car to the building and ruin her outfit.

Thats when I threw the rules back to her. I didnt have a security notice for him so I couldnt assign a badge and couldn’t let him in. She tried the “but it’s only 100 yards” which again I reminded her of the rule SHE set down.   


She actually said “Well I’m your boss (technically she wasn’t) we are going in anyways” which I replied again her rule that any breaches of policy must be reported as a security violation. So there she is, dressed to the 9’s forced to walk, without a jacket, to the building, 100 yards, in the rain to get to her office. Why didnt we lend her a security rain jacket you ask? Because she said there wasn’t enough money in the security budget to buy them.

Later that day she modified the rules that on drop offs that security has full discretion to allow someone entry for that purpose. We also got our rain jackets 2 weeks later and she never bothered security again.Just happened, my bosses and I are still laughing.

We are a small IT company. We manage quite a few clients, though. This one gentleman and one of our busier client sites says that he's tired of being told his emails never arrived to him. We look it up and yes, a couple of legit emails got tangled up in the spam filter. No big deal, we whitelist the sender and release the message.

No, not good enough for this guy. He calls back *screaming*. "I ORDER YOU TO LET ANY EMAIL ADDRESSED TO ME COME TO MY INBOX". I advise him that I'm going to have to transfer him to IT security and he's going to have to, on a recorded line, say he understands and accepts responsibility for yadda yadda yadda.

See, I did that because these guys get thousands of spam emails a day. A while back, several folks (this guy included) decided to give their email address and password to some unsavory website. Then did it again. And again. And again. So now they get easily 15-20+ messages an hour to the entire organization.

So he accepts, saying he just wants all his emails to go to him. We allow all messages to him to bypass the spam filter. 

Three hours later, he has over 100 new emails. And they keep coming in.

He calls back, furious, asking why his spam filter isn't working.

"Sir, you asked that all emails addressed to you arrive at your inbox."

UPDATE: So right around 4:45pm today, he's calling our office and the call gets routed to me since I own the ticket. He's *livid*. Shouting so loud my co-workers on the opposite side of the room can hear him. "WHATEVER YOU DID TO MY EMAIL I WANT IT PUT BACK TO THE WAY IT WAS! YOU F*CKED UP MY EMAIL AND NOW I CAN'T GET ANY WORK DONE BECAUSE MY STUPID NOTIFICATIONS ARE GOING OFF EVERY SECOND!"

I calmly reply "Absolutely. I'll go ahead and turn your spam filtering back on and all these emails will stop."

"GOOD! ITS WHAT YOU SHOULD HAVE DONE IN THE FIRST PLACE!"

At the end of it all, nothing changed, and he's happy. God I love IT work.

EDIT: To the few of you who have (and the many more that will, seeing as how this picked up a little more steam than I was expecting) commented saying I should be fired... Chill. I'm lucky enough to be at a place that values their employees enough to know that we do not deserve the kind of verbal abuse this guy slings out. A lot of jobs I've been at would have handed me my walking papers the moment I didn't immediately suck this dude off to climax before finding out what his name was. Between me and the security team, we told him at least four times that this exact thing would happen, and he said (on a recorded line) "I don't care". I take care of my customers and my bosses enable me to do a damn good job. I believe that's why our company is experiencing very good growth right now. Relax.

FINAL EDIT: I had to. I logged into our system this morning from home and listened to the recording. It's glorious. Here's the highlights:

Security: So [OP] tells me you're looking to turn off the spam filter?

Client: I don't even get spam. I'm paying you people for something I don't need.

Security: It's not an added cost, but you're not getting spam because you have a spam filter. If you turn that off, you're going to get flooded with spam emails.

Client: I don't care. I've given you guys an order, and I expect it to be done.

Security: I just need you to be aware that without the spam filter, you're open to getting every spam email that comes to you, some of which may be malicious and could open you up to viruses, malware, and all sorts of software that could compromise your entire network. By going against our suggestions, you understand that [Our Company] cannot be held liable for any malicious software that makes it on to your network, infects any of your systems, or causes any system downtime and that you are claiming sole responsibility for that. Do you understand this?

Client: Yeah, whatever. Just get it done so I can get off this call.

Security: Sir, I really need to reiterate how much we cannot recommend this action, you're going to get--

Client: I DON'T CARE, DO WHAT I TELL YOU.

Security: Ok, I'll have [OP] remove you from the default spam rule, and you'll start receiving any email sent to you. Again, it's going to be a lot. The spam filter actually does catch a lot of spam.

Client: I. DON'T. CARE. JUST DO IT.

Security: Ok then. Thank you. Have a good day.

*Click*

EDIT: The things I get gilded for on Reddit. Thank you for the gold, kind stranger!

FOR REALS LAST EDIT: I talked with Security this morning. This guy *has a history* with us. Apparently he's been told numerous times that if he "calls our employees 'delinquent fucks' or any other form of verbal abuse" then the company will be offboarded immediately. Oh, these previous tickets with him are juicy.

EDIT AGAIN: Holy shit, PLATINUM? Goddamn, anonymous Redditor! Thanks! My first one!

EDIT AGAIN BECAUSE PROMISES ARE A POINTLESSLY EASY SOCIAL CONTRACT TO BREAK: WE'RE OFFBOARDING THE COMPANY! Apparently when he called back to talk to security about the whole thing, he called the tech a very inflammatory racial slur. Immediate offboarding. By the end of the day, they will not have an IT company. Holy fucking shit this is huge!

THE ACTUAL FINAL EDIT: Well, it's been a crazy day, folks. We offboarded the company despite the CEO (not the CFO, which was who this douche was) calling and asking us to reconsider. The CEO of my company told their CEO that these kinds of things are covered in our service agreement which the CFO had violated on numerous occasions and our complaints had gone unaddressed. We are providing EXTREMELY limited service to them for a total of thirty days while they find a new IT company, after which we will send over all our notes and configs and wish them the best of luck. I'm glad we all could share in this little adventure, and I hope we can all do it again sometime. In the meantime, thanks for the rewards, the karma, and the comments that had me laughing. Goodnight everyone.TL;DR at bottom.

&nbsp;

Let me start off by saying that this did not happen to me, but rather to a cousin of mine who is 18 and a senior in high school. She told me the story and gave me permission to share it.

So my cousin has a natural patch of white hair at the front of her otherwise dark head of hair. She's had this all her life and it's gotten bigger as she's gotten older. She used to get teased a lot for it at school...until bleaching/dyeing the hair at the front of your head a different color than the rest of your hair became a trend, and now she blends right in with other girls her age. (I believe that this is the "E-girl" look. If you google it you'll see which hairstyle I'm referring to. My cousin's hair looks similar to this, only she doesn't have to dye her hair to get the light streak.)

The school she currently attends has a very strict dress code that includes no hair that is dyed "unnatural colors" and extreme hairstyles, and frowns heavily on dyed hair in general. When in-person classes resumed at her school, one of my cousin's teachers took one look at her hair and sent her to the principal's office, insisting my cousin's "unnatural, extreme" hair was in violation of the dress code and "too distracting", despite the fact that she's never dyed/bleached any part of her hair in her life. My cousin insisted that this is the way her hair has always grown, but the principal was having none of it. She told my cousin "When you come back tomorrow, I expect you to have dyed your hair back to its natural color, and don't dye it again! As long as you are at our school, you are to adhere to the dress code!" My cousin smugly replied with "Of course, I will comply with the dress code from now on!"

My cousin got some hair dye that was as close of a match to the hair on the rest of her head as possible. In order for it to blend in, she ended up dyeing all of her hair, not just the white streak. The next day when she walked in, the teacher complimented her on her "natural" hair and told her never to dye her hair again.

Cue malicious compliance!

As with anyone who dyes their hair, the roots eventually need to be touched up as the hair grows. But my cousin didn't bother with doing that. At first nobody (at least none of the teachers/staff) batted an eyelid. It wasn't until her hair had grown maybe an inch or so that her teacher suddenly looked at her and barked "What did we tell you about your hair? No unnatural colors or extreme hairstyles! We told you to dye it back to its natural color and not dye it again! Go to the principal's office!"

My cousin did as she was told. The principal asked her why her hair looked the way it did. My cousin replied with "Well, you told me to dye my hair back to its 'natural' color and to never dye it again! So I did just that. I dyed my hair the color of the hair on most of my head to get rid of the white streak, which, by the way, is how my hair naturally grows, and didn't dye it again, so now the roots are showing! I did exactly what you told me to do!"

The principal called her parents and told them to come pick their daughter up, explaining that due to her multiple violations of the school's dress code, she would be suspended. So they came to the school and brought the family photo album with them, which had pictures of my cousin at various stages of her life, all with the white patch in her hair. In addition, her father also has a white patch of hair on the front of his otherwise dark head of hair. It runs on his side of his family (I believe the medical term for it is "poliosis"). So the principal reluctantly didn't end up suspending my cousin, but she did give her a warning that "Your extreme hair is still a distraction to the other students, and they are going to wonder why you're getting special treatment. Consider yourself lucky!"

So my cousin wasn't suspended and didn't get any more harassment from the school staff. Gradually her hair returned to its natural "extreme" color. She still continues to occasionally get disapproving looks from the school staff, but none of her classmates feel like she's getting special treatment, and think it's cool that her hair naturally grows that way.

My cousin says that she will not be returning to that school next semester and will be home-schooled instead.

&nbsp;

Edit 1: Wow, I did not expect this post to blow up the way it did. Thank you all for the awards and upvotes!

I would like to clarify some stuff people were asking about. Yes, my cousin and I are both American, but from different states. The school my cousin attended was indeed a private Christian school. She told me that their dress code was very strict, but for some things they were stricter with girls about, and for other things they were stricter with boys. Girls could grow their hair as long as they wanted to provided it was clean, well kept, and not styled in an extreme way. Boys were required to have their be short enough to not touch the back of their collar or their eyebrow, and must style it in a "conservative" way. Hair on both boys and girl must be its natural color and not dyed. Boys also were required to shave their faces daily, even if they only had peach fuzz. Girls were allowed to wear earrings provided they weren't too large (or distracting), boys weren't allowed to wear any jewelry at all. There of course was the usual "skirts must be a certain length, no spaghetti straps" etc. Hats, hoods, sunglasses, and jackets were only to be worn outdoors. Students' clothes were not to have any logos or images on them with the exception of the school emblem, and they were not allowed to wear anything that was considered "faddish".

She told me about this one guy who wore the type of glasses that get darker when you go outside, and his teacher mistook them for sunglasses and made him take them off. Since they were prescription lenses, he was unable to see everything clearly unless he wore the glasses. His parents complained but the school insisted that the glasses took too long to return to their clear state and would be too distracting, both for him and the other students. So his parents were forced to buy him two new pairs of prescription glasses; a pair of regular glasses and a pair of sunglasses.

I think some of these rules were relaxed a bit for the Zoom sessions, but once in-person classes resumed they started cracking down on students who were violating the dress code.

&nbsp;

Edit 2: [Here's a picture of a girl with a similar hairstyle to my cousin's.](https://i2.wp.com/rodankersalons.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/img_1415.jpg?resize=564%2C564&ssl=1) The girl in the picture obviously dyes her hair as you can see the roots. My cousin wears her hair in a similar way but the hair at the front is even lighter and never needs the roots touched up, because it's her natural color. 

&nbsp;

Edit 3: Once again, I want to thank all of you for the upvotes, awards, and feedback. A lot of you have given great suggestions as to what my cousin's family should do. They have made their intentions quite clear that they do not wish to pursue any legal action against the school. Like I've already said, my cousin has decided to finish the remaining months of her senior year being homeschooled. This was her decision. She wants to concentrate on her finals and preparing for college without any distractions.

I'd like to clear up a few more things that people have been asking about. The first one is that, no, the girl in the picture I posted is NOT my cousin. For privacy purposes my cousin doesn't want me to share any photos of her. But I wanted to show you all the hairstyle "fad" that the school insisted my cousin was following even though (up until they asked her to) she had never dyed her hair. So I went on Google Images to try and find some examples of how my cousin wears her hair, and how it could potentially be mistaken for money pieces, the Rogue look, or whatever you want to call it. My cousin's hair is all natural, and it just so happens that she currently blends in with a lot of girls in her age group, which is cool because when she was younger she used to get teased for having "old lady" hair because it's so white in the front.

That being said, now that she's free from that school, for the first time ever (other than when the school forced her), my cousin decided to try an experiment and dye the hair on the front of her head a very UNNATURAL color; blue. It looked pretty cool but the dye didn't hold very well so it quickly faded back to white.

Also, a few people had been asking why the school only began giving her a hard time this year (when she's 18 and a senior). As I mentioned in the comments, my cousin began attending that school for her junior year in fall 2020. Prior to that she attended a different school in another city that was a little more lenient on their dress code, at least in terms of hair colors (i.e. you were allowed to dye your hair natural colors like blonde, brunette, etc.) She switched schools when she moved with her parents to where they currently live. This was during the height of the pandemic and all of the classes were virtual. Her parents were aware that the school had a strict dress code, but since the classes were virtual, a lot of the rules were relaxed, and it was only when in-person classes resumed last fall that they began giving her a hard time about her hair.

Lastly, if any of you YouTubers out there wish to feature this story in your videos (r/Rslash_YT), you have my permission to do so, on the condition that I remain completely anonymous (by that I mean don't use my Reddit username in your video).

Once again, thank you all!

&nbsp;

TL;DR: My cousin's school made her dye her hair to cover up her natural light streak in her otherwise dark hair (which they didn't know was the way her hair naturally grew) because they considered it to be an "extreme" hairstyle, and to not dye her hair again afterwards as dyed hair wasn't allowed. She did exactly what they told her to do, but once the white streak started coming back they tried to punish her for dyeing her hair, even though they had forced her to break their own rule by making her dye her hair in the first place.Story time: 

Last September, my wife had planned a wonderful Father’s Day present for me. (Father’s Day is in September in Australia). 

This was to be my first ever Father’s Day as a new dad. So to mark the occasion. My wife had arranged to have our daughters face laser etched onto a dog tag. 

However, the day before Father’s Day, she received the item back and it was, shall we say —[Sub-Par](https://i.imgur.com/geAIw01.jpg)— so she came to me and showed me my present early. 

Now I’ve had some experience with shitty retailers before and remembered to always come prepared when disputing the quality of any goods and services.   So I set my phone to record all audio and approached the retailer. 

I explained that my wife was upset at the quality of the engraving and rightfully so. I requested a refund and was immediately met with resistance. To begin with, they blamed the quality of the photo we provided. Then when I disputed that, they said that laser engraving doesn’t do depth very well and some faces can end up with some shadows missing. 
End of conversation, they refused a refund and threatened to call security if I didn’t leave. (The engraver is located in a mall that I also happen to work in). 

My wife and I left, we straight away left a less than glowing review on their google page. This was met with accusations of us being unreasonable and threatening violence. Ours was not the only review to which they had this response. 

They informed us that the matter had been passed on to the local police and that a restraining order had been applied for. We immediately called all local police stations and were delighted to hear that they had never heard of the company in question.

After some thought, and me being the stubborn bastard that I am. I decided to forward the matter on to the local small claims tribunal. 

A month or so passed and our day in the tribunal had arrived. We honestly weren’t expecting the engraver to show up. But lo and behold. There he was. At a civil claims court. In camo pants and a hoodie. 

We met in a room with a mediator, who told us that it may not be worth chasing a 40 dollar refund from someone who is —in short— a dickhead. She warned that it may end up costing more than the service to begin with. But, as mentioned before, I am a stubborn bastard. We pushed forward, opting to go to hearing. This is when we heard some marvellous news from the engraver. 

“Oh, I’m not prepared to go to hearing today, I haven’t got any of my evidence.”

DING DING DING! 

We went to a hearing that day, the registrar ruled in our favour and issued a notice of payment. The business was to pay us $40 within two weeks. 

*Two weeks later.* 

No payment. No surprise. 
During this time, I had been communicating via email with the holder of the engraver’s lease. Who, in response to my complaint among many others, had decided to terminate the lease, effectively kicking the engraver out of the mall. (☞ﾟヮﾟ)☞ my man!

While the engraver was organising a new venue for his ^business. I had filed a motion for a writ for levy of property. Meaning the local sheriff was able to enter his premises and relieve him of merchandise to the value of the refund plus court fees. Now totalling $139. 

I informed the engraver. Asking him if he would like to settle like a reasonable person or have the sheriff pay him a visit. [He was not a reasonable person](https://i.imgur.com/LVV9xwf.jpg)

Once the writ had been issued, the fee then increased to $225. All I had to do was wait. 

And wait I did. Until March 13 this year, when the sheriff finally attended his new business premises. He was offered an ultimatum. Pay the fee, or have merchandise repossessed. 

Ladies and gentlemen, we got him. The man paid. He was stubborn for 6+ months over a $40 refund. Only to be down $225 + $5 interest. 

[bUt ThAtS nOt HoW tHe LaW wOrKs](https://i.imgur.com/4iiGvMQ.jpg)

Edit: tl;dr: 
Got refused $40 refund over poor laser engraving. Ended up receiving $230 after court process.This chain of events started almost twenty years ago, and involves myself and a notoriously snooty national Real Estate agency.

There is a bit of background leading to the MC incident so please bear with me. This all occurred  in QLD, Australia.

I once rented a property through an agency from 2004-2006. Due to my ex partner’s explosive (and violent) temper, we had been handed an eviction notice.There was damage to the property that was unfixed at the time we were evicted. Damage that was in the form of fist and hammer sized holes in walls etc.

We obviously did not receive any of the bond deposit back as the repair costs more than absorbed the amount. There was also an added sum of about $1,700 extra to cover the rest of the costs incurred repairing the damage. This amount was forwarded to a debt collections agency. This collection amount was in both of our names as we had jointly been on the lease agreement.

I was not upset at the agency, they were just doing their job by being a good advocate for the owner of the property at this stage. Taking the bond and charging us for the repair was standard and not nasty, vindictive or overkill in the slightest. My anger came later.

Although I must admit I was a bit miffed to be dually held financially responsible for the damage caused by my ex, but due to the nature of the joint lease not much could be legally done. I was just grateful we had parted ways not long after...

A few years post eviction I wanted to get my life more organised in many areas and tie up any loose ends that would impede me moving forward. A clean slate so to speak. So the debt issue came first.

After many phone calls,  and some paperwork exchange (plus an escalation or two) the debt collection agency finally agreed to split the $1,700 damages bill between the ex and myself. Now I could pay off half and not be held accountable for his portion any longer.

This had to be done without his consent as he refused. I’m unsure as to why, possibly hoping I would pay the whole lot to rebuild my credit rating, or most likely just to be annoying.

Once I had paid off ‘my portion’ of the collectors debt I thought I was done with the whole business and the black mark against my name.

Not so unfortunately. It turned out that the State I lived in had a blacklist that Real Estate agencies and lessors could add tenants names to. It’s called the TICA list. All they needed was proof that the tenant had behaved in a bad enough manner regarding renting of a property to warrant being listed. Due to the fact we had been evicted, the damage, and also owed arrears to a debt agency for repairs we unfortunately qualified.

Being on this list made it almost impossible to rent, especially via a Real Estate agency.

After speaking extensively with the RTA - which is a government agency - I found I was definitely eligible to have my name removed from the list so I started taking action for this to happen. I was able to demonstrate good faith by having paid for half of the damages. It also went in my favour that my partner was abusive and there was legal evidence of this fact.

However I was told the only way to have my name removed was by the Real Estate agency. So I approached them and asked for them to do so. 

They were very helpful initially, if I was able to show them proof that the debt was settled they were happy to remove my name. At least seven years had elapsed by this point so it was considered punishment enough.

At the time after five years your name is usually removed from the TICA list, however this company apparently kept tabs on who they had added to the list and when the person’s five years expired they just added them again. 

Dirty tactics indeed, obviously I had been re-added.

So I provided relevant documents to the agency and was assured my name would be removed as soon as they located my file.

This apparently had been stored away in archives as much time had passed since I rented with them. I was told this would take a week maximum. All good.

So I called a week later, and was told to wait another week, still in a kind, helpful and cordial tone. I called again after that time and was told to wait – you guessed it – another week, and this time I detected a tone of frost in the reply.

So I called back more than a week later just to show patience, and  now was spoken to in a very haughty manner. I was informed that my request was bothersome! Being so because what I asked was not important and finding my file was a waste of their staff time. They would call me when they got around to it...

I expressed how important it was personally, and then heard the magic words (almost verbatim) “If you want us to do this so badly, we will only be forcedd to help you if ordered, perhaps you should take us to court if you can’t be patient. Goodbye.” String me along? 

Ok, Game on...

I had a feeling this was all done to avoid removing my name as they had found my file. Also that they were stalling, and wanted me to stay blacklisted. But I wasn’t backing down without a fight, and so I took their advice.

I filed against them to have the matter seen in a Small Claims Court. It cost me $35 which would be reimbursed by the agency if I won. I didn’t have anything to lose and I wanted them to know that not all people will hold indefinitely, or continue to be unjustly punished for longer than fair. It was listed to appear in about four days from filing.

As soon as they received the court date paperwork I was suddenly bombarded with phone calls! How dare I take the agency to court when they were working their hardest to find my file and help me?!

Doing my best to sound apologetic for taking their advice, I thanked them for the suggestion, as it seemed there would now be a timeframe at least for the matter to be dealt with.

On the day of court I had three sheets of paper as my sole evidence. A statement showing that  repair bill had been paid and there was no finances outstanding. A statement from the RTA that I was eligible to have my name taken off the TICA list. And lastly a document stating it was at the behest of the Real Estate agency to remove my name and that they had no good reason not to.

Not one but two agents for the company showed up to Court. When it came before the judge both parties had to give evidence if relevant. I handed in my three pages. Seeing them pass the judge a thick folder of paperwork (including photo’s of the property damage) was rather amusing considering they supposedly couldn’t find my file when last requested.

The judge asked them for a statement. They went on for a few minutes about why I didn’t deserve to be removed, and justified their stance with the photos and prior rental history with them.

All I had to reply was that I had paid for my share of the damage, that the damage was due to my abusive ex, and that I had made restitution as much as I could regarding the matter. With no money owing.

The judge then asked why I had brought it to court? I explained that the company was dragging their feet removing my name when it was a simple matter, and it wasn’t necessarily fair to do so. That I had called  them repeatedly and waited while they found my (so hard to locate) paperwork that had somehow miraculously appeared when convenient. That being on the TICA list was harmful to my future chances at renting and also that my name had been re-submitted after dropping off the list.

The judge queried them why they had added my name again. They stated it was company policy. The judge expressed agreement with my stance. I had been punished enough, had made financial restitution and now that my file had been located I was not to be blacklisted anymore. Case decided in my favour.

Win!

The Real Estate agency was given 48 hours to submit proof to the court (and a copy to myself) that I was now off the list.

Also they had to pay for the $35 I spent taking them to court.

The pair of agents walked out in a huff and were on the phone out in the hallway immediately after vacating the courtroom. I floated past them as I was on a justice high.

As I got to the lifts I thanked them for coming and their sound advice in recommending court. Also that I was grateful for the bottle of wine they would be buying me with the $35 I was to be paid back.

The look on their faces was priceless.Years ago I worked at a local coffee shop. We served the standard coffee shop menu of coffee drinks and pastries we made in house. One of our coffee drinks on the menu was a macchiato. We served a traditional macchiato, which is a double shot of espresso with a touch of steamed milk and milk foam, but since a certain chain has named a very different drink the same thing I would always try to clarify what the customer was ordering when they asked for one. 

One day a woman came up to the counter on her cell phone. She briefly pulled the phone away from her head long enough to mouth “caramel macchiato” at me. I started my spiel about how we serve a traditional macchiato, which is quite small, did she want that or one like the other place makes. She cut me off three words in and dramatically said “I know what it is! Just make it!” So I rang her up and made it. 

I made her a tiny drink with espresso, caramel syrup and milk foam. When I gave it to her she finally got off her phone call and told me I clearly made it wrong. I explained I made what she ordered as she told me she knew what she was ordering. 

She now said she wanted one like she would get at national chain, which I happily made and charged her for. She did not get a refund on the first drink.I work at a cinema and the other day I had a guy come up and request to see a movie. I asked if he wanted to see the 2pm session (it was around 1.30pm) and he replies ‘obviously’. It’s not always obvious to me though and I’d rather be safe than sorry so I always check. It’s also a thing at my cinema where if you sign up for our rewards program (free to join) you save a hefty amount of cash off each ticket so I always suggest joining before selling a ticket. I started my spiel with this guy when he interrupted and said ‘I’m not joining anything’. So I ask if he has any concession cards and he rolls his eyes and says ‘no, i just said I’m not joining anything’’ which wasn’t even what I had asked him. At this point I’m getting annoyed cause I’m just trying to help the dude save money and he’s getting annoyed with any question I ask him. I know I have to ask where he wants to sit and when I do he says ‘in a seat’. I ask if he wants to be more specific and he gives me the filthiest look and says ‘this is taking so fucking long, just put me anywhere’. It had only been probably a minute or two of conversation so I’m pretty ticked off at this point. So, I pick his seat for him. Front row as far to the side as possible in a 400 person cinema with a giant ass screen.When I was younger I worked as a engineer for a small company. The owner who I'll call Jake, let me know before I started that I would be doing about 10 hour days, 6 days a week for about 6 months, but that I would have to be flexible. Some days they wouldn't have work for me and other days I'd be expected to stay a few hours late. This didn't bother me too much as I wasn't too tight for money and I didn't mind staying behind a few extra hours occasionally.  

I got to work and was told to follow instructions from the owners brother, Steve. He was an arrogant character, who always thought he knew how to do everyone's else's job better than them. We butted heads a few times but nothing major. 

A few months in, I found a new job starting in a week that paid better. Later on that day I had another disagreement with Steve. The situation was petty but it's his response that really confused me. It ended with him screaming in my face "if you don't do as I say, then you can fucking leave!". 

So I packed my stuff and left. Steve was a little confused, thinking I'd just fall in line. He was too arrogant to apologise, and I had a job lined up. 

(Side note for people not in the UK, I was working a zero hour contract. This means I get an hourly wage but I'm not afforded some labor rights like a set salery, minimum work hours or notice for dismissal. This works both ways though so I can leave the job whenever I want with no notice.) 

I decided to call up Jake since he'd always been chill and told him what happened. He told me he needed me and I should just return to work. I told him unless he controls steve and made him apologise, there was no way I was coming back. He refused so I told him I'll send in my final time sheet.

Two weeks later and I've started my new job. I still haven't been paid for my final week, so I call Jake. He told me that "since you didn't give notice for leaving, you owe me for lost product of work." He said if I didn't like it, I should sue him and "recommended" I should just take the loss and move on. This was complete bs.

A couple months go by until I finally find time to file for small claims court. Few days after sending him notice, Jake paid my money including court fees and extra. He actually called me up apologizing for the "confusion". He wanted to know when I could return to work. I'd heard from one of my ex co-workers that because of the infrequent hours, people would leave as soon as they were told they wouldn't have work the next day. Others would leave when they realised how much of a jerk Steve was. They'd gone through about 7 different workers in the time I was gone and struggled to keep anyone for more than a week. I told him I'd think about it. I managed to string him along for a few weeks before he stopped calling me.

The moral of the story is that if you think you're being treated unfairly, you shouldn't just put up with it. Your self respect isn't worth compromising. Don't settle for being treated like shit, especially when you're willing to go above and beyond for them.This happened to me while i was in elementary school. Our mrs. math teacher really hated my guts for no reason really. She would always find an excuse to lower my grades or blame me for something i didn't do. I was a pretty sick kid that had bad astma, dermatitis and was sickish in general. Thinking back, I think her hating me had a lot to do with that, as she felt i had "special treatment and privileges".

One day we were doing a test and i started feeling very bad. It came to the point of really needing to puke but i held it in because i knew she wouldn't believe me. Then i started shaking and kinda puked a bit in my mouth so i stood up and started to go towards the toilet (we had a rule that anybody who has to go to the toilet can do so without asking).

She ofcourse stopped me and told me to sit back down. I tried explaining but she wouldn't have it. One girl stood up for me and said something like "he is really pale and shaking and sweating, i think he needs to go home". That caused the teacher to go on a 5 minute rant how i'm a spoiled liar who didn't study for the test and now i'm trying to fool everybody and that i'm taking away their precious test time and they should hate me for that" I said i really need to puke and she just scoffed saying "You ain't going anywhere with your lies so you might as well do your imaginary puking here". 

Yeah... You can guess what happened next. 
Not sure if this is compliance because i couldn't hold it in anymore anyway but i was so happy while doing it.
First i puked a bit trough my arm and then it all went out. Across her desk (grading book was ruined) and all over the floor. She tried to blame me saying that i "threw up by force" but the principal didn't buy it after the doctor examined me. Nothing special happened to her but she never bothered me again.I'm home on spring break, and Saturday night after we finished watching movie, I turned on the shower, got ready to get in when it sounds like the KGB were going to break down the bathroom door.
I open it expecting my dad to yell at me about something, but it's my teenage sister screaming at me to let her use the bathroom. So I get out, let her use the bathroom, she comes out again, screams at me some more about how I need to let her know when I'm going to take a shower, goes into her room, slams the door. I take my shower.
I'm on a college sleep schedule so I go to bed at 1am, so the next night I'm doing some work and I start to get ready for bed around 12. My sister has high school the next morning so she's in bed.
Before I take my shower I open her door and say in a loud voice that I will be taking a shower now.So I just had a lateral sphincterotomy for chronic anal fissures. It’s just as painful and terrible as it sounds. It’s also kind of an awkward topic to get into with 99% of people, so for the most part I’ve been deliberately vague about my surgery with people. My husband, parents, boss, and closest friends know the details. But as far as anyone else knows, I’m just having a minor procedure and will be out of work for awhile. 

If people have reached out to check on me and see if I’m okay, that’s fine. I appreciate that. But if they keep prying despite my obvious attempts to be vague, my strategy has been to tell them in graphic detail exactly what the surgery entails and make them regret asking.

It goes like this. 

Them: “Hey I heard you were having surgery, is everything okay??”

Me: “Yeah, it’s just a small elective procedure. Everything is fine! Thanks for checking in.”

Usually the conversation is over here or the subject is changed. But if the person wants to be nosy, it continues: 

Them: “Okay good, just making sure.”

Me: “Yup! All good.”

Them: “What’s the surgery for?”

Me: “It’s for a digestive system issue, nothing to worry about.”

Them: “Oh, what is it?”

Me: “My butthole. I have chronic anal fissures, which means my entire anus splits open every single time I poop. It’s excruciating. I’m having a sphincterotomy. That’s where they cut into the sphincter muscle from the inside, and then cauterize the fissures to allow them to heal better.”

Them: “Well that’s graphic...”

Me: “I tried to be vague, but you still felt the need to ask, so. I felt the need to tell you!”


I really just hope it makes them feel awkward and like they shouldn’t have asked such personal questions when someone was clearly trying to be vague about something. Mind your own damn business and get your nose out of my ass. Literally.

Edit 1:  Whole lotta people in the comments like “That’s not fair, they might not know they’re being intrusive or nosy! They might just genuinely be concerned!” But like. I know these people on a personal level. I know who’s concerned for my well-being and who is being willfully intrusive. I know I could just say “I’d rather not discuss it”, and I do say that to some people. I adjust my response to people accordingly based on their intent.

Edit 2: I did not make the advice animals post. Someone else liked my story so much they decided to make a meme out of it! Hopefully some people who need to see it, see it there. 

Edit 3: “Yeah but you’re talking about your DiScREtE pRiVaTe MeDiCaL iSsUe oN tHe iNtErnET so clearly it doesn’t bother you to talk about it!” I didn’t say it did. I said I have an issue with people deliberately prying into someone else’s information. Also you didn’t have to read this post or the comments, so don’t get butthurt that you now also know more than you wanted to about my anus.This happened about 15 years ago. Relatively early in my career as a web developer/software engineer, so some details are not remembered precisely. Names changed etc. Tldr at the bottom.

Anyway, I thought I had landed a dream job at a small media company that had gone all-in on digital media and marketing a few years prior and had started to land some big clients (think NHS etc…).

The team comprised of two owners, we will call them Jeff and Nige. Jeff was the lighthearted, approachable and more tech-oriented member of this double act. Nige was the straight man, less approachable, and less likely to join us in any social antics but ultimately a seemingly decent guy and the main driver of the business. 

In addition, there was an office manager, James, who was also Nige’s other half and Rachel, an office assistant and a good friend of Nige.

The rest of the workforce made up the media team which comprised of a senior and a junior designer, a senior and junior dev and me (another senior dev).

What made this a dream job for me at the time? Well, on top of the fact they were doing some great work with what was, at the time, cutting edge technology, it was an overall great place to be. Flexible working hours, lots of holidays and lots of social events.

To give you a better idea, most lunchtimes Jeff and the media team would all go out for lunch together, or play a FIFA tournament, go to the pub to mob on a new idea etc. Most importantly for this story, every Friday we would all finish an hour early, at 4 pm instead of 5 pm, and head to the pub and have a couple (or more) drinks together.

It was a very open place to work at the time and the two owners were clear on how they expected the business to expand and our future positions within such an expanded company. Basically, all the guff any potential employer peddles when you interview but we were actually doing it and living it. 

They were receptive to new ideas or different ways of doing things, and regularly included us in sales meetings and we could see the direction the company was going in. Everybody who worked there was excited and I honestly thought I’d be there for the rest of my career.

Things, however, change.

As time went on the company became more successful, and with more success came more recognition, more clients, more money, and greed.

I won’t go into too much detail, but by the time of the main event in this story a couple of years after starting there, this once open and relaxed workplace had become hell.

There were no longer flexible hours, you had to be in at 8.50 am to get ready at your machine and you didn’t power down until 5 pm at the earliest unless you had been asked to stay late to churn out more work (unpaid).

No more lunchtime socials, there was a lunchtime rota that stated who could go for lunch and when, so we could no longer take lunch together.

Despite the ever-growing workload of more complex and larger websites, no new members were added to the team. Even when the other lead dev left, no replacement was found. On top of this, despite the growing workload and shortening deadlines, promises of raises and bonuses never came to fruition, which was especially galling when coupled with the fact both owners were by now getting a new car every 6 months.

Nigel also made it clear that with the success of the company as it was, his plan was to sell it at the ripe age of 45 (I think) and semi-retire to a life of travel writing and photography (despite being mediocre at both), without a second thought for the rest of us.

The business was now being run in a manner that allowed the owners to line their pockets with as much cash as possible whilst also making it look like a good takeover prospect.

The only perk that remained was the 4 pm Friday finish which by this time, instead of all going for a drink together, we just went home early. 

Morale was low.

One Friday afternoon, Nigel, Jeff and James went to visit a prospective client. Rachel was off for some reason which left nobody in charge of the office. 

Expecting the usual early finish everybody had completed their work by 4 pm, but having not received any word from the owners, we hung on. At around 4.50 pm and with nothing else to do we collectively decided to “fuck it”, lock up and go home.

Apparently, at about 4.51 pm Nige had tried to call the office, probably to tell us to go home, but of course, we had already left. Monday morning, every one of us was called into the main office, given a bollocking and told that a planned upcoming social was now cancelled (it probably already was anyway, but why not use it as a punishment) and that our wages were going to be docked for leaving early.

Now, here in the UK, it is naughty to make deductions from a salary unless it is for some legally mandated reason, e.g. taxes, national insurance, student loan etc. or unless the employee has given explicit written permission so I didn’t think this last threat would actually happen.

I didn’t have to wait long to find out as we were paid weekly, but sure enough, that Friday, there was a deduction from my wages as well as everybody else on the media team.

I approached the owners about it, but I was basically given the same speech as on Monday morning previous.

Law has been a particular interest of mine, still is, and whilst I’m no lawyer nor any kind of expert, I know enough to stand up for myself and those around me, and so, with the backing of the rest of the media team I sent what may be considered a “Notice Before Action” just prior to leaving on Friday.

That NBA being a formally worded email to both owners stating my grievance, the illegal deduction from salary, and my proposed resolution, the repayment of the deducted salary in our next wage along with a formal apology to everybody on the team. Failure would mean the engagement of legal services.

On Monday morning the owners arrived late and instead of Nige’s customary visit to the media room to ask how we were\* (\*make sure we were slaving away) they both retreated directly to their office and shut the door. 

This was shortly followed by an email to us all stating that due to my “threat” and after taking legal advice they had been told to cease direct communication with any of us until the matter was resolved. The resolution they wanted now being a full apology by me to them and the agreement that salary should remain deducted. Any communication should be via email.

Now, I’m reasonably sure they hadn’t had any legal advice on the matter, or if they had, it was shit. 

Firstly, a decent solicitor would have told them they were idiots for doing what they did and to give the money back and apologise. Secondly, because the entire point of a Notice Before Action is to try and find a resolution prior to taking any legal action, in closing up shop in this manner they are practically forcing a legal engagement.

My belief is that they were simply calling my bluff, and didn’t believe I would take this any further. They reinforced this by adding to their email that any further communication about the deduction from our wages would need to come from my legal representation.

I, of course, was not bluffing and complied with their request.

What they didn’t know was that a member of my family was not only educated in employment law, albeit not an actual solicitor, but also a union representative at another company, so by the end of the day a legally drafted letter arrived on the owner’s desks laying out the illegalities of what had happened as well as the expected timeline of events going forward.

Within 30 days (I think) we were to have had a formal meeting between the owners and myself, with me entitled to legal representation present in that meeting, and with the expectation that my demands in the NBA were to be met as they had no defence.

Should that not occur, this would be going to a tribunal or maybe even full court with the company liable for expenses. It was a slam dunk, so they would end up with a relatively hefty bill.

Instead of folding, as I expected them to do, this led to them doubling down on their stupidity. Their door was permanently shut with very little direct communication between the whole media team and the owners, with it mostly being done by email, or via Rachel and James.

At this point, Rachel and James, who were obviously on good terms with Nige became openly hostile toward me. For a small example, Rachel would make everybody in the office a coffee in the morning, now it was everybody except me.

Seemingly, neither the owners nor Rachel and James seemed to know or understand that I had the full backing of the rest of the team. 

They didn’t have the know-how or the will to fight it themselves, but they were aware of the downhill direction in the working environment and that my actions were preventing the owners from further taking the piss in the future. Now the environment had become exceptionally toxic and nobody wanted to be there. 

They, and I, started actively looking for different employment.

If I remember correctly, an extension was requested and granted but the deadline for the aforementioned meeting came and went so my representative sent another formal letter to my employers stating that we would be going to tribunal. 

It also now stated that I would be leaving the company immediately and I would be claiming “Constructive Dismissal” due to the actions of the owners, James and Rachel which had all been logged over the previous weeks. 

The only result of the extension they requested being an extra few weeks of workplace bullying logged.

Receiving all this was the last straw and their resolve was broken. An apology was sent via email along with the promise that the money would be returned in our next paycheque.

I’d had enough however and I immediately handed in my notice which I believe was 4 weeks. I hadn’t found another job, but I had decided to move to the city anyway and go freelance.

Before my notice period ended, the junior designer also handed her notice in, also to go freelance, and within a few months of me leaving the junior dev and the senior designer had done the same.

The business owned by Jeff and Nige was essentially dead, with many of their existing clients seeking us out to continue doing work for them on a freelance basis.

I learned that Jeff and Nige eventually had a falling out, with Jeff resigning as a director and becoming CTO at another tech company. 

Nige renamed and rebranded the old company and attempted to carry on somehow but to this day the examples of work on their web page are still the ones we made 15 years ago. Most of them aren’t actually his clients anymore or are defunct. 

I also later learned, as we had all suspected, that Jeff wanted nothing to do with the wage deductions etc. Although I’m not sure how hard he fought against it.

Although I’ve not physically met them since the day I left, I am connected to everyone in the media team and they are all doing well. Jeff also reached out a few years later and he is doing well too.

As for Nige, James and Rachel, I have no idea. Rachel was close to retirement anyway, so I guess she was reasonably fine. 

Looking at the public details of the businesses Nige now owns it’s clear that none of them makes any money and his travel and photography blogs stopped being updated a few years ago. Nige’s (and James as his partner) plans to retire early and travel the world are probably now permanently on hold. As is his penchant for a new car every few months.

And the amount deducted from our wage over which Nige lost his business and planned future for?

£6.80p

Tldr; Owner illegally makes deductions to my salary and insists on only discussing it via legal representation, so I get legal representation and he loses his business and dreams.This happened about ten years ago at my (American) university. I enrolled in a class that two friends also happened to enroll in (an elective for our major). The professor, whom I will call "Prof Y", told us straight off the bat that our entire grade would be based on two exams that would be open book and we could collaborate with anyone else in the class, as long as we cited that we did so. Additionally, it was the kind of exam where you could submit it as many times as you want before the deadline. Prof Y's rules though were that he'd grade easiest on the first try, and much tougher with each subsequent try. Fair enough.

Now, some background on this professor.  I'm not defending him, but I do think this context is important. He immigrated to the States from another country where women are seen as inferior, and the often expectations of women are to be meek and quiet (maybe less so nowadays, but definitely more so when he was growing up). In class one day, a female student challenged the professor; he argued back, she admitted he made a good point and he said to her, "You are very agreeable. You'd make a great wife." Now, at this point I probably should have reported him for sexism. However, we all apparently let it slide. He was in his late 60s, he had tenure, so I think we all brushed it aside as harmless (hindsight 20/20). I am female, btw.

Fast forward a few weeks into the semester and the first exam is given to us. My male friend, David, and I did the test together. We submitted it on the same day. On the bottom of my test, I wrote "worked with David" because I wanted to follow the prof's rules. A few days later, we all got our first attempt at the test back. David scored the equivalent of about a C (remember he had further chances to improve); my test had a big fat zero at the top with the words "CHEATER" written on it. I was shocked. I obviously held back after class and asked why this was written on my test, and Prof Y started screaming at me.

"I HATE LIARS!!!! I HATE PEOPLE LIKE YOU!!! YOU ARE SCUM!!! YOU ARE A LIAR!!!!!"

I could not believe what I was hearing. I was sobbing, explaining that he SAID (and it was in the syllabus) that we could work with other students. I asked where I had cheated and Prof Y had literally underlined the first five words of ONE question where both David and I had started off the paragraph saying something like, "The reason that we are seeing these results is.....". And that was it. I asked him why he thought **I** cheated, and not David? But Prof Y would not listen to me, continued to insult me until I left.

Now, my university was SUPER strict about plagiarism and cheating. We got emails like once a week about the Honor Council. All the emails said that anyone caught cheating would be reported to the Honor Council and sit trial. So I went to their office and reported myself. They were all confused and were like "wait....you're reporting yourself? Not the professor?" and I told them calmly that I had been accused and given a zero without any evidence, so I wanted to sit trial. They incredulously told me no student had ever asked for a trial, but I was following the University rules and I was confident I would win.

Needless to say, Prof Y was not happy. At the next class, he pulled me after class and screamed yet again that they were HIS rules in HIS class and HE decides the grades, not the Honor Council. I said that's not the university's policy and if he thought I was cheating, HE should have gone to them. Since he didn't, I did. He was livid and tried to bully me to back down but I didn't.

We had the trial, and I obviously won. At the end of the semester, I organised a meeting with the Dean of the school and filed a formal sexism complaint against Prof Y. The Dean, also incredulous, promised to launch a formal investigation into this professor and would be meeting with him to discuss. I'm sure that nothing happened besides a slap on the wrist, but even a slap on the wrist was worth it.

&#x200B;

Edit: Wow what a nice surprise to wake up to!! Thank you all for the awards!!

I also want to add that I looked it up and he is retired, so nothing can be done now. I also stumbled upon his "ratemyprofessor" page and LOL his rating is 1/5 stars. Most of the comments are "his tests are stupid and he grades based on his mood that day". I'd be very curious to know if these are all women writing these reviews. Also, my major is in a STEM field. I forgot to add this note, but there were only three women in my entire class (of like 30 students, but still). One woman was told she'd make a good wife, and I was accused of cheating. It's just such a shame that women are trying to break into the hard sciences and yet sh\*t like this happens that discourages us. 

I also am SO curious about why so many people have guessed BYU and why if it were BYU (it's not), it would "change everything". Someone please provide more information!!!

Second edit: thank you everyone who has offered more information on BYU’s honor council. Thankfully this honor council was more focused on academic integrity and nothing like the HCO at BYUI was going to buy a car from a small used car dealership. We agreed on a price and a day to meet. The morning of he sold it out from under me right before I was there with no courtesy call or text or anything.

I wrote an accurate review reflecting my experiences with the dealership online. A couple days later he calls and threatens me with a lawsuit claiming my review is slander. He warned me everyone else that gave a one star review was sued for slander and had to pay court fees and remove their review. He said if I edited the review everything would be fine and he wouldn't take me to court.

Well I obliged and edited my review stating he threatened me over the phone with a lawsuit since I gave a negative review and that my review was in fact 100 percent accurate of my experiences. 

The icing on the cake... I text him right after I edited the review and said, "Hey man edited the review as requested hope there are no hard feelings." I guess he didn't read my edit before replying with, "thanks man I appreciate it. No hard feelings!" I'll update if he reads the review and contacts me again...

Update: Well sorry to disappoint but his reply was not wildly entertaining as anticipated. He opted to not call me again or text me but to reply to my review on Google. He absolutely went into damage control mode after my edit stated he threatened a lawsuit over my review. He did what anyone would do and skewed the story to make him look less like the bad guy and more like the poor business owner who has an unwarranted negative review.

I once again edited my review to combat some things he said. I bought a different car the next day that was a lot nicer and I am going to be happier with it. I just had my first daughter on July 5th and was just trying to find a car safer for her to be in. I wasn't out to ruin this guys business or anything but after he threatened me the gloves were off. I am glad you guys enjoyed my post and I'll update again if anything worth posting happens!HI, this is my first post in here about a thing which happened half a decade ago, but recent experience made me remember it vividly. I hope you enjoy my story.

To give context, I live in Europe in a non-Anglophone country. I have always been a language nerd, and since my parents' divorce, English and everything in it (music, movies, internet) was my escape, so I was fluent before most of my classmates and got my CPE (Certificate of Proficiency in English, the highest certificate from the Cambidge Council) at 18. In my country High schools are basically undergrad college and are finished between the age of 19-20, and a problem which almost all public schools have is terrible language teachers - most of them being former Russian teachers with minimal English or any other language education. Also, as my country is small and nobody could reasonably expect to use our language abroad, we put a HUGE emphasis on language studies at all levels of education, and it is often the thing which schools boast about to become more prestigious. So enough context.

From early on, my last high-school English teacher and I kicked it off to a bad start. The first test she gave us came back all red because of "words which are not in the textbook". The terrible teacher (TT for short) would do this to me for the full final 2 years! She would take my essays and tests, and cross out any word, phrase, or structure, which was not in the textbook we were using! I maintained that I will not go as far as to learn the textbook vocabulary by heart (just to remember which synonyms I was ALLOWED to use) just because of TT's antics. I have managed to keep an A for 3 terms because there was nothing she could mark down on my grammar. The final term, however, TT learned that I wish to go to university to do Anglophone Studies, a specialisation her daughter had failed to be accepted for (she told me that as an explanation why "I cannot ever hope to be accepted" at the start of that term) and which, among dozen other things, required good or even perfect marks from high-school language lessons and accepted only 5% of applicants. TT was dead set to make me fail.

She started giving me the stupidest assignments and extra tests for "misbehaving in class" (being finished early and silently staring at a wall), which required me to "mark the exact position of Disneyland on this A4 blind map of USA" (exact quote I still remember after all those years), and more of the same shit. You could tell she was so satisfied by me failing these tests, she would have a grin on her face each time handing out the results.

By this time I have been representing the school in laguage olympics for both English and Spanish. She had no idea, because it was organised by another language teacher, and even though the principal made it into a big deal, TT was plainly uninterested. I have placed 3rd in the Capital City District in Spanish and 6th NATIONWIDE in English. Not to listing this to brag, (ok, myabe a bit), but to use it later.

By the end of the term she god my mark down to a C- (mind you, all the grammar was still A's, but her blind maps of tourist attractions had taken their toll). I went to her to reason with her, but her reaction was "If you think a different teacher would propose a different mark, take all of your documents and go to one of my colleagues, but I believe it is clear to anyone that you do not deserve any better."

SO I DID, I took ALL my documents. The bloody blind-maps, the grammar tests, my by then a year old PCE certificate and my 6th place diploma. I went to the teacher who organised the competitons and explained my situation. SHE WAS FURIOUS.

She took this to the principal, and even though I was waiting outside, I could hear him yell at TT, "You are trying to fail the student who was representing us at the national level of competitions!?" It also turned out that with the CPE I had, by that time, a higher level of English education than TT had. I got my A. I got to the uni and I love it there. I also started my own tiny language school where, among of course teaching the language to whoever is interested, I help kids whose language teachers are incompetent and/or power-hungry morons.

The impulse for me to write this was walking by the highschool last week, and meeting TT. She acted like we have always been best buddies (a couple of MY students are her students as well, so she knows about me). She hugged me in front of the High-school kids present and exclaimed that I got where I was thanks to working hard in HER lessons. I am still pissed I did not get the courage to tell her off there and then.

Edit: Thanks everyone for the kind comments, I haven't expected the post to get so much attention! Seriously thank you guys for making my day!

Also, I know that there are mistakes and typos here in the post. As I have stated in the comments, I have not really proofread anything, I have not expected this to get any attention at all, and I would feel like a prick editing them out now, so, sorry about that.I was an English teacher in Moscow. At the beginning of the school year, I asked for a week of time off around a holiday, so I could travel some. I got denied so the week it came around, I was pleased that most of my classes had been canceled because the students had the same idea I had and were all going on vacation.

I get an email from the administration stating that I was to cover classes for another teacher. Who was taking vacation for the week I had asked for. So I was already a bit upset about that they'd approved him, but not me - especially since I'd asked for it like 5 months ago. Anyway, I accept the hand that was dealt and start preparing lessons.

The day of the first class, I leave home a few hours early so that I had plenty of time to make sure I could find the place (it was at a location I'd never been) and that I had all the necessary equipment I needed to read the lessons. It was pretty easy to find, but when I rang the bell, there was no answer. I had some time, so I went off to get a snack. I come back to the school about 30 minutes early and ring the bell again.

No answer.

I try calling the school's administrator.

No answer.

I try calling the administrator who assigned the classes.

No answer.

For over an hour I rang the doorbell and called multiple times to no avail. My contract stated that I had to wait 30 minutes for students to show up before I could leave. So at the 30 minute mark, I sent a text to all parties that read something along the lines of: I was here on time. I waited a half hour after the scheduled time, but nobody answered the door. I'm going back home. It will take me 20 minutes to get to the metro, if you call me before I board, I will turn around and come back.

When I got home, I got a call:

"Where the hell are you?"

"At home."

"You have a class."

"I'm aware. I was there and nobody answered the door. I called and nobody answered. I also left a text."

"Texting is not an approved form of communication."

Now, this was before I had a phone with a data plan, so text was the only way I could message someone. They tried docking my pay for this, but when I told the owner what had happened and showed him my call logs and the text I left, he made sure that didn't happen.

Fast forward a few months. I'd been having a lot of issues with the administration so I'd become an expert on the finer details of our contract. One of those details was that the administration couldn't assign a class with less than 72 hours notice. So when they called on Saturday, to give me a class for Monday, I told them no. Again, they tried to dock my pay. The owner sighed at me and told me I was right.

My favorite part, though, was receiving a text that said I was to teach a class on a given day. They made special mention of the 72 hour rule. I ignored the text. When the time for class came around, I got another call:

"Where the hell are you?"

"At home."

"You have a class."

"No I don't."

"I sent you a text. I have it saved."

"Texting is not an approved form of communication."This happened a long time ago but still tickles me. The year was 1971 and I got married for the first time. Things were a lot different back then for women. We had just gotten married the day before and the next morning my husband woke up and told me he wanted cabbage, sausage and potatoes for dinner. At this point I had never eaten sausage and was never going to it strangely enough and never had cabbage. I told him I didn't eat those things and he simply told me that that's what I was fixing.

So I unpacked the new pots and pans is that the biggest pot on the stove and added water, cabbage, potatoes with seasonings. I turned it on high. When everything inside the pot, which was Teflon, burnt to a crisp I still left it there until it completely ruin the pot.

When he got home I told him going forward I would be cooking dinners that we both could eat. As we have been dating almost 3 years I clearly knew what kind of foods we both liked. He was seriously mad. I calmly stuck to my guns and told him he wasn't going to bully me and just because we were married doesn't mean he got to tell me what to do. The marriage lasted a year and a half. I couldn't wait to get away.I work in a data center and obviously every day presents itself with something new. Sit at desk all day sometimes, yep. Crawl across ladder racks running fiber next day, yep. Therefore, you dress for comfort and any situation. Which is generally jeans, t-shirt, sneakers, and for me a fleece jacket because it's cold as balls. 

Many years back, our boss informs us that his boss and a few other VPs are coming in for a tour and we need to be dressed up. His boss is new to him and he wants us to make a good impression, but when we ask for clarification, he didn't have an answer, just look nice.

Cue malicious compliance - there were only 5 of us working in this location and three of the four guys had tuxedos, the other one, a nice suit. I had a great floor length formal gown. So on the day in question, we arrived earlier than usual in our spiffiest duds. When our boss arrived, he straight panicked. He was convinced that this would not go over well. We calmly explained that he's the one that told us to dress up and we had. Plus, there was no time for us to change before the tour was going to arrive.

A few minutes later his boss rolls up and the 5 of us, plus our boss are in the front lobby to greet him. Our boss is terrified.  He came through the door, took one look and almost fell over. I've never seen anyone laugh so hard in my life. He insisted on taking pictures of and with us and said it was the best thing he'd seen in a long time. Our boss of course then switched gears and acted like he'd been in on it and thought we were hilarious too. Mmmkay. 

Our photo made the 2nd levels wall and even went out during a team meeting a few weeks later. It's still one of my favorite work memories. Our boss was much more succinct going forward when he wanted us to "dress up"This boss has since been fired, which makes this story so much sweeter, but this man was a Grade A Douchenozzle while he was there. Fired a coworker who's been there for years over petty shit. Constantly reminding people he was their boss. Asked me to do nonsense work and when I questioned it he just said he was in charge. Threatened to fire me multiple times for being "disobedient". Luckily I was trained to do a job only 3 people were trained to do and the coworker he fired was one of them. 

Anyway, he called everyone for a meeting about the dress code and said there were people not tucking their shirts in. Whatever, I always had my shirt tucked in so I thought I'd get left alone for a day. 

Nope. 

He comes over with the dress code printed out and says we have to talk. I asked what was up since I had a tucked in button up on. He said my undershirt was light grey and the rules say it has to be white or navy blue. You've got to be fucking kidding me. So I looked through the company rules and it said you can have 2 top buttons undone and if an undershirt is worn it must be white or blue. If. So the next day I came in without an undershirt and the top 2 buttons undone. I forgot to mention, I'm a hairy motherfucker. And I fluffed up my thick ass chest hair so it was poofing out like an Italian mobster. I sat directly across from him at the meeting and kept leaning forward. He looked visibly uncomfortable and after the meeting I saw him frantically looking through the rulebook. He must not have found anything cause he never mentioned it again.So this is about 3 years ago i was working at Papa Johns (in Canada) and was acting as the assistant manager.  When we had customers order within the store we would just take the customers name so that we can call out their order once it's ready and usually this isn't an issue. 

Well an older gentleman walks in 60-70 i'd say. He waits in line, approaches the counter places his order, but when I asked this customer for his name, I realized I had opened pandoras box.

Cus: "What do you need my name for?"

Me:"its so that when your order is prepared I can call it out for you sir. "

Cus: "You don't need my fucking name" turns to customers in line and says " Watch out! The fucking pizza guy wants your social security number." 

Me:" Sir if it is an issue you can just use a fake name"
Cus: "just put Bob on it"

and so i did

10 Minutes later his Pizza is hot and fresh from the oven, i walk to the counter and yell out to the store "pizza for bob". The guy doesnt budge. I realize now that this man has forgotten that he was ordering under an alias and doesn't know his order is ready. The other customers in the store however knew what was happening because they just watched and heard the misery unfold, they turn to "bob", they turn to me, they turn to "bob" and I can see it in their eyes, even the customers long for that malicious compliance. 
I continued to bring the other customers their orders, some who had been there before him, and once "bob" had noticed that i was serving food to those who ordered after him, he  approached the counter [ at this point the pizza is getting nice and dry under the heat lamp] it's been about 20 minutes since he's ordered. 

Cus:"Is my food going to be ready soon?"

Me:"Sir, it's been out of the oven for about ten minutes now, i've called for the name you gave me several times but nobody came to the counter."

At this point the guy is aware that he is getting his food late at his own demise. 

I hand him the pizza and there is no more exchanging of words, he leaves and goes on his way, the customers who witnessed the misery unfold were all snickering as he left. 

Not a bad gig. 

Just deleted this by mistake, first time on the internet.I broke this scenario down over in AITA, and was told to bring it over here cause it would fit in just swimmingly. 

I am currently 31 weeks pregnant and I work as a water filtration operator. Every four weeks, me and the other operators rotate onto the maintenance shift where we work under this particular supervisor, we'll call him Randy. Randy likes to think he has more control that he does have, and honestly, the plant supervisor just lets him think that. 

About a month or so ago, I was working with him and he told me to pick up a 45 lb empty nitrogen cylinder. I politely reminded him that I was pregnant and shouldn't be doing that, to which he responded since I didn't have light duty paperwork, it shouldn't be a problem. I sucked it up and lifted the cylinder and carried it to the destination, but received a pulled muscle in the process. The next day, I informed the plant supervisor and an work injury report was filed. When my statement was taken, the verbiage I used that was corroborated with another coworker that was present caused Randy to get in trouble because he knew I was pregnant and essentially caused the injury to happen. They took me to a nurse to make sure that my baby was fine and that I was okay and was not experiencing any complications from the injury. I wasn't other than being in pain if I moved too much. They sent me back on my way and the plant supervisor put me on desk duty for the day.

Randy was livid of course because he lost some of his manpower on the maintenance team. He made a fuss about me not having light duty paperwork saying that if I didn't have it then I should be capable of doing the work that is needed around the plant. I was capable, I just used common sense. Prior to this incident, I did my job to the fullest within the limitations of my body, which wasn't that much. I rested when I needed to, didn't lift more than my body would allow, and most importantly, I was the only female out of 7 employees so my other coworkers were more than willing to help me if I asked (which wasn't that often).

So the plant supervisor called me into his office and requested that I go get my light duty papers from the doctor ASAP. That's the only way he could protect me from getting further hurt at work. I told him I understood and made the call to the drs office and picked it up that afternoon. I got the paperwork that was supposed to keep Randy quiet and it restricted me as such:

* No stooping more than 2 times an hour
* No climbing ladders or poles at all
* No climbing more than 3 flights of stairs a shift
* No lifting more than 25 pounds
* No standing more than 30 minutes out of each hour
* And limited contact with chemicals

These orders of course make it very difficult for me to do my job fully as it basically limits me to either desk work, or general cleaning. Now Is know this list is bullshit, because I can definitely stoop more than two times in an hour. I may be out of breath coming back up, but I can do it. And the climbing more than three flights of stairs is ridiculous because that means I can't do all of my rounds. Someone else has to do the last set for me because you climb a set of stairs every time. 

Under normal circumstances, I would be more than happy to bend the rules here to make everyone's lives easier, but honestly, since he's the one who bitched and moaned for me to get this paperwork, I plan to make full use of it. So far, since I've received this paperwork, I keep a checklist of all of the things I can't do and fill it like a bingo card. If I fill all of the things; to the office I go because that means I can't do anymore physical work on shift. And he has a bad habit of tossing a lot of work my way in the beginning of my shifts.So this isn't malicious compliance in the exact sense of the word but pretty much the same effect.

I (26m) started my first job after college 3.5 years ago. I was hired with a group of 25 people. I used to run a lot of clubs in college and had this I need to finish my job as best as I possibly can attitude when I first joined. I was good at what I did and put in considerably more work than other people who joined with me. Another huge motivation behind this was that since the initial pay wasn't good enough, I wanted to impress with my work and get a really good raise at the end of the year. 

So throughout the year, I kept working late hours, stayed at the office for 10+ hours on a regular. The way our work dynamic was I was the only one under my manager and we were both supposed to share the work on the projects. And slowly and steadily my manager started noticing I'm taking up extra stuff and he started offloading his work onto me too. Now I was essentially doing my own job and half of his job as well and had reduced the time it took to do those things by at least 40%. I was stressed and overworked but was getting exceptional weekly ratings so I felt it was worth it. How naive I was.

Appraisal time came and I went into the one on one with my manager. This guy tells me that while I have one of the best performance ratings in the company, they're not allowed to give freshers a huge raise and I received the same raise that others who joined with me did by doing the bare minimum. I was pissed. I told me manager that since the company has declared me average, that he should expect average performance from now on. He laughed there thinking I was kidding. I wasn't.

Next day onwards, every task that would be done in 2 hours now needs 8. Won't stay in the office for more than the agreed upon 8.5 hours. Won't finish up lunch quickly to get some more work done. Won't do any of your job for you. 'oh the client is asking for this document that I prepared in an hour? Sorry an average person wouldn't do it in less than four so I'm going to keep it with me while I take the next three hours to figure out how to update the table of contents (it takes 3 clicks btw)'. Oh there's something you need to ask after work hours? Sorry, it'll have to wait till tomorrow.

 Complaints started coming in quick about the delays in deliverables. Manager started spending a lot of time frustrated because he wasn't very good to begin with and now I wasn't taking up his workload. I spent the entire year working 2 hours a day while I spent the rest of the time listening to music, browsing reddit and watching him struggle. Left at the end of the year for a job that paid 3 times the salary. Some details of our projects get published online and last I checked this guy was running 7-8 months behind on some of the projects and, from what I heard from some of my friends in the company, didn't get any raise last year.This happened 20 years ago after i had just turned 18 and during my first adult job as a cook in a franchise that has a very creepy clown as a mascot.

After working there for 6 months, i decided that i preferred to work as a bartender so it was known that I was looking to find some other job in a bar. This is a bit relevant with what happened.

So, I was  supposed to clock out at 4 pm. As soon as my shift ended, I punched my card (yes, we used to punch cards back then) and I was on my way to change clothes so i can leave. As I was leaving the kitchen a big group of customers (like 10 or 12) walk in the store, so one of the managers, demanded me stay to help. Note, she did not ask me if i can help, she demanded that i help even though i had already clocked out. Being 18 and nice, i agreed to stay to help.

Around 20 minutes later and i was still in the kitchen with several orders still to do, so i was complaining to the second manager who is also working the kitchen at the time that i really needed to go.

For some reason, the other manager (the one that demanded that i stayed to help) overheard my complaint and starts yelling at me that i am useless and that i should be grateful that i have a job and that i shouldn't say these things as she knows i am searching for another job and she could fire me on the spot. Mind you, she was not working the kitchen she just entered the kitchen to grab some stuff. So i told her that i had already finished my shift and i was not getting paid for the extra time i was there, and that I was already late for the plans i had. So she yelled to me:

"If you want to leave now, i might as well quit"

Cue Malicious Compliance. I followed her instruction to the letter. I told her:

"Yes, I want to leave now, so i quit!"

I took off my shirt and pants (as they were company issued), and went to pick up my stuff wearing only my underwear. Even after picking up my clothes i didn't bother to get dressed just walked out of the front door in my underwear. My shoes were also mine so i was not barefoot. I walked to my car, where i put on the rest of my clothes.

This happened in full view of the customers as the kitchen is in direct view from the whole store. She was dumbfounded and some customers even clapped and cheered because they heard how nasty she was being with me.

Later i found out that she was reprimanded by the owner (probably because everything happened in view of customers) and i even got a small bonus on my last paycheck.  Within the next couple of weeks found a bar tending job that i kept for a few years. So in the end everything was for the best.

&#x200B;

Edit: Because people are asking, I am not from the USA. In my country you can legally work in a bar at the age of 18.

Edit 2: Because i see a lot of people hang up on the "people cheered" part. When i left the customers that were there told me that i did the right thing and clapped. I didn't say that i got a standing ovation and I never said "everyone". I just said some people. In my country people cheer and clap for all shorts of stupid things. Glasses fall down and break, people cheer. People get in a fight, people cheer. It  is more common than you would think.

But even if you do not believe me, that's ok :) I just wish that i was able to entertain you...

Edit 3: Because people are asking, I am from Greece. Although from my understanding the same thing (cheering for things that break) is happening all around the world. I saw many people mentioning the UK and Australia.Many years ago I used to work as a web developer at a medical center where the types of people in that org were, let’s say, tenured. Many comfortable people who have been working there for 8+ years. Not the least of all was our manager who had been there for 20+ years and fancied herself a dictator.

I was the youngest there followed by the other developer. Engineering was a team of 2 myself included. We had content creators, support people, designers, etc. But the engineering was just me and this other person, we’ll call her Lucy. 

Lucy and I would show up around the same time every day between 9 and 9:30. Nbd, we thought, since we typically ate quick lunches at our desk and stayed long after 5 to actually get some focus time in and get stuff done. Our manager typically showed up early around 7:30 or 8 and would leave the office at 3:30 or 4 to “skip traffic”.

Now, at some point, our manager was on some sort of power trip and decided it was necessary to call a full team meeting to inform us that “work starts at 9, not 9:15, not 9:30, but 9”. Me being a young smart ass decided to fight this tyranny and asked her “what time does work end?” , to which she very calmly stated 5. So I asked how come she leaves at 4. And she explained that she shows up early and therefore gets to leave early. I was on autopilot because the next thing I said was “But I thought work starts at 9 so how come you show up early?”. She explained that she’s made a special arrangements with the higher ups and therefore she is exempt from the rule.

So Lucy and I dropped it but we decided to show up exactly at 9 everyday, take a full hour for lunch, and leave exactly at 5. Meetings all day and work due tomorrow? Sorry but work ends at 5. Working on an issue where stopping halfway means it would take longer to pick it up tomorrow? Sorry but works ends at 5.

About a month of this and our backlog is piling up, our clients are complaining, and my manager is fuming at our reduced output. She sits us down and asks us why this is happening. We calmly explain that with meetings, an hour lunch, and work starting at 9 and ending at 5, there’s just not enough time in the day to get stuff done.

She dropped the policy the next day and instead issued a “core hours” policy of 10-3 where everyone is expected to be in the office then.A relative of mine dates an ER doc.  It was a typical slammed evening, and a lady arrived with a non-urgent, non "personal area" problem.  All treatment rooms were full.  

The doc suggested that she have a seat in the hallway, and they could probably get her taken care of fairly soon.

She started complaining about being in the hallway, and used the term "HIPAA."  That was all it took.

The doc said, "No problem.  Have a seat in the (full) waiting room and we'll get you a room when we can."

The patient said, "You know, Dr, I'm actually comfortable being seen in the hall."

He replied "But now I'm not comfortable with it."

She was there for six hours before a room was available.EDIT: This took place in 1992-1993.

I got a job as a security guard after leaving the Army. The company refused to pay very much so they had high turnover. Because of the turnover, they had very small raises built in at 90 days, six months and a year as an incentive to stay on.

My one year anniversary rolls around and I don't see my 50 cents an hour raise in my paycheck, but something more like 35 cents. So I called the boss.

Supposedly they wanted to give all employees a raise, so they did. Furthermore, I wasn't going to get ~~a raise for one year~~ my one year raise because, "You just got a raise. No one gets two raises at once. If your pay raise isn't enough, quit."

I spent the next week calling in sick and showing up late while job hunting. Called my last day, at the end of my shift, and told them I was done and they could find someone else, giving them no notice at all. Panic mode ensued. Everyone else was at 40 hours for the week and they hated paying overtime. One of the salaried managers had to cover for me. 

I'm a teacher now, near retirement. My raises are still shit.

ANOTHER EDIT: The MC is the fact I quit since they told me to, and did it in such a way that they were screwed for covering the position. The fact a salaried manager had to cover my shift for a couple days was the icing. 

EDIT: There was a lot left out. I left that shitty job to become a computer network engineer after college. Did that for a bit under ten years. The 2001 tech bubble burst put a lot of us out of work. I started teaching to put food on the table. After that I felt a calling and decided to stick with it. I'm now just a few years from retirement.This happened when I was around 12 years old. It was my birthday, and in the morning I came out and asked my dad what he got me for my birthday. He didn't even wish me, and he was quite busy with work as well so just smirked and said I got you the bunch of bananas there.

I was so upset and mad because he wouldn't even look up or wish me, I ate all 12 bananas because they were my present and I could. I'll never forget my dad's face when he found out.I live in a german speaking country and we are known to be very strict about closing times and time limits at our gouvernment offices.

I happened to witness some fine malicious compliance in one of these offices.
I work as some sort of engineer and went to an office which is dealing with formal requests regarding gouvernment issued assignments. If you want to get such an assignment you have to bring in paperwork in person up to a specific date. Because of the form and many things that happen in my industry it is quite common to bring in the paperwork on the last possible day. 

It was close to closing time and I was waiting for someone when a woman entered the room, obviously in a rush, heading to the counter where paperwork has to be put in.
The counter was empty at the time. While she rushes across the waiting area her paperwork slides out of her arms and falls to the ground, spreading all over. As she is trying to put all together a man, who looked middle eastern tried to help her but when he touched her she let out a shriek and told him to get back where he belongs and to not touch her paperwork. (Obviously a racist remark, telling him to get to his country of origin, a quite common statement here)

Without a word he gets up and behind the counter the woman was heading for. When she finally finished picking up her papers she heads to the counter, realising that he is in there. Just as she reaches him he puts up a sign saying "closed" and points to the clock which had just reached closing time. Her face went blank as she stammered to please make an exception but she surely knew from the beginning this was a pointless request. 
If she had let him help her, I'm sure she would have been able to put in the paperwork.

I just can make an assumption that she either wasn't able to put in the paperwork at all or at least had to come in again the next day. Surely not what her boss was expecting.After seeing a bunch of similar threads, I thought I would post my own story that was shared by a coworker friend and her former manager.

Back in my call center days a frequent issue among our female techs (my team had about 5-9 on average out of about 200) was to get someone who would insist on being transferred to a male tech. This happened at least once a week.

My friend (Valerie) got a customer who insisted that he speak with a man before even mentioning his problem, saying "No offense, honey, but I just don't think you're qualified."

If a customer ever requested to speak with another technician for whatever reason, the policy was to tell the customer to call back. When told this, the customer demanded to speak with a supervisor.

So he did.

He spoke with the only female supervisor (Liz) on the floor (who LOVED getting these kind of escalations) who asked the customer why specifically he felt the technician who transferred him wasn't qualified to assist him. Apparently Liz had a habit of letting any female new hires know that if a customer wanted to speak to a supervisor because they demanded a MAN, they are free to let her know.

It gets better.

Liz had told me that normally these calls end with a very resigned and defeated customer being transferred back to a different (and FEMALE) tech to resolve this issue.

But the customer that had escalated from Valerie refused to believe that ANOTHER WOMAN would be in any position of authority in our company and demanded to speak with *Liz's* boss. Liz told the customer that she was the final point of contact he was going to get and if he didn't like it, he could call the corporate office. The customer assured Liz that he would do so and hung up.

A week later Liz finds out that the customer actually DID call corporate to complain. However, unlike tech support, the customer interaction department of the corporate office was MOSTLY WOMEN. When the VP of Customer Service got wind of this guy, she made sure that the few male members of her staff were suddenly unavailable to speak with him, and even spoke with the customer personally.

Unfortunately ignorance often knows no bounds, so the customer continued to call back and harass the staff (using choice language and vague threats) until he finally managed to speak with a man - a representative of the company's legal department who let the customer know that all calls with him had been recorded, that they consider any future attempt to contact them to be harassment, and he can expect a cease and desist letter in the near future.

Liz said it was the first time she had ever had the legal team follow up with anything she had did before.Had forgotten about this story until the other day when I was chatting with a friend I went to high school with... it's silly, but I think it fits. (tl;dr at the end.) 

It was the late nineties, I was still wearing too much flannel and continuing my historical trend of keeping books from the library much too long. I had a paper due for my sophomore Global Studies class, so I naturally took out more books than I could read, wrote the essay, and completely forgot about the books piled in the corner of my bedroom. After a series of overdue slips sent to my homeroom, I eventually did return the four or five book one sunny afternoon in the anonymous drop book during a study period. Promptly moved on to bigger and better things.

About two weeks later, I was called down to the assistant principal's office in that space of time before classes officially started that was reserved for one thing and one thing only - the reprobates and delinquents were in trouble. I walked the halls thinking that surely this was just a timing mishap and I was being summoned to receive congratulations for some kind of award I didn't know I had entered into competition for. Yup, he just wants to prepare me for the surprise ticker tape parade. I was wholly unprepared to hear that I was receiving lunch detention, to start immediately, because I had not returned a single book, that I still remember was slim and had a white and red cover, from my GS paper research. I tried to argue that there was a mistake, since I was sure, like I am sure that I have fingertips, that I had returned it. But he could not be moved, and I was sentenced to indefinite lunch detention until I either returned the book or paid the sixteen bucks to replace it.

I left the office, late for first period, defeated, but kept my head held high at lunch later that day as I walked past the entirety of cafeteria, which held a couple hundred of my peers. Plastic food try in hand, I went down the hall to the old shop classroom that had since been moved and the awaiting detention. I checked in with Mrs. Brown at her desk in front and took an inconspicuous seat in the back. Staring down at my canned peach slices, I braced for the worst. A murderous ruckus were going to break out any minute, I could tell. But once my ears stopped ringing, I discovered that it was really a calm escape from the crowded and rowdy lunchroom. I eat slowly that day, enjoyed my young thoughts in blissful quiet, and wondered what kind of heaven was this.

To be fair, I did search far and wide for that book that first day. Attempts to find it in my locker, bedroom, and backpack were fruitless and the general consensus in my home was that the school was being ridiculous. I certainly wasn't going to pay for something I didn't lose. So the next day, considering my brief brush with the law and the invisible stain already attached to my reputation, I went armed with a book and my lunch past the maddening crowds to the detention room.

I sat there, day after day, for nearly two months of lunches.

In retrospect, to this day those remain some of the most relaxing lunch breaks of my life. I had around forty solid minutes to recharge in (mostly) complete silence with my reasonably priced lunch and whatever book I was currently reading. I had to recount my origin story a few times, since no one could figure out how the quiet bookworm of a girl who had never been in trouble before had landed in the wilds of detention, but I was mostly left to my own devices in this newly found peaceful retreat.

I was friendly with Mrs. Brown, who had worked for the district of my small town since I was in elementary school, and even hooked her up with a sweet Horse Whisper poster that she loved from my family's mom and pop video store. She must have felt bad for me, because somewhere around the one month mark she started up a collection to cover the cost of the book. She added the initial donation, but teachers who would stop by to chit chat would add loose change to it, and race to buy my freedom was on. After a few weeks she handed me just under seven dollars.

My love of solitude was no match for the guilt of carrying around that money or my mom who had just started a new job in the school district, so with a heavy heart I paid in full for the missing book and went back to my old lunch table in the thick of the action.

Months later, during the last week of school, I was called down to the library at my convenience and with sweaty palms forced myself to face the music over what was inevitably going to be yet another overdue book at the end of the day. Well lo and be-fucking-hold, the end of year inventory check had located the book as waylaid in the wrong section of the library. I received a few sheepish looks from the librarians as they refunded the money and apologized in a backward way that still made me the bad guy, as overdue books are the real blemish on one's character, so how were they to assume that I didn't lose the book. Remember my mom's new job in the school? Well she just happened to be walking by the library just as I was finishing up and to say that she laid into them is far too extreme sounding. But she did scold some stern faced librarians into giving me a proper apology. She also demanded that they look into reforming their system and, my favorite part, take the proper measures to expunge my record - she was very concerned about me carrying around the albatross of false accusation apparently.

And just like that my life of crime was over...

tl;dr: got lunch detention thanks to a missing library book, discovered I loved it, intended to sit there the rest of my high school career until the teacher running detention took up a collection to get me out. Book was found in the library and my mom chastised women who were likely as old as time itself.When I was 15 I started working for a particular clown who owns a fast food restaurant.  When I first started working the manager assumed I was 16 and I was given a red polo shirt to wear during my shifts.  There was a hierarchy to the shirts at this restaurant, white was for anyone 15 and younger, you got a red shirt once you were 16 or over, black shirts were for crew trainers, and the full button down shirts were for managers.  All of the shirts were made of a decent fabric except for the white shirt, which was very thin and practically see thru.

About a month after I started working there, the manager called me into her office and asked why I had lied to her about my age.  I told her I  had never once said to her that I was only 15 so I never really lied about it.  She told me I had to hand in my red shirt and exchange it for a white one, which I did.  I wore the white one for about a week and that's when I noticed after the first wash the fabric became even thinner and the shirt was practically see thru.  As a heavy set individual, if I were not wearing an undershirt, you would have seen all of my hairy manly glory underneath this sorry excuse for a shirt.  I asked since I had already been wearing a red shirt for a month, and the shirt colors really don't mean much, could I get my old red shirt back?  I was told that it was company policy to follow the shirt rules and I was denied my old red shirt.  

Cue the MC

There was a rule stating I had to wear my see thru company issued shirt for all my shifts, there was no rule stating what I had to wear underneath.  My dad had recently returned from Mexico, and had brought me the most touristy shirt from his trip.  There were four panels on this shirt, the first had a worm and a shot that said one tequila.  The second the same worm, second shot, much drunker and said two tequila.  The third, the same worm, third shot, very drunk and said three tequila.  And as I'm sure you have deduced the fourth is the worm passed out and it says floor.  I decided this was the perfect undershirt for a 15 year old register worker at the clown to wear underneath his see thru shirt.  I wore it for one shift before the manager came up to me.  She told me how much she didn't appreciate the fact that I wore such a vulgar shirt underneath my work uniform.  I politely told her nobody would know what I was wearing underneath my company issued work shirt if they weren't see thru.  When I went to clock out that day they had a brand new unused red polo shirt just waiting for me.  I was told to wear the red shirt from that point forward and to turn in my white shirts.This isn't my story, but I was able to witness it in all its glory because I used to work for one of the people involved.

Years ago, I used to work at a state government agency where my boss was a political appointee. Her mom was a bigwig in our governor's party who wrangled a political appointment for her daughter, which meant she had some clout behind her.

Let's call her Shannon.

Shannon was not good at her job. At all. She was frequently out of the office for "meetings" (e.g., two-hour lunches, coffee with friends, a bit of shopping).

She was also a bully and a tyrant. She bullied her staff and would hold the threat of firing over everyone's heads to get them to do what she wanted. She wasn't a micromanager because she was never around enough to actually micromanage anything.

And she was widely disliked throughout the entire building. This was a *large* agency, so to have a building where almost everyone disliked you took a lot of work.

The problem is that, as a political appointee, she was untouchable. The people who had the power to fire her couldn't because of her family. Even the number three person in the agency couldn't do it, and he was a political appointee as well.

But after a year of mystery meetings and time out of the office, her excuses were catching up to her. The agency director removed her from her job and put her in charge of "special projects." Anyone who's worked in a corporate job knows that people get put in charge of special projects because they were largely incapable of doing their previous job. They didn't get fired, but they no longer had any power.

This was Shannon's case.

For a while, she seemed to get the message. She shaped up, didn't have any more mystery meetings, didn't disappear from the building for two hours, and treated people somewhat nicely.

Of course, it didn't last and Shannon returned to her old ways.

Around that time, we got a new assistant director — we'll call her Tricia — who was also a political appointee. She was the number two person in the whole agency, and she was great to work for. She was very serious about her job.

She had access to Shannon's electronic calendar and saw what Shannon had been up to. She then cross-checked the security logs to see when Shannon was in and out of the building.

After her brief investigation, Tricia emailed Shannon with a list of dates and said, "Can you tell me more about these different meetings you were having? And why they took so long?" (I'm paraphrasing.)

Well, Shannon wasn't having any of that! How dare Tricia call her character into question?! This was an outrage! It was so outrageous, in fact, that Shannon wrote a resignation letter and slammed it down on Tricia's desk! That'll show her!

After a few hours, Shannon had time to think about what she had done. She remembered that she had a 1-year-old at home. She also remembered that her husband was an unskilled truck driver who made $8 an hour. (**Edit:** He was a local delivery driver for a construction firm, NOT a CDL driver.) And she remembered that she was the primary breadwinner for her family.

She went back, hat in hand, and apologized for her attitude, she said she was willing to try harder, and she asked Tricia if she could please possibly have her letter back, pretty please?

Tricia said, "Oh, I'm sorry, you're too late. I already processed the letter and sent it off to HR. I'm afraid I can't undo that."

Do you remember in the movie, *The Incredibles*, when Mr. Incredible fought the giant ball with legs? The ball was so indestructible and powerful, the only thing that could beat it was itself?

This was that moment. The previously untouchable political appointee had just been fired by the only political appointee who had that power: herself. And rather than protect her or do her a solid, Tricia would not undo her self-termination. She just let Shannon be her own undoing.

When news of Shannon's self-firing raced through the building, you could hear the cries of "What? Are you serious?" followed by howls of laughter as each new person heard the story.

Shannon was out and everyone who had to deal with her was much happier than they had ever been in that job.

&#x200B;

**EDIT:** Thank you to everyone for the great comments and the awards. That's very cool, and I really appreciate it. You all are awesome!I was working at a company that despite being a multinational, had a very small staff due to it’s nature (very specialized medical field).  This plus the constant staff absences from the office due to site and field trips meant that everyone, at all degrees of seniority, came and went from the head office, and “mucked in” and did whatever needed doing whenever they were there.  Eventually however, it came to the point of needing a dedicated office person, for answering the phone, data entry, filing etc. so the specialists could focus more on the medical work, and a girl was hired.  I was away consulting on a site set up when she started, and this is what happened when I came back and met her.

I got back in the morning, and wasn’t planning on working immediately after such a long trip; instead I was planning on (as I usually did on Wednesday when I was in the city) picking up my 5 year old nephew from school and going to the park with him.  We were going to drop off some papers and a case full of medical equipment at the office on the way.  So I arrive at the office wearing jeans, with a child in tow.  This is fairly unremarkable: our job schedule is non-standard and to accommodate this, drop-ins at all hours, in various states of sometimes casual dress are frequent.

&#x200B;

Me: Hi. You must be <*girl’s name*\>  I’m…(she cuts me off)

Office Girl (OG): What do you want?

Me: Just dropping off the equipment case and some paper work.

OG doesn’t bother to reply, just shrugs toward the back where the case goes.  I put the papers on the edge of the desk in order to wrangle the case into it’s cupboard.

OG: Don’t put them there! They don’t belong there!

Me: Where would you like them?

OG: Where would *I* like them?  They’re nothing to do with me! Just get them out of my way!

Me: *takes a deep breath, remembers she has no way of knowing who I am, or my role with the company* Actually these need to be entered in the computer, so should I just hand them to you or do you have an in tray?

OG: How about you do your work and stop trying to slough it onto me.  And that child shouldn’t be in here.  (My nephew, who has been in the office many times, looks startled at this, and a bit upset.)

Me: I understood you were taking over in the office...(she cuts me off again)

OG: That’s right.  And as the manager, I need to tell you that in future you need to dress appropriately and do the work you’re given.

Me: *another deep breath, trys to muster sympathy as she’s new and possibly hasn’t realized the jeans, and the child, aren’t out of line for a quick drop-off. I summon a smile, for a final attempt at making the encounter more pleasant* You know, I never finished introducing myself.  I’m…

OG: (to my nephew) Don’t touch anything.  Just because your mother (she meant me) lets you get away with coming in here doesn’t mean I will put up with it.  In fact you can go and stand outside. (nephew is confused and distraught at this attack, and bursts into tears)

Me: *suddenly not giving a damn if she’s new, and losing all sympathy and the smile* No, I don’t think so.

OG: If you don’t like it you can take it up with the CEO.  I’m a close personal friend as well as the manager here, and he’s happy for me to run the office as I see fit.

&#x200B;

Take it up with the CEO she says?  Malicious compliance time.  I know he will be in shortly, so I decide to wait and do just that.  Soon he comes in the door:

Nephew: Daddy! (runs over and gets hugs)

CEO: (to me) Oh great you’re back!  Have you met OG yet?  OG this is Dr <*name that is part of the company name*\>, my business partner and sister.  I hope you’ve been treating her well.  He takes papers off me and hands them to her. Then he looks closer at his son.  What’s wrong kiddo? Has someone not been nice to you?

We didn’t fire her, she just didn’t show up the next day.  Don’t know what happened to her after that; she never contacted us for a reference...

**TL;DR** Office girl gives herself a promotion to manager, claims a non-existent friendship with CEO, lies to and trys to bully one company owner, and makes other company owner’s child cry. Spoiler alert: does not have long career.

&#x200B;

Edit: Wow! Silvered! (And now gilded!) Many thanks, and I'm glad if people have got a laugh out of it.

And now platinumed? platinized? platypussed? Thank you, benefactor!  I'm a bit stunned at the reaction, but happy if this story has brightened peoples day a bit.

&#x200B;

Edit again: I was asked for a few more details, and to put them up here. (the following is posted in a down thread reply)

 

Everything after seeing OG realize quite how deep a hole she was in is a bit anticlimatic.

Once my nephew had been reassured that he wasn't in trouble, he was over the whole encounter, and really just wanted to go to the park as promised, and I wasn't anxious to upset him again. So when his Dad arrived, instead of the boy answering him about someone 'not being nice to him' (a paraphrase, since this was about 3 1/2 years ago) I simply said there had been a misunderstanding about nephew visiting the office, and that OG, my brother and myself needed to have a chat to clarify office policies, duties and the like. (She may have gone a little paler at this idea.)

I was deliberately underplaying things due to my nephew's presence, and wanted to calm down myself a bit too. OG knew that wasn't the end of it by a long shot. My brother knows me fairly well and could read between the lines that 1) something serious was up and 2) I wanted nephew out of the line of fire before discussing it. So he suggested the three of us meet up first thing the next morning, and I chimed in that as he had work to do in the office, he could lock up for OG, if she would just leave her keys.

Him having work to do was fiction, and her leaving her keys wasn't about him locking up, and "getting them back to her when she comes in tomorrow" was never going to happen, and we all knew it. But she was out of options, and I was out of \*\*\*\*s to give.

I was prepared to meet with her, give her a chance to put her case etc, document what happened, pay her whatever was owed, cross every i and dot every t, though the outcome was dead certain. I wanted it all by the book because she wasn't going to be given any grounds to do anything but go away quietly. Or loudly, for all I cared. But she was going away promptly, comprehensively, and permanently. However she didn't bother to show up the next morning (or tell us she wasn't going to), and that was the last we heard of her.

She was only with us two weeks, and my brother says her work was OK. To be fair, she does seem to have been polite enough to the very few clients she had any contact with- perhaps she didn't see them as office rivals. I think her behaviour was about establishing an office pecking order, and that's why she was so aggressive and tried hard to inflate her position and importance, despite being so new. Wow, did she misjudge that! It would fit with comments from the other staff who met her, some about being pushy, and disputing what was her work. I don't know why she paid out on me in particular. Because I was the only woman? (There was/is another, but she was on a site and OG didn't meet her.) Because of the jeans and child? Maybe she really did just have a bad day and handled it unacceptably. Douche level behaviour, but if she'd been a polite douche during this one sided pecking order contest, and apologized after, she might have had a second chance, and survived her second week.Today I was on my way to work, I was getting off the subway station still 10 min. walk away from work (the office in a very conflictive part of the city, traffic wise) when I started receiving a lot of Slack notifications (that even if you are "away" the person sending the message can force a notification push).

$TL (Tech Leader): Hey, the CEO needs a change on the platform because of the presentation she has today.

$PD (Me, poor developer): What change? When does she needs it?

$TL: A couple of style changes, but one of them an endpoint has to be modified. You are the only one with access to both repositories and that can push to master. She needs it ASAP, how far away are you?

$PD: I am 10 min. walk away. The change shouldn't take more than 15 minutes, at what time is the presentation?

$TL: No, she needs you here now. She said that you should ask for a $RideSharingService with the company account.

... five minutes later...

$TL: Where you at?

$PD: Waiting for the car, it's still about 5 minutes away. And it says it takes around 15 min. to get to the office.

$TL: Ok.

Got to the office about 25 min. later due to the traffic. CEO visually pissed. Started up the computer, made the fixes in about 15 -20 min. and then they told me that the presentation was still 5 - 6 hours away.

edit: Line breaks, was using my phone when I posted it.I just remembered something kind of funny from about 13 years ago. My sister was married to someone I shall call Major Dickhead. The guy was a mooch - he would brag about how much money he made, while hitting you up constantly for “small” loans (the one person I know who gave him a $25k loan never saw that cash again because they were (unfortunately) too nice to sue family). 😡 

Anyway, Major Dickhead got pissed when I wouldn’t loan him $40k and had been punishing me by not letting me see my nephew and niece (Major D wasn’t my nephew’s father but he was my niece’s father, and both still lived in his house). When a truce was arranged by my apologizing as sincerely as John Cleese did in a Fish Called Wanda’s window scene, he allowed me to once again send gifts for birthdays and Christmas but they needed to be arts and crafts type stuff (no electronics). So for my then extremely active 4-year old nephew’s Christmas gift, I included a box of 1,000 stickers. I made sure they were all shapes and sizes, ugly as hell, and (most importantly) that had been down voted because reviewers reported them as being almost impossible to remove. 

I hope that fucker still finds those fucking things every so often to this day and thinks of me when he does. This story happened to me in my college days many years ago and to this day, whenever I remember it, I let out a smile.

 I graduated in a traditional and very strict engineering school.  At that time, there were not substitutive exams of any kind, no matter the reason. So it wasn't uncommon for people to fail subjects because they couldn't attend the test day.

In the end of my last year, I don't know how or why - since  I took the vaccine - I got chickenpox. Luckily for me I didn't suffer at all, maybe a day with mild fever and that's it.  All the itching was completely mitigated with medicine. Although externally I looked really bad.

More concerned about my appearance than anything, I called and asked If I could take my exam another day. The lady who answered it immediately denied my request, as expected. Then, being as patient and kind as possible, I tried to explain my situation, but she was very rude and cut my explanation short, not letting me even say what my illness was. As a last attempt I asked if at least I could take the exam in a separate classroom. Then she told me to wait on the line.. I heard some people talking in the backgroud and laughing, after she left me hanging for more than ten minutes, she comes back just to say that there is no way. So I thanked her and hung up.

I don't really know what heck they expected, that I didn't come and failed my very last test? Hell no. So I went.. looking absolutely hideous, not a square inch of my skin didn't have a mad hash, including my face.

In the class, after the monitor arrives, he told me to remove my sunglasses and cap, as per regulations, and so I did, including my jacket and medical face mask. Oh boy, I'll never forget his facial expression. And then my fun begins, during the test I start to fake cough like a man about to die. Getting really good on my act, was really amusing seeing the monitor's reaction going from little apprehension to total panic, until he gave up and left, leaving the class unattended!

Barely able to hold my bursting laugh at this point, my  colleague who got what was going on, look at me also holding his laugh and shaking his head.

In the end I did pretty well on the exam and had my fun, including paying a visit to the lady who left me haging. Later on, after graduation,  I found out through a friend that I became sort of a famous joke, like the guy who came back from the dead to attend his exam.This a few years ago roughly 4.

I worked at an office about a 45min drive from my house and I had a friend who worked in the office I would give a ride home to it was on my way I literally had to pass bye her house to go to and from work so it was no big deal.

Well a woman who worked in my office lived really close to her and found out about the arrangement and wanted in she guilted my friend in to asking me since it was on my way I said ok.

Well at the same time my late husband's car was in the shop so I would make a detour to pick him up and he's a giant of a man 6 foot 3 and could not physically fit in the back so to make things easier my friend would just sit in the back.

Well the other woman known as Karen was a big woman not tall but big. So on the way home literally the first time she starts getting in the front I explain to her she has to sit In the back.

Well we get to my husband's jobsite and I park and text she jumps out of the car and gets in to the front I tell her to go back and strait up says no because the seatbelt in the back is to tight it hurts her chest.

I tell her it's to bad she can get out of she doesn't like it. Well she gets out and goes to the back seat..my husband gets there and climbs in I start the car and the seatbelt warning light is on and beeping. She has the seat belt off.

I say you need to put the belt on..I am.met with a No I can't it's easier if she's in front.

Well I say your in back were not going anywhere untill the belt is on she crossed her arms.like.a child and says I guess we're not going anywhere. 

I tell her if she doesn't put the belt on she can get out and walk home.

With a nice bit of snark she says well you better call me a taxi.... That pissed off and that's what I did I called a taxi.

She puts her belt back on but I say it's to late get out you have a taxi coming I say you can get out of my car now or the police.will be happy to remove you.

She gets out and her jaw almost hit the road as a drove away.

Outside my friend I never let anyone from work in my car again.

Edit: English is my second language I usally type on word but am mobile and was poopingNot sure if this truly belongs here but here it goes.

I used to work at a car company about 2-3 years ago as a telephonist on the night shift doing 12 hour shifts. It was pretty good 4 days working 3 days off and the pay was decent. 

However most people didn't take their job seriously, they would call in sick or just not show up for work at all and especially on nights when there were 4 only 4 of us. If one person didn't show up you felt it. 


I was a star employee. I showed up early logged in and started working usually from 6:30. I Never took a sick day. Changed my holidays to fit the companies needs and worked any overtime they needed me to work. I was so dedicated to the my role that I had worked on multiple occasions 18 - 24 hours as people wouldn't show up for shifts and they needed cover. It was my first REAL job and I believed in the company. 

I used the train system to get to and from work and always planned out my routes around as much as I could to avoid being late however on this particular day they were running a reduced service due to breakdowns alot of the trains had been repaired using less than stellar parts and the wheels kept sticking to the track when they hit the brakes causing wearing on the wheels in specific spots. So ALOT of trains were out of commission. On top of that the train I was on had been stopped due to a signal issue for 15 - 20 minutes this led me to being late. I had shown up about 10 minutes late to the start of my shift. 

Before I had even sat down my manager was giving me grief. Apparently they were mad because I had stopped other telephonists going home as someone had to work 10 extra minutes to cover my shift as 2 people were ill and couldn't make it in. Now I hate being late. I was already pissed off that I was late but my manager giving me trouble as soon as I walked through the door just irritated me even more. 

My reply to him was as follows "Apologies I was late however how many times have I ever been late? I show up 30 minutes before my shift every day. I have stayed late to covers days before the train had an issue and it was out of my control. I was stuck underground with no signal to call or text to let you know." 

My manager didn't give a fuck their reply to me was "You start at 7 you finish at 7. You are in early on your own time. Those times you have stayed behind you have been paid and no one asked you to."

"Okay then" was my reply. 

The next day was EXTREMELY busy. my colleague had left and only one of the morning guys had shown up for his shift to take over. As he sat down I began to pack up. At 7am on the dot I left. As I usually helped out when this happened everyone was surpised and had asked me where I was going. My only reply was "I start at 7 I finish at 7." 

This was my final shift and so I was off for the next few days.

On my first shift back I get pulled into the office by my manager with HR. They ask me why I left a single telephonist on their own. I looked at my manager and repeated the EXACT same words that were said to me. "My manager informed me I start at 7 I finish at 7" The look on HR's face was priceless. She WAS pissed. She already had a staff issue to deal with and on top of that one of her most helpful staff members had been mugged off by a manager. She told me to go back to my desk and she needed to speak to the manager in question. 

20 minutes later the manager came back in looking absolutely defeated. He never EVER said anything to me again about being late.This particular incident was back in 8th grade, but my mom's always been competitive about scholastic achievement. I wasn't bad at academics, but saved my competitive streak for more important things like kicking my friends' asses at Street Fighter.


Anyway, the morning of the math test, I felt absolutely unwell. The conversation went something like this:


"Mom, I don't feel good. I need to stay home."

"No."


(She's from India, they straight up don't accommodate sick days. Hopefully it's changed since. I tried to explain America is more chill about these things, but somehow it didn't work.)


So I sped through the test, handed it in, ran out the door - with permission - and vomited in the first toilet I got to. Yeah, definitely going home for the day.


As a result of subpar performance on said test, my grade for the quarter was an A-.


Cue mom: "An A- is the same as a B+! You need to do better!"


I was pretty salty about the situation with the test, so like any 11yo with cable and my own room, I binge watched Toonami instead of paying attention to my math homework* for the rest of that semester.


Shockingly at the end of it, I had a B+.


Mom wasn't pleased.


Some kind of generic yelling later, I came back with: "It's the same as an A-."


Welcome to the commutative property, mom.



Tl;dr: mom tries to get me to do better at school, but phrases it in a way that justifies doing worse

*Edit - I still did my homework, I'm not a maniac.I used to be a sales manager for a B2B Services company. We provided a service to business. Unlike a lot of companies we would not auto renew a clients service UNLESS they signed a new contract. The contracts were generally for 1-3 years.

All our contracts were signed on an Ipad, that recorded the GPS coordinates of where the document was signed AND we emailed the client a copy of the agreement instantly and in the email we basically said "If you disagree with this contract or would like to make changes contact us within 5 business days, if you don't we will move forward and bill accordingly" 

In addition one of the cancelation terms in the contract was dishonesty. If the client could prove we were dishonest they had a right to cancel without penalty. If the client acted dishonestly, we had the right to cancel their contract with us.

There was a client, that was actually quite a small account but always proved to cause a lot of headache for my reps. I remember calling the rep and going over the common issues I've seen with this client and I stressed, get the signature on the ipad in his office. I also stressed that if the client wanted to cancel, let him cancel because he's been proven to be very difficult to work with.

Sales man went to the sales call, signature was signed, clients service was executed according to the terms of the contract.

4 months later I get an email from a customer service rep, the client is claiming that my sales man forged the clients signature. I did my due diligence before calling the client.

* I checked where the newest contract was signed, it was signed in the clients place of business via the ipad
* I compared the signature on the newest contract to the many signatures on the numerous contracts we had on file with the same signer from the client they were all very close
* I also looked at the email that we went to the client right after the contract was signed, the client opened the link to see his contract 65 minutes after the contract was signed and did nothing. Also the link was open for several minutes.
* I looked up the clients current billing status, he was 45 days behind, he knew we didn't start charging late fees until 60 days behind and at 120 days we would began litigation/collection account status.

I called up the client and this is how the call went

Me: Hello this is Luther from ABC I was told you are accusing my sales rep of forging your signature on the renewal?

Client: Yes I never agreed to pay that much I never would have, I told him to give me a discount and I wanted to see it in writing before I signed

Me: And did he give you a discount and show it to you in writing?

Client: No he said he had to go talk to his boss and I never heard back from him

Me: Ok, and then what happened?

Client: Well yall kept up the service and I noticed on my billing it hadn't gone down but up in cost and I looked back in my emails and saw the sales rep forged my signature, and that's illegal

Me: Yes you are right, if the sales person did forge your signature that is illegal

Client: Well good to see that we agree on that

Me: After the contract was signed regardless if the signature was forged or not you would have gotten an email with a link to the contract asking you to verify that everything is correct, and if its not to let us know within 5 business days did you get the email? If you did get the email, did you review the contract?

Client: Well yes, but I was pretty busy and didn't open the email until recently

Me: I totally get it, we are busy now-a-days, so assuming he did forge the signature what would you consider an acceptable resolution to this? Would you want to end service with no penalty? Would you like a discount?

Client: I would want a discount

Me: And what would you consider an acceptable discount? 

Client: 3 months of free service

Me: Got it, well Mr. Client I got several problems with your claim that my sales rep forged your signature and before I fire this sales person for forgery and offer you a discount I'd like to see if we can't address those problems.

Client: Sounds fair

Me: The signature was captured on our Ipads, which records the GPS coordinates of where the signature happened, per the GPS coordinates it happened inside your place of business.

Client: Well he knows that right?

Me: Yes he did

Client: That just means he forged it inside my building

Me: Ok, well the next issue is that the signature on the renewal contract looks exactly like the previous contracts

Client: He just copied my signature, I know I didn't sign that

Me: Could it be possible someone else in your company signed it?

Client: No, everyone here knows I'm the only one that gets to sign those contracts

Me: I understand, the next issue I have with your claim is that the link to the contract that was emailed to you was opened 65 minutes after the contract was signed

Client: No it wasn't

Me: Yes sir it was, the reason why we have you click a link to view the signed contract is so we know if you opened the link or not, not only that it appears like the link was opened for several minutes. Which to me would indicate the person who opened that link reviewed the contract. Also the fact that no one ever responded to the email would indicate to me the person who reviewed the contract was fine.

Client: Are you accusing me of lying?

Me: Yes, and because of that I will be canceling your service with us effective immediately how would you like to pay your current balance?

Client: Your canceling my service and want me to pay?

Me: Yes I want you to pay for the services we provided

Client: I'm not going pay

Me: If your not going pay for the services we provided I'm going refer you to our collections department, and they will add late fees and if you don't pay them they will refer you to our law firm for litigation.

Client: We have a contract, you can't just cancel my service

Me: Actually I can, since I have good reason to believe your lying about the accusation that my sales person forged your signature, everything I have says you signed it. Our contract states that we cancel your contract for being dishonest, and that's what we are going do

Client: Fuck you *Hangs up*

I referred the client to collections, he eventually paid them without us having to sue him (honestly we probably would have just sold his debt to a collection agency due to the dollar amount not being high enough to be worth it to sue) 

TL:DR Client accused my sales rep of forging a signature, I canceled his agreement with us for lyingYears ago, I taught Sunday school on a voluntary basis at a megachurch in my town. There were so many children in this church that classrooms were made available to group children with Sunday school teachers for every year of their life until middle school and high school, at which point they attended a larger group with similarly aged peers in separate wings of the building. I taught two-year-olds, and loved every moment of it.

My classroom boasted a huge number of children, at about 20-25 per service. I was supposed to have an adult co-teacher, but all the other adult volunteers were sent to other classrooms with a "higher need". I had two high-school-aged volunteers, best friends, who often spent service time playing together, despite repeated approaches to asking them to play with the children (one of my volunteers was the director's son, who I couldn't replace because of his mother, and who clearly did not want to be volunteering).

Despite this, and despite inheriting a huge classroom full of several special needs children, my children played calmly throughout service, and enjoyed a routine and simple rules I set to run the classroom efficiently. Children arrived, played calmly, sang songs, ate snack, and went home.

Even in the face of this obvious evidence that my classroom was running efficiently, I was repeatedly asked by church leaders to adopt certain mannerisms around children I found inauthentic and frankly patronizing. I don't and won't speak in a high-pitched voice to anyone, child or adult. I don't and won't use words like "upsie daisy". These requests were persistent. It was the opinion of the church that I was not "warm and welcoming" enough. It was modeled again and again that the church would prefer I was overanimated in a HUGE SMILE HUG "I'M SO GLAD YOU'RE HERE" kind of greeting. 

One summer day we were all called (some 50+ room leaders and volunteers) into a mandatory meeting. You know those meetings where you instantly know they're talking about you? The policies on words like "upsie daisy" were now set in writing, and I was shortly asked to step down for not using these phrases. I was not allowed to prepare my children for the transition to a new Sunday teacher. I was immediately replaced (by a friend, actually) and was fairly crushed about the sudden break from little people I liked spending time with. And furthermore, it made me question my abilities to work with children, an endeavor I had already devoted my life to.

Unbeknownst to my church, I had long been working at a career in early childhood intervention, teaching a classroom full of two-year-old child victims of trauma and abuse with a heavy case load of special needs children. My coworker called me over one Monday, as I was the twos teacher, asking what I made of this email she had just received concerning a church with an out-of-control twos room requesting that someone come consult with their new staff and help implement some new classroom techniques to "manage difficult behaviors".

Naturally, I agreed to do the consult in person as soon as possible, and asked my coworker to let them know I would meet with them on a completely voluntary basis at their next Sunday service.

It was absolutely my pleasure to greet my church leaders and friend as their specialist consultant, to their confused surprise.

I walked them through all sorts of interventions and strategies I had previously used to create a calm classroom environment and strongly advised against the use of overly excited greetings and phrases like "upsie daisy" in place of direct redirective requests (e.g. "Please put your feet back on the floor.") It was my strong written recommendation that the written policies on these strategies be amended and for staff to be immediately retrained in accordance with actual therapeutic practices.

It was my last time stepping foot in that church, and will forever remain my most deliciously cherished memories of vindication.# Updated: New Information and Clarifications

This Malicious Compliance belongs to my Beautiful Wife, but since it is from many decades ago, from a time before we knew each other, we will call her Classy Flight Attendant here.

First the usual disclaimers: I am on a computer, so completely responsible for the formatting. English is both my 1st and 3rd language, and my mother was a school teacher, so I am also completely responsible for my use of grammar and spelling. Although I do not care to hear about it if the spelling tends to vacillate between British and American standards. Or the punctuation for that matter. Dialog is translated from the original language and is given as reported to me.

**The Setup:**

At the time of this event, Classy Flight Attendant is one of the top tier flight attendants for her country's National Airline. Strictly speaking, any of their flights that do not involve ports in the USA or its territories, are not required to follow all FAA rules. However, whenever they fly to ports regulated by the FAA, they are expected to follow those rules to the tee. Of course, it doesn't always work out that way in practice.

On this occasion, Classy Flight Attendant has just landed from Europe at her home airport in South America, only to learn that she is being turned around for a roundtrip to New York City. She protests. By the time she lands in New York, she will be well outside FAA rest period rules with all the consequences that could follow. Her supervisors don't care. They need her on that flight RIGHT NOW. And away she goes.

But she knows the flight to New York isn't the real problem; it's the return trip that will be pure misery. Her compatriots flying home from New York tend to be extremely entitled. They are coming from New York. That makes them "somebody" now. They will refuse drink service when offered, and then when the flight attendant is three or four rows further along push the call button and order a drink. They will keep an attendant hoping back and forth the whole flight for stupid little things, many of them things they could actually do for themselves. Classy Flight Attendant is tired, and knows that dealing with this entitled crowd on the return trip is going to be the worst.

As they get into New York, she is told to go check out an in-flight movie for the return trip. The suggestion is made to make it interesting enough to keep the passengers too busy to order the flight crew around that much. Cue the Malicious Compliance.

**The Malicious Compliance:**

As she looks over the options and finds the perfect film. It will keep the passengers riveted to their seats. Frankly, given the nature of the film, she isn't even sure why it exists in the cartridge format used on planes at this time. Perhaps because the format is also used on some yachts and cruise ships? She orders it.

Once on board she keeps it secret. She knows that once she pops it in and it starts to play, the systems in use at that time cannot be stopped. But any time before that, she could be thwarted. Mid-flight, as the plane is well out over the ocean on its way south, she pops it in: Airport '77. For those who don't know, this film is about an airplane crashing in the ocean and passengers and crew trying to escape with their lives from 100 feet under water.

The results are immediate and absolute. While there are many white knuckles, no one seems inclined to press their call buttons. And Classy Flight Attendant has a very quiet, uninterrupted rest for the remainder of the flight home.

**The Aftermath:**

As she is deboarding, one old lady is heard to say that she will NEVER fly National Airline again. When called on the carpet for her movie choice, Classy Flight Attendant feigns ignorance, claiming to have thought it was the much more comical Airplane! and that the name was lost in translation. She is given a 3 day suspension - which is for her a much-needed rest. Oh, and she will never be allowed to pick the in-flight movie ever again.

&#x200B;

# UPDATES and CLARIFICATIONS:

**Acknowledgments:**

First, let me give a very warm thank you to this community for your interest in me (the least interesting part of this story really) and my Beautiful Wife. For your support and also for your heartfelt, honestly expressed concerns about possible collateral damage from her actions. Even for those who have outright doubted the possibility that this could ever happen - even though it is strictly speaking contrary to this subreddit's rules to pursue such inquiries, I personally don't mind them and find them useful. To all who gave awards, if I failed to thank you any of you personally - at some points things were moving so fast I fear I may have - please accept here and publicly my sincere regards for your absolutely unexpected generosity and appreciation. This community is filled with genuinely awesome humans and I thank you all from the bottom of my heart (and on behalf of my Beautiful Wife) for all that you do.

**Clarifications:**

The least first, just to get it out of the way: My first language is American English and my third is British English. For those who argue they are the same language, have it your way. It was meant as a throw away line and a bit of humor. It did generate a lot more questions than I would have expected. My fifth language is also English, in a way, but many consider ASL (American Sign Language) to be a different language from English while still insisting that British English and American English are the same thing. This perplexes me somewhat, but again, not a hill I am prepared to die on.

For those who challenge my writing style by asking "Who talks that way?" Well, I do. Not your cup of tea? I understand. But thank you for visiting. For those who love it: Thank you. Sincerely.

And for those handful of eagle eyes who caught me in a misspelling (which I won't correct here - the Original Post remains untouched): Well done you! I did mean "hopping" not "hoping".

In an attempt to keep the story brief and leave out unnecessary details, I left out a few very pertinent ones. Many have been confused as to how Airport '77 would even be an option available on the airplane in the first place. The answer is simple: It wasn't. At the time this event took place, there were services that provided cartridges of movies in a format that was used exclusively on planes and boats. The airlines or cruiselines would pay a handling and licensing fee and the cartridge itself, I'm lead to believe, would track the number of uses so that proper charges could be made. This is why the movie could not be stopped once started. So it was rather akin to a member of the flight crew going to a specialized Blockbusters and picking a movie from their selections. Since they also served boats, it would include options that were perhaps not intended for use on planes. Consistent with public exhibition rules of the day, these were specialized versions of the movies that excluded foul language and nudity.

I also appear to have not made it clear enough in the Original Post that it was illegal for Classy Flight Attendant to fly into New York City without having been provided her mandatory rest period, and this not only risked the airline being penalized if they had been audited, it placed in jeopardy her FAA certifications, without which she would be unable to continue working in her profession. 

**Update:**

For this to make sense, a little context is needed. 

I first learned of this event from others who were around at the time it happened and not from Beautiful Wife herself. She is actually not particularly proud of this Malicious Compliance and doesn't like to talk about it much. However, for her coworkers on that flight and others in her company who heard about it, as well as her sisters; for them she is a legend for this as well as other events she doesn't like to talk about much. One involving an intended petty revenge that almost crash landed a 747 will likely be the topic of another post in another subreddit when I get the time to pin down the details and write it up. 

So it is that while I have gotten Beautiful Wife to tell me her version of the event, as well as to read and approve the Original Post, there was additional information to uncover.

While we were on a long drive to a family event a few towns away, I expressed some of the honest concerns from this community about collateral damage: the potential of traumatizing innocents and children, for example. In the past, she has expressed that her main immediate regret while the movie was playing was a legitimate concern she may actually cause a heart attack during the flight. Fortunately, there were no medical incidents forthcoming. 

Me: "But what about the children?"

Beautiful Wife: "Oh, there were no children on that flight. If there had been, I wouldn't have done it."

Me: "Wasn't it your usual 747? How is it possible there were no children?"

Beautiful Wife: "No. It was only a 200 passenger Jet. It was a special. That's why they wanted me on it."

The context there being that Classy Flight Attendant was in fact very classy and normally requested for any flights involving dignitaries, famous singers or actors or other specials.

It turns out the flight from New York that day was a special with two opposing sports teams, their management staffs and many rich promoters and others from the entitled compatriots living in New York City who had enough money to go to the exhibition game they were involved in. In other words, they weren't just the entitled, they were the uber-rich uber-entitled. There was in fact much less potential for collateral damage than I had always believed existed.

Also, because of the nature of this flight, her Malicious Compliance directly impacted the airline that didn't honor her mandatory rest period requirements, as the group on that special decided to use an American airline to return back to New York and never contracted such a flight again with National Airline.

If it were not for the prominent position her father held in her country at that time, I do not doubt for a minute that she would have been fired outright. She still really enjoyed the rest provided by the three day suspension. And the money lost didn't matter. She didn't actually need to work at all.

So, I hope you all find that additional detail as interesting as I did. Thank you all for being awesome!i was visiting my mother with my car, picking her up to go to a restaurant.

at her residence, i had trouble finding a parking spot, so i "parked" my car near an entryway. "parked" in quotes because i kept the car running and stayed behind the wheel, texting my mom to come out because i'm waiting for her, in case i have to move the car to let someone else pass.

while i was waiting for my mom, another resident pulled up in his car and went into the entryway. i had to move the car a bit  to let him in. the dude exited his car and came to me, red faced.

"what do you think you're doing? you can't park here, that's illegal!"

"that's why the car is running and i'm sitting inside. i'm not parking."

"like fuck you are! i am calling the tow service and you *better not move!*" and then he went into his home.

so i complied. i was pissed, but i stayed. technically, i could've just left, driving carefully around him. he never wrote down my license plate and i did not violate any rules. but he said to not move, so i didn't.

when my mom came down, i explained the situation to her, and she agreed with me, that i have not broken any laws.

a few minutes later, the tow truck came. i stepped out, with a bit of a scowl on my face, ready to clear up the misunderstanding, but instead, the tower took the initiative with a smile:

"ah, i see what's going on. you got blocked in. lemme fix that for you", and he *towed the other guy's car!*

in the end, the angry dude had to pay to get his car back, aswell as pay for the towing, since he called the tow service, and i got a nice meal at a restaurant and a fun story to tell.I used to work for a car rental company, I won't say which, but the name accurately describes the employees' daily experience working for them.

During my time, the company continuously changed policies regarding debit cards for rentals because of the large amount of fraudulent transactions associated with them.
This caused much drama with customers, in particular with return customers who hadn't been in since the policy change.

Around the end of each school year, many people rent minivans or SUVs to pick up their kid and a bunch of their stuff from college. I had one such customer who did not qualify for the rental vehicle she reserved. Per my training, I was not allowed to rent anything larger than a sedan because she did not have a credit card. When I informed her that I could only give her a Hyundai Elantra, she became enraged.
She stated that the previous year she was able to rent a minivan under a debit card, and I informed her that policy had changed since then. She refused to acknowledge that I was doing my job properly.

I repeated company policy multiple times and did my best to inform her that I was doing the best I could with the current situation. She refused any attempt I made to placate her. My manager eventually stepped in, and he broke down and did the rental for a SUV, against company policy.

The entitled woman smirked at me and pushed a stack of Post-It notes that was on the counter in front of me.  She said "You should not be in customer service and I'm going to report you to corporate. I want you to write your name on this paper."
Without missing a beat, I took the pad and wrote the words 'YOUR NAME' on the top sheet, ripped it off, and handed it to her. Apparently she didn't notice until she was in the parking lot with my manager and her husband to inspect the vehicle.

When my manager came back in the office, he said "Her husband (who stood silently behind his raging wife throughout the whole interaction) wants me to write you up because you didn't give them your real name" then he started laughing and said "but I'm not going to do shit because you followed the company policy and you did exactly what that bitch asked you to do!"

She gave us a horrible survey and it tanked our bonus for that quarter but it was totally worth it to put that rude woman in her place.So I recently started posting to reddit, and I have a lot of stories. This one happened during my first career, when I worked as a scientist in a diagnostic lab. I had been working for about 2 years at this point and had just been promoted to senior scientist.

I had two supervisors in my section, each assigned to oversee half of the tests being done in our small corner of the lab, Rory and Tanya. Tanya was the senior most supervisor of the two, and secondary to my department head she had the most authority over me on any given day. She also hated me. Never did figure out why, but she hated about 3/4 of the people working in the lab so I never took it personally. I just don't think she liked people (the lab tends to attract people like that, funnily enough. We always used to joke about being the rejects stuffed in a hole at the bottom of a hospital to be kept away from the general public). As for Rory, it's important to note that he had a very good reputation in the lab of never lying. He was never once caught in even a half truth, and he'd been working there for over 30 years. He was well liked and well trusted. This will be important later.

One day I was doing one of the more technically challenging tests that our department performs. It's long, fiddly, expensive, and easy to screw up. Only senior scientists are allowed to do it unsupervised, and this was maybe the second time I've done it alone. We are talking two days just to get it set up. It was a nightmare. While I was measuring out some gelatin powder into a beaker, I accidentally elbowed Tanya (our work stations were right on top of each other, this happened at least 4-5 times a day with everyone). I apologized and go back to what I was doing, but she flips out. Like full on rage screaming in my face kind of angry. After a couple of minutes of her tirade, she says "Just fuck off TerrificMoose, no one wants you here!" and then she storms off to her office to cool off.

Rory comes up to me, having seen and heard to whole thing and asks if I'm alright. I say I'm a little shaken, but nothing too bad and get ready to continue my work. But Rory had HEARD the whole thing, and he saw what test I was doing. He Whispers to me "Your supervisor told you to go. Best you do what she says, and if she causes a fuss about it, I'll be sure to tell the boss EXACTLY what she said to you." Now, I knew Rory's reputation, so I knew I'd be safe. I also know that being told to leave early by a supervisor meant that I was still paid out for the rest of the day, provided I had worked at least 4 hours of my shift (The lab was actually pretty generous with time off, even if the pay and working conditions were shit).

So I did exactly what Tanya had said. I fucked off home.

Now at the stage I was at with that particular test, I had spent about $4000 worth of reagents. Normally batches of 20 samples are run to try and keep the cost down, but it was still an expensive test when you include the nearly 3 days of work from a single scientist. This was one of Tanya's tests, and therefore Rory was not required to ensure it was done. No one in my section was very happy with Tanya, and she had gone off to her office and so couldn't see me leave, so no one went to tell her that the test was left unsupervised. Apparently she didn't come back for over an hour, and by then the test was ruined and had to be started over again. My boss was PISSED. Tanya of course tried to throw me under the bus, saying I had left without informing anyone and that it was all my fault, but good old trustworthy Rory told the boss exactly what Tanya had said. I love Rory. I couldn't be punished for doing exactly what my supervisor had told me to do, so I got away with it completely.

Unfortunately nothing overly terrible happened to Tanya. She got formally reprimanded and had to take an anger management course that the hospital runs, but otherwise she got no real punishment. She never yelled at me again, and was always careful to word things just right around me after that though so that was something. As for what I did on my half day off, I went to the beach to enjoy the sunshine I almost never got to see working in the deep dark dungeon that is the average hospital lab. I made sure to bring in the pictures the next day.

UPDATE: I was teaching a class with Rory today and showed him some of your replies. He's genuinely touched by it all. He does recommend not naming your children after him though, as his name was changed for the story.

Also to all of you saying that 4 grand is too much waste for a lab, in the grand scheme of things $4000 is nothing. Diagnostic labs will waste that daily just through simple errors. The boss was annoyed, but not disproportionately so. It's factored into the budget.Throwaway and vague details as there are work rules about posting on social media, also mobile so apologies for formatting etc.

I work in a support role for a global insurance/investment company. Over the last 6 months I’ve lost many an evening and weekend to unexpected work problems, with not even a thank you, let alone any financial compensation. As an example, being called at 21:30 and asked if you can log on, when you’ve met friends for a drink.

Where a job needs to provide out of hours support, a supplement is meant to be paid for being on call, with additional payment if you‘re required to actually work. 

My contract is based on annual salary, where additional work might be required for no extra pay/overtime if it’s considered business as usual(BAU) or known in advance (this bit is important). However, the work I’ve been asked to do on weekends/evenings is not BAU. BAU assumes processes work. If something goes wrong, someone needs to step in to fix it and it’s no longer BAU. Hope that makes sense.

A couple of months ago, I had the conversation with my manager about being paid for being on call. I was told the work I was covering actually fell under BAU, and as I was always given advance notice (I wasn’t) I wouldn’t be paid for being on call. Manager wouldn’t budge on this, so I made it clear I would not be taking my laptop home/available unless I was given advance notice I might be required to log on, to which my manager agreed.

On this glorious day I received a call from my manager asking me to log on as some critical data was missing from a file, causing significant problems with several admin systems. Trying to sound as sincere as I could, I apologised and said as I was not made aware in advance, and I’m not on call, my laptop was left at the office. 

This was met by an “Ah”.  To which I responded, “Good luck, and I’ll see you tomorrow.”

Expecting it to be a shit-show in the morning for muggins here to clean up, but it’ll be worth it.

Edit1: Wow, was cathartic to write this last night, did not expect this. Thank you for all for the upvotes and the silver and gold. I’m on my way to work now and will look to update once the fan has been cleaned of shit.

Edit2: So last night after the call to me, my manager rang around and finally got hold of a manager from P Team (Team I provide support to). Over several hours, between them they figured out that somehow a group in the system had not been run for the day (controls are in place so this shouldn’t be possible). To fix it they had to run the missed group, validate the movements, and then rerun processes to send the data to the admin systems. 

After looking into it this morning, this is for Team P to look into how they’ve managed to done goof on such a scale, a ‘near miss’ recorded with governance, who they’ll need to explain it to. This caused several issues with admin systems and a lot of verifying everything is as it should be this morning.

Following this, a group email has been sent around, to remind people that laptops should be taken home, as in the event of the building been unavailable/inaccessible, recovery plans are for people to use their laptops to work from home/alternate site. It seems the manager had trouble contacting someone with a laptop able to log on. 

I’m positive they’ll have no issues finding someone to drop everything at a moments notice going forward . . .

I fear that should I receive a similar call in future, I’ll not be in a position to access my laptop. Work\life balance is important, and I’m going to enforce those boundaries. The trouble is, it starts as a one off here and there, and you do it to be nice with the best of intentions, but give an inch and they’ll take a mile if you’re not careful. 

For some of those asking, I‘m already looking at other jobs. Although there’s definitely issues with the management in my current area, and employees being taken for granted (not just me), the company as a whole does have a good ethos.

Hope this provides at least a little amusement, and is only giving back a tiny amount of what you’ve all given me. I’m not planning on anymore updates, so this it from me. Thank you all, and don’t let the bastards grind you down!As part of my job working in complaints I write letters to customers. We don’t use templates and each letter is tailored to the individual. Sometimes customers raise multiple complaint points and each point is carefully addressed in the letter we send. We outline everything the customer is unhappy with, our full investigation and what we are doing to put this right. Or alternatively explaining carefully why their complaint is not justified.

A new manager “Steve” was hired a few months ago and he decided that we were wasting too much time writing letters and he was going to come up with a template for us to use as we were obviously too “simple” to understand how letters are meant to work.

So he goes off and drafts a template and proudly shares it with us all. It was shit, to put it bluntly. It was full of typos and grammatical errors. But it also did not contain details of what the complaint was about or how we had resolved it. 
Of course this was pointed out to him in full why this was not appropriate and why it would lead to more complaints and it’s basically terrible customer service. 
He lost his temper screamed and yelled until 3 separate people cried and 2 logged out of the virtual meeting. 

Afterwards he sent an email saying he wants his letter used EXACTLY as he has attached it.
Who am I to argue? I sent the letters exactly as he had written them. Copied and pasted to ensure nothing was changed EXACTLY as he asked. Right down to his signature and contact details at the bottom of the letter. 

I told the rest of the team and they all are sending letters with Steve’s details too. Within the first week he had 40 customers call him and email complaining about the letter we had sent.
The week after 50 irate customers.

Steve hasn’t looked into the complaint so he doesn’t know how to address any of the customers or understand their issues. 
So I get phone calls day in and day out “this man is livid what was his complaint about”
Each time I reply “oh it should all be explained in the letter I sent. You know the one detailing all complaint points, my investigation and resolution in full. I would just check that. Bye” 

The whole department is now under investigation as customer satisfaction has tanked. Best bit is each and every dissatisfaction is scored against Steve. Every other member of staff has 100% satisfaction as nothing is logged against us- our name isn’t on the letter. 
Steve is on zero%. It’s a terrible shame


Edit: goodness me this blew up. Thank you. 
Hopefully Steve will get fired soon. We work in complaints we’re pretty thick skinned. To make 3 staff actually cry takes some serious work. He’s vile.
I will provide an update if management ever get their act together enough to listen to our concerns.

I do feel bad for the customers involved though. 
The customers that are complaining about the letter don’t know that their complaint is upheld and that I’ve sent them compensation or flowers. They would normally get a letter apologizing deeply explaining what went wrong and how we will resolve it going forward. Those customers are normally absolute dreams the only time they come back to us is to thank us. I have never in all my days sent someone a cheque and a nice letter and had them phoning to yell at me. Poor deluded SteveIt's 1993, and my first day of work as a secretary for a high-powered attorney in my hometown. He brags that, when people give a two-week notice, he immediately takes their office key, has them clean out their desk, and hands them a final paycheck. 

After 8 months of working for him, I call in "needing extra rest" one morning (I was at a job interview), then go in at 1 p.m. and tell him "I quit." He asks me to finish out the day's work, which I do. 

At the end of the day, he comes to my desk and asks me to at least finish out the week, stating I put them in a hard spot for not giving a two-week notice. 

I remind him that on my first day of employment he told me he did not accept two-week notices and that is why I did not give a two-week notice. 

I received my final paycheck and walked out with a smile on my face!So this didn't happen to me, but an attorney that I work with regularly as part of my job.  He moved from a very high COL area to our rural community.  Sold his $2,000,000 house, paid off and inherited from his grandparents, and bought 50+ acres with a huge house in a bedroom community that has a lot of dairy farms.  He always used to say how it was much better living up here, both in terms of the lifestyle and monetarily, as his urban $2,000,000 house had property taxes in excess of $40,000 / year.

Now, in addition to the huge house, the property was mostly fields, 40ish acres, and had a 10-acre or so large woodlot.  After he moved into his new house, the attorney was approached by his neighbor, one of the area dairy farmers.  The farmer told the attorney how he had a handshake agreement with the former owner of the attorney's home/property.  The farmer would mow the fields for hay 2-3 times per year and would harvest a sustainable amount of trees out of the woodlot.  In exchange, the former property owner got 10% of the chopped wood, which was more than enough to heat the house all year long without having to run the oil boiler for anything more than hot water.

The farmer wanted to keep this arrangement going, as it had worked out well for both parties for over a decade.  The attorney thought the former owner was being taken advantage of and refused to do a handshake agreement, but told the farmer to give him a week to draw up a proper contract.  The farmer was not overjoyed with making this out to be more than a gentlemen's agreement, but agreed to come back the following week.  The attorney decided that what would be "fair" was that the farmer should pay him $1,000 each time he mowed the fields for hay, since the farmer would feed the hay to his cows for "free" otherwise (completely ignoring that the farmer was using his own equipment and time to do the haying) and that the lawyer deserved 50% of the chopped wood, not 10%, or at least the 50% of the revenue the farmer got from selling the excess chopped wood (again ignoring the equipment and time investment of the farmer).  As you can guess, the farmer refused.

This all happened in late 2019, when the fields were rather bare and the supply of chopped wood for the house was full.  Well here comes 2020 and now the fields start looking like garbage, because none of the other farmers will pay to hay the fields.  In fact, after speaking with the first farmer, all of the other area farmers are unwilling to mow the fields unless the attorney pays **them** $1,000 per mowing.  And, of course, come wintertime the attorney's woodpile is depleted and he has to use the oil boiler to heat his entire home, costing well over $300 / month in winter heating costs.

Now we come to early 2021, tax prep season.  The farmer, being a good a dutiful community minded citizen, informs the town that he did not cultivate any of the attorney's land for the entirety of 2020, nor did he know of any other farmers who did.  Well, as it turns out this is a big deal, because in our state farmland is assessed at a much lower value than residential property and additionally has a seperate and lower tax rate.  The attorney's land had previously been entirely zoned as farmland, except for the house and a few acres of lawn around it.  Now, the town sent out an assessor and rezoned the entire 50+ acres as residential, which more than tripled the taxable property value and imposed the residential tax rate rather than the much lower farm tax rate.  The attorney was quite surprised and furiously told me, and everyone else we work with, all this past  week how he's going to sue the town because they now expect him to pay $50,000 / year in property taxes.



tl;dr - City attorney buys huge farm estate in rural community.  Refuses to work with farmer neighbor who used to maintain the property.  Property now looks like shit, attorney has extra bills, and the entire estate got rezoned costing the attorney $50,000 / year in property taxes.Not my story, but my parents. 

Car involved: 2005 diesel Jetta (the generation before the recalled model)

About 10 years ago, my dad got into a bad accident in the Jetta (woman t-bones him at full speed, left side of the car shot to hell). He starts the claim through his insurance and they start the repairs. The insurance adjuster writes into the repair report that the insurance company put a lifetime guarantee on all repairs done to the car from this accident. Things that were repaired/replaced included the transmission, the condenser, the radiator, serpentine belt, headlights assembly, ECU, etc. Basically, a lot of big ticket items. 

So time wears on, and about three years later the clutch padneeds to be replaced so my dad takes it into the shop and then sends the insurance company through bill. 

Insurance agent: why are you sending this to us?

Dad: it's one of the things repaired after the accident that you guaranteed for life.

Insurance company: we didn't mean lifetime, we meant a year.

Dad: well, the policy says lifetime so you're on the hook.

After a few nasty grams between lawyers, the insurance company pays up. But now, my parents are pissed at the way they've been treated so they resolve to keep the car until the floorboards rust out.

Things that have been replaced on the insurance company dime since then: clutch, radio, left front tire (multiple times), brake pads and rotors, front bumper, driver door window motor, air filter, left side engine mounts, etc.

The insurance company tried to buy them out a few years ago but my parents refused, and since no limitations were put on the repair policy, the insurance company is on the hook for as long as my parents own the car. It's a manual diesel so it's going to live forever.

Current mileage target: 500kI work in healthcare where phones are not to be used while on the floor caring for patients etc., for privacy/WHS reasons, which is fine and understandable. 
Most of us have our phones on us or in the break room, and don't use them unless on break or away from patient care areas. None of us check our phones while busy and if they do, will always get called out for it by other staff. 

We were all recently in a meeting where we were told we are no longer allowed to have our phones on us, as it is a distraction and against policy, meaning not to be used unless we are out of the unit or off hospital grounds. 
A few people piped up and said they had young kids in care where their phone was the direct communication for the carers, or there are issues at home that they needed to have their phone to have quick contact if needed, even if it was left in their hand bag and could be checked on breaks. Not only that, but we have a half hour unpaid lunch break where we should be able to use our phones as we see fit, but this was also denied as it's still in a healthcare setting and could cause WHS issues. 

Now I know working in healthcare and personal mobile phones don't mix as it really is against policy, however the issue with denying us complete access was a total over reaction. The issues with requiring quick and direct contact with home or other outside work contacts was brushed off and we were told if the issues were that bad at home, we shouldn't be at work. Many people were a bit taken a back by this saying a lot of the home issues are resolved by a quick text back and not allowing us access to our phones while at work was a bit unreasonable. 
Our manager said if that is the case, we can give people her direct work number and for contact to go through her and she will relay the message to us or give the phone to us to talk to whoever is calling. 

So, cue malicious compliance. We all gave our at home/spouses/carers/schools/etc, the direct work line to call for any reason if they are unable to get in contact with us directly, and the phone started ringing continuously. 

First was a lady who's husband needed approval for a big financial decision at home. The next was a vet calling to tell a co-worker their dog needed to be put down. I got a call from my children's day care saying my son had been bitten and was bleeding (mandatory reporting policy). There were several other phone calls within the span of a few hours with my manager running to find us to relay messages or pull us off the floor so we could speak to the callers, wasting more time than if we were allowed to shoot through a quick text or take a quick phone call while on our breaks. 

The next day we were told we can have access to our phones while on break and to please tell our home contacts to stop calling the managers phone. It took a few days for everyone to get the message, meaning there were still many unnecessary calls coming through, but it made it obvious that the need for communication lines to be open at home was important.This happened about 6 years ago when I worked at my local pub.

Now for context the landlord operated on a “Grandma’s Rules” in the pub. Meaning anything you said or done that would offend my Grandma or yours then you’re out. You don’t offend Grandma. Simple. 

I used to supervise the bar while my landlord dealt with the office stuff to help balance the workload. It was a great job overall - decent wage, was right on my doorstep and the regulars were class. Except one. We shall call her Karen.

Karen was getting married to one of the regulars and was a complete bitch. She was this horrible morbidly obese woman who would complain about the size of the stools and how it doesn’t fit her. What’s worse is she doesn’t acknowledge you. She would just huff and puff until she gets a new drink - I HATED that and so did every member of staff.

One day I got fed up and ignored her because she snapped at me for saying hello. The situation went as follows:

Karen: “well aren’t you going to serve me?!”

Me: “Why?”

K: “Err, Grandma’s rules?! My grandma would be offended if I sat here with an empty glass for too long!”

I immediately had a lightbulb moment and waited my moment to strike. I served her as normal and spoke to my landlord about her in the office. I explained what I wanted to do and he gave me the go ahead.

I went back to the bar where she was spitting fire at the new bar girl I was training. I just calmly told the bar girl to ignore her, serve the customers. I then took her drinks, poured them down the sink and asked her to leave.

Karen: “WHAT ARE YOU DOING?!”

Me: “Sorry, Grandma’s Rules. She thinks you’re a bitch and wants you to leave.”

Spoiler: the landlord is actually a landlady and my Grandma.

EDIT: Woah this blew up - thank you kind strangers for your awards, karma and comments. My Grandma is an awesome human being!In high school a few friends and myself worked at a local chain restaurant.  We were fully able to run the day shift but had never really broken down the equipment and closed up for the evening. One particular night, a few of the night shift had called in sick, we were asked to pull a double and close the restaurant, which we did. Essentially worked from 10a.m. until after  midnight. Myself and my three friends and a manager. We were really tired but felt that we had done the right thing and helped out the company. 

The next day the four of us come into work another day shift. The day manager pulls us into her office, one by one, and informs us that she would need to write us up because we hadn't properly cleaned and filtered the fry grease. Regardless of our leaning in for a double, having never closed or been trained on closing procedures,  and having been given permission by the night manager to leave (meaning all closing work had been completed). After a quick chat with my friends, it was aligned that I was going to push back on the write up, and if the day manager insisted on writing up us, we would quit. I informed the manager that we were collectively not going to sign the write up slips. Her alternative, threat, was that we would be fired, to which I informed her that if she insisted on writing us up for helping out, pulling a double, not being trained,  and having been released by the night manager....then we would quit. Collectively.  Immediately. She responded with "If you don't sign the write up, then you will be  fired."  A staring contest follows, I eventually break in with an, " Ok. I guess we are fired then." We turned in our hats, quit symbolically and left. It was really really amazing,  my friend quit mid-burger prep,  my other friend simply walked off the cash register in the middle of taking an order. We clocked out and walked out the back, leaving only the day manager in the restaurant. Customers in line, customers at the drive thru.

Later that same day, we decided return to our place of prior employment. To have dinner. The night shift must have still been sick as the entire restaurant was staffed with managers from nearby restaurants (same chain), including our day manager, who was now pulling her own double, and the night manager that had released us the prior evening. There was nothing better than eating our burgers and watching the management staff fail at every station and knowing that their pride, lack of rational flexibility, and threats had resulted in one of the most righteous meals we ever ate together. 

Needless to say we were all employed at the next chain restaurant down the street in a matter of days. It's been nearly thirty years and I remember that stand off, her ultimatum, and our walk out like it was last week.I work in accounting and my assistant is out on this particular day so I’m working on invoicing. While doing invoicing, I come across a work order that has a higher expense amount than invoice amount. Realizing we will be losing $100 on the job instead of at least breaking even, I decide to question the project manager (Chad) about it.

Me- hey, I noticed this job has an anomaly. Can you explain it to me?

Chad- What are you talking about?

Me- See the expenses? They reach a higher total than the amount you want me to bill for. I want to see if that was a mistake or

Chad- No! It’s right.

Me- if that’s right, we’re going to lose money on this job. You won’t get commission and 

Chad- I’m telling you it’s right. (Chad then rips the papers from my hand.) See, we charge a 20% markup right here. (He points to the wrong spot and has the audacity to look smug.) See, it’s fine.

Me- (I calmly take the papers back and show him to two amounts side by side) I see that, but you didn’t account for that over here for the billing amount. The total billing amount is less than that. 

Chad- Look, it’s right and I don’t have time to explain it to you. Just do it and stop bothering me.

Me- no problem, can you just initial here so when our boss asks me why this job is invoiced so low, I can

Chad- sure fine, whatever. (Signs his name next the billing amount) now get out of my space

I go back to my office and invoice the too low amount. I sent it off, fully knowing this was going to backfire, and kept all backups and copies handy for when it did.

Next Monday, I have the boss in my office. The invoice in question is in his hand.

Boss- hey, you did this invoice wrong. (Shows me the invoice)

Me- actually, if you’ll look at the backup, Chad told me that was the invoice amount. (I show him where Chad signed off)

Boss- I’ll be right back

He left my office. Roughly an hour later, I get called in to the boss’ office. Chad is there, looking uncomfortable, and my boss is on the phone. He waved me inside and I sat down.

Boss- alright. We’re all here. Now, TandyAngie, please explain this to me.

Me- I noticed that the expenses on this invoice were higher than the billing amount. Chad told me that the numbers were fine, and to just do the invoice.

Boss- hear that Tex? (Tex is the sub contractor we used on this job)

Tex- yup. So what are we gonna do?

Boss- only thing to do is fire them. They’re either incompetent or cheating us. Either way, it’s bad for business 

I am now very concerned for my job, but I sit silently. I know I don’t have the whole story yet. 

Tex- I recon you’re right. Good luck. And don’t worry about the park job. I got an opening up tomorrow I can squeeze in.

Boss- thanks Tex. 

He hangs up the phone and turns to Chad. Chad has gone from nervous to mad.

Chad- it’s not my fault she can’t do her job!

Boss- you signed your name right next to the wrong amount. Now you’re either working with someone in accounting over in Tex’s company to steal from me, or you’re too stupid to work here. Which is it?

Chad stands, as does my boss. I stood as well,  not liking being the only person sitting. Chad says nothing.

Boss- you’re fired. Get your computer and leave. (Boss turns to me) Go ahead and fill out the paperwork for his leave. Make sure to add that he attempted to embezzle money.

I nod and leave. Chad stays there. As soon as I leave, the office explodes in screaming. I stayed in my office, doing the paperwork my boss asked me to fill out. I saw Chad leave later with his stuff thrown haphazardly into his bag. That was the last time I saw Chad. A friend saw him working at a cash register at a buffet place about a month later.

Turns out, both my boss and Tex had agreed to lower their markups for the job so the invoice number was STILL too high (not too low), but I didn’t know that until after the fact when my boss had me redo the paperwork for the entire job. Someone from accounting in Tex’s company had altered the invoice sent to Chad, and they were planning on splitting the difference after we paid the altered bill.

TLDR: Chad attempts to embezzle money for the first time and doesn’t pay close enough attention to his numbers. Got caught and fired.I am a radiology resident and luckily the facility I am working at allows for each resident to be separated in individual workstation rooms for reading imaging. This morning I grabbed one of the rooms, spent awhile cleaning it all up to make it safe for me to spend the day in. Another resident, who showed up late, came in the door and demanded that I leave the room because it was “assigned to him.” I chose the room because I knew the dictation microphone didn’t work so all reports would have to be typed and I was on a rotation that was light on volume, so it wasn’t a big deal to type the reports for me.

He started to squeeze his way in/box me out and because of his persistence I let him. I packed all of my things to head to a different room, got up and headed out the door. Right before shutting the door I told him, “oh by the way, the dictaphone doesn’t work in this room.” 

As I sit here typing this I am watching him read case after case (which he has to individually type), meanwhile, I have spent the day studying and relaxing in my new (cleaned) room.

Edit: No, the room was not assigned to him.So this story is going to be very short, as it didn’t happen to me, but to a fellow professor last year.

Last year, the university I teach wasn’t particularly strict on attendance. The only thing not attending would get you was a call asking if you want to keep paying for the class if you’re not using them at all. (there are no refunds, but they could sign you out midway through so you didn’t pay extra).

Aside from that, it was up to the teacher to control how they wanted attendance to affect their class. This one professor decided to be incredibly strict about it and the students hated him for it.

He would physically lock the door once 5 minutes passed, and would not open it again for any reason whatsoever. If you were 5 minutes late, you lost that lesson. Some students started sitting on the hallway and talking notes while looking through the glass doors when that was an option.

One day I arrived to teach my lesson and all the students are gigly and happy. It just so happened that the professor himself arrived five minutes late that day, and the students locked him out of the classroom.

For an entire hour.

I suspect he was too embarassed to ask for a key and in the process having to admit why he was locked out.

Needless to say he never locked the doors again.

Edit: I guess I should have mentioned it in my post, but I was reminded of this story after reading another post in this sub. This happened around may of 2019 and at the time it was very minor so I forgot about it until today.

Edit 2: english corrections lol

Edit 3: More english typos. I didn’t mention in the post that it wasn’t my first lenguage. I teach calculus in spanish, and portuguese is my mother tongue so english is a distant third lenguage. Sorry if anyone got confused by that!out a year back, my ex father in law took me to court for an incident that had happened 5 years previously. While still married, I got into a door dinger with his jeep. At the time I offered to buy a new door and help install it ( he is a self proclaimed mechanic and had the know how) the project fell to the way side, the door was never purchased and never brought up again. 
That is, until his duaghter and I had a falling out and we divorced 5 years later. So I got served and taken to court for $2,000. A made up number that he felt was adequate. During mediation, I offered him $1,500 and to never contact me again. At which he scoffed. So I told the mediator I'd like to go before the judge. I informed the judge of the original deal, and found a matching door from a scrap yard for $400. The judge took my side and granted my father in law $400. It was incredibly gratifying  hearing him throw a fit in front of the judge to "go ahead and file an appeal now" and have the judge tell him that wasnt his job. And  walking out if the court room as he angrily yelled at me that " he would be seeing me again." Still havnt heard back :)This happened a couple of years ago. I was working on a part time basis in a small firm owned by friends. Pay was not very good, but the atmosphere was and I was allowed to set my own timings. So life was good overall.

Then a friend whom I knew only through social media approached me for a job in her company. Even though they were offering good money I turned down the offer as I knew I could not get the benefits I was getting in my current job. Plus the commute to the new office was very long. I would have to travel 2 hrs one way and change 3 trains just to reach office.

A month later the HR of the new firm approached me again. They offered me almost four times the money I was making and I could set my own work hours. There was also extra pay for working overtime and on weekends. This was important. I joined the new company.

My friend did not know the terms of the new agreement I had with HR. She used to act like I owed her big time for the opportunity I got. So one day I corrected her. I told her that I had turned down the offer she had been part of and one month later I had had my own negotiations and I got much more favorable terms. So I was here because her company really needed me and not because of her.

I didn't share the details of my agreement with her, but we both realized that she was making significantly lesser than me. This totally changed her attitude towards me.

Now she wanted me out and I was determined to stick through for at least a year. So she decided that she would make it very difficult for me to work so that I quit on my own.

There are a lot of stories I have about how she tried every trick in the book to make me quit. I'm sharing some of them here.

She was my manager and was in charge of allocating work.

**Malicious Compliance - 1**

She started piling on more work on me than any other member of the team. I was happy to comply - she did not know that as part of my contract I would be paid 1.5 times the hourly rate for every hour I worked OT and 2 times the hourly rate if any work was allocated to me over weekends or holidays.

Every time she tried to ruin my weekend by calling me to office unnecessarily, I happily complied. This continued till the time I left the organization and told her how much extra money she had helped me make.

**Malicious Compliance - 2**

After the long commute to work, I used to be hungry so I developed the habit of stopping at the food court to pick up a glass of fresh fruit  juice and carry it with me to work.

My manager thought that this way she could harass me without actually seeming to do so. So she sent a notice that bringing liquids to office was a hazard.

Ironically she used to have coffee delivered to get desk 3 times a day. Well, I pointed out that the rule applied to her as well and if I couldn't have my juice, she couldn't have her coffee. She had to literally spend an extra unpaid hour at work every time she wanted her special coffee.

Meanwhile I was happy to leisurely sit in the food court - have my glass of fresh fruit juice with some snacks and then begin my work day half hour later than usual.

**Edit -1**

Whoa!! This blew up and how. I didn't expect that this post would receive so much response. These two were the least of the incidents of my work life with this woman.There are a lot of comments and messages about this post and while I would love to answer all of them individually, since they more or less relate to the same subject I'll add the clarifications here below.

1. A common question people have posted is why my manager did not know my **pay structure**. I work in India and here salary structure is kept strictly confidential. It can be grounds for firing to reveal or ask for someone's salary. Basically the way the system works is that every new hire negotiates their salary on the basis of last drawn pay, experience and qualifications. It is very common for two people working on same level to have vastly different pay structures.
2. **Overtime:** Usually people in Management level do not get overtime. I had a 7 year gap in my career and when I started working again I chose to work in a different field, so even though I was drawing a high salary I didn't belong to the Management level. My manager was not aware of it. When she assigned e work she assumed I would be working without pay.
3. **I owed her.** NO. No organization hires anyone on the basis of recommendation. They hire people on the basis of what they bring to the table, how they seem to fit into the organization's growth plans and culture. I was able to prove that I was worthwhile investment for the company.This goes out to all. If someone tells you that they did you a favor by recommending you - don't feel overly obligated. Yes they did you a good turn. But you got the job on your own merit. Be professional at work and do not go out of your way to return perceived favors.
4. **Was she a "friend"** \- No, not towards the end. Initially I knew her only through social media. As we worked together I developed a friendly working relationship with her. When she began harassing me, the dynamics changed. Though I made sure that nothing in my attitude, behavior or demeanor would give any indication of hostility from my end.
5. **Negotiations** \- How was I able to get such a beneficial pay structure? I was working part time before. The first offer I had was double my salary - but it actually worked out to the same salary structure since I would have to work full time. I took a calculator to my meeting with the HR and showed them how with my increased travel cost and time spent on commute I would be more out of pocket taking their job. This is how I was offered OT, flexible timings and a high base salary.

**Edit - 2**

Link to my other story about this manager. I have a lot of stories about her. As I keep posting them, I'll update the links here for those who are interested in following the saga.   


The Uber ride that didnt turn out to be a freebie like she expected:  
[https://www.reddit.com/r/EntitledPeople/comments/ndos8b/manager\_tries\_to\_scam\_me\_into\_paying\_for\_her/gyekio6/?context=3](https://www.reddit.com/r/EntitledPeople/comments/ndos8b/manager_tries_to_scam_me_into_paying_for_her/gyekio6/?context=3)I was working IT for Safeway Corporate. Throughout the day employees can submit for tech support by either calling the number or sending an email. As we were mostly a call center, the emails (called web tickets) would back up as everyone was busy on the phone. They would nominate a few agents to jump off the phones and call out on these emails we got. The average person would do 20-40 by the end of their shift.

I got assigned to a special group assisting other tech specialist with telephony engineering issues (phones don't work). We needed someone to work the night shift to help the night guys. I gladly volunteered. We got maybe 3 calls a night and that was for general tech support. I helped with maybe 1 thing a week. My manager asked why I wasn't very busy at night, I told him all stores are closed except those in Hawaii and we just don't have the same volume of calls. He tells me he wants to see me work web tickets at night.

I work a few web tickets from 10-11 when I show up and a few more from 5-6 but don't have much success as night and morning stock crews want to put product on the shelves, not reboot a printer that is probably already working just fine.

My manager calls me in and is saying that everyone works significantly more web tickets than I do and he wants to see my numbers go up. I explain to him that the majority of the tickets are for stores that are closed or for our corporate office in California where execs are sleeping. He says he doesn't want excuses. So that night I call all 200 tickets, it isn't difficult and doesn't take long because no one answers and I leave the typical voicemail explaining why I called and to please give us a call back.

The next morning my manager calls me in furious, apparently high level corporate execs called my manager personally wanting to know why they were getting woken up in the middle of the night by tech support. My manager asks "Did you call these people just to prove a point?" ... I could have said many things "just following orders sir", "Just doing my job", "What did you expect?", "do you know how dumb you look?", instead I simply replied "yup"

His reply: "Well played"

He no longer expected me to do web tickets at night.

Adding an update post below :)Background: Part of my job involves taking calls from the public to offer various types of support, this can range from tech support to helping people find services in our county that they need. My "team" is me and one other person, between us we have to cover 07:30 - 19:30 Mon-Fri and weekends as well. Because of this, and the fact that the company won't invest in call waiting for us, we can only take one call at a time. Our voicemail quite clearly states that we're a small team but if you leave your name and number we aim to get back to you within 5 minutes.

Normally people are rather understanding of our situation and are happy to wait for us to call them back but, as the world is full of impatient a\*\*holes, we often get voicemails just criticizing us.

&#x200B;

Now, this happened today and I've been wanting to react this way for a long time and finally got the opportunity to!

&#x200B;

Me = Me

Asshole Caller = AC

&#x200B;

AC: (Voicemail) *This is bl\*\*dy ridiculous, I was told to call this number but what's the f\*cking point in telling people to call if there's nobody to answer the phone!?*

\-AC calls again-

Me: *Hello you're through to -company name- CrackB3ar speaking, how can I help?*

*AC: Oh, so now you answer the phone. What is the point of having a number if you never bl\*\*dy answer in!?*

Me: *Ah, did you leave us a voicemail? I've just listened to it but unfortunately you didn't leave any contact details so I was unable to return your call. Thank you for calling back, how can I help?*

AC: *You should answer every call that comes through!!*

Me: *Well unfortunately there are only two people in my team, including myself and there tends to only be one of us in at a time so if I answered every call I'd end up having to keep putting people on hold and that really doesn't seem fair. Regardless though, you're through at the moment and I'm happy to help you however I can.*

AC: *You can help me by doing your job and answering the phone when it rings!*

&#x200B;

At this point I'm like, f\*ck you lady. So sod it, I'll comply.

&#x200B;

Me: *Ok, sure. I'm sorry that I've annoyed you, I'll make sure to answer the phone whenever it rings. Now, how can I help?*

\-AC starts to describe her problem-

\-Phone rings-

Me: *Oh, I'm sorry, the phone is ringing. I'll have to place you on hold.*

AC: *Wai...*

\-Hold-

&#x200B;

I then help the person calling, taking my sweet, sweet time. Like going above and beyond just to keep this other b\*itch waiting... plus, y'know it's nice to help people.

&#x200B;

\-Take AC off hold-

Me: *Thanks for your patience, now you were saying?*

AC: *How dare you put me on hold, especi...*

Me: *Oh, I'm sorry, the phone is ringing. I'll have to place you on hold.*

\-Hold-

&#x200B;

You can see where this goes. I think I managed to keep this going for about 15/20 minutes before she hung up and I'm in for the next 10 hours.... god I hope she calls back.

&#x200B;

TL;DR: Lady wants me to answer every single call that comes through, regardless of whether I'm already on the phone or not. I comply.

&#x200B;

EDIT: Obligatory (but also 'cause I wanna) - thanks for the gold stranger! :)

EDIT 2: Silver too! I'm enjoying this metal, thank you.

She still hasn't called back though guys, although there's still time in the day!!

EDIT 3: Platinum - motherflippin' heck yeah! Thanks dude :D - [this.](https://media.giphy.com/media/lS74OiH1JYYak/giphy.gif)

Still no sign of her but 4 more hours, here's hoping!

EDIT 4: I'm afraid they didn't call back, sorry to disappoint! Have a great weekend all... except that one person who called me a cunt... I hope you have the best weekend! <3This will probably get lost in New but thought I'd share what felt like a solid victory today:

I work for a pretty well known home improvement store, and we have a breakroom in the back with a TV for us to watch programs and sitcoms on our break. On this particular day, No one was using the TV -- it was turned off and everyone was on their phones, so I figured that there was no harm in plugging in my Switch and sharing the fun of letting people have a go at it.

While Im watching people play, my supervisor walks in and sees the setup. She informs me that "this is the company's TV, so you cant use it for personal entertainment." Big bummer, since people were having fun, but I cant lose my job, so I pack up my Switch.

That day on my way home from work, I pass by a house that has a massive honking old school CRT TV out front that theyre giving away for free. Its bigger than the TV that we have at my job and it still works!

The next day I haul this massive TV out of my car and into the breakroom. I get a few odd looks but I dont care. Too focused on complying with the rules. I plug this sucker into the wall right underneath our company TV, now tiny in comparison to the CRT and hook up my Switch to it for people to play.

Supervisor walks in and sees people playing on a bigger monitor. Im not using the company TV, but I am using an even BIGGER personal Tv. People are playing the Switch and having a good time. She tries to say something about how Im blocking the view or causing disruption in the breakroom, but the other TV is turned off anyways and people are watching intensely as two coworkers are racing around in Mario Kart, so I dont really think it was that big of a deal. Not really sure if Im gonna get a strike for this or not, but Itll be worth it if I do, and I think i might be able to argue that I followed the rules.

Part of me expects that this TV will "mysteriously" disappear and that security will have "no footage" of who might've taken it, which will be funny since its so big, but its the thought that counts.

Edit: Thank you for the Platinum!! What do I do with it?Crosspost from r/prorevenge

Doing collections that, occasionally involved speaking with businesses about past due accounts.

Their main tactic was postponment and delay, of any kind. Negotiations could drag on for months, even if you were speaking to the principal payee or their lawyer.

I would fax important paperwork, receive a fax confirmation and yet, somehow, they "didn't receive it". "Oh, gee, sorry. Can you refax?"

My response was to apologise for the confusion, and ask them if it was ok for me to continue to re-fax the paperwork until they finally received a copy.

I would always receive a smug "Sure!" from them because they had no intention of acknowledging receipt and planned on simply throwing the fax away.

So they thought...........

I would make three copies of the bill, tape them end to end, feed the first copy into the fax and, as the top came out, quickly tape it to the bottom of the third copy, making an endless loop for faxing.

Within the hour, I would receive a call screaming obscenities about their jammed fax machine and how much trouble I was in.

My response was "So you acknowledge receipt of my fax?"

"But, but, but, but......."

"Sorry, you said I could."So I have worked in IT most of my life


One day in a job I was in it was slow so the manager asked me to check the firewall logs for anything dodgy


Pretty soon I find indications of a female staff member accessing some racy content of the adult nature 

This staff member had a reputation for blaming her slow productivity on her computer/network/mouse etc so she was given no quarter 


I go up to the large office where she was is surrounded by many other staff members but here monitors are facing a wall and only she can see them


I politely as to speak to her in private for a moment in a meeting room. 

Her response "no I don't have time I'm too busy"


Again I quietly said it would be in her best interest to have this conversation discreetly 


Her " look! Stop wasting my time and say what you need to say"


I pause. Clear my throat and say loud and clear " OK the IT manager has asked that you stop accessing bondage porn sites on your work computer"


There's a moment of stunned silence where the staff member turns Scarlett and everyone looked at her including her manager.

Me "ok see you later"

And I turned and left the office

Corrected: spellingMy parents and I were on vacation a few years back, and hanging out at the Hotel bar. This place was one of those places that was cheap, but everyone who stayed there thought they were better than everyone else. A couple (Male & Female) walked in talking about how "Nice and quaint" the bar looked. They sat down at the table next to us. You were supposed to order your drinks at the bar, then sit down. But since it was a slow night the bartender walked over, and served them. 

Bartender - Hi, what can i get you?

Male - What wines do you have tonight?

Bartender - (Reads off wine list)

Female - Ooo, a Rose wine would be just perfect.

Male - Make it two.

Bartender - Sure that'll be $15

Male - We're going to open a tab.

Bartender - Unfortunately we don't do tabs here, you have to either charge it to your room, or pay cash.

He throws his room card on the table.

Male - Ugh, Fine. Charge it to that.

They laugh as bartender grabs the card, and heads back to the bar. Bartender pours their drinks, and brings them back over. The first thing they did was hold up the glasses. 

Female - Hmm, these are rather small, do you have any bigger glasses?

Bartender - Unfortunately those are the standard glasses.

Male - Really? We're paying $7.50 a glass, and you're going to get chinsy on us? Surely you have bigger glasses, come on.

Bartender (clearly annoyed) - Ok, I'll go check.

He went to the bar, and came back out with two glasses that I think were supposed to be for margaritas, but were atleast twice the size as the wine glasses. He held them up for them.

Bartender - How are these?

Female - Oh, those are perfect.

Male - Yes, thank you.

So bartender puts the bigger glasses on their table, then takes the smaller glasses and dumps them into the bigger glasses. 

Bartender - is there anything else I can help you with?

They didn't say anything, just sat there dumbfounded.

Bartender - Great.

My parents and I start losing it. We tried not to laugh, but we were all a bit inebriated I guess. Bartender looked over at us and smiled. My Dad gave him an extra $10 tip and said "Thanks for the laughs" Don't fuck with the people who serve your drinks lolThis one is short and the comments on another post here reminded me of it.

The city I live in provides you with one recycling bin for free. If you want an extra one it's $10. If it breaks for any reason they replace it for free.

When I moved into my house the old owners left the recycling bin. Both handles were broken which made it near impossible to carry so I took it to the dump to exchange it. When I got there I was told it was still usable so they won't replace it, but I could buy a new one for $10. After a bit of polite arguing I asked if there were any restrictions on how the bin breaks to have it replaced. They said no, if it breaks for any reason at all and is unusable they would replace it. So I placed it on the floor and stomped on it a few times, until it was in pieces. I then picked them up and put them on the counter and said "Excuse me, my recycling bin broke and I'd like a replacement please."

They had no issues giving me a replacement.Let's set the scene.
So this was a few years back. I have quite a few tattoos (basically all my chest, my upper back, top half sleeves and one on the inside of each forearm (about 15cm across)<<these last 2 are what started it all.

I worked for a cinema chain for a LONG time. Always had tattoos. I landed myself a management role.(more like a supervisor). The standard uniform was black shirt and black trousers. I prefer a short sleeved shirt due to being a bigger guy and cinemas being bloody hot.

My site manager quite liked my tattoos and other querks that I had. My area manager however did not. She would come in to the site, walk passed 8 other staff with full sleeve tattoos and make a b line straight to me. Stating that my tattoos need covering up and I quote "they're not offensive just alot of people don't like them". Now my tattoos aren't offensive they're just patterns.

She informed me that I had to wear long sleeves to cover them up otherwise I would face disciplinary action. I had read the employee handbook a few times because of other petty crap so I know it was the managers decision (my site manager) but she decided to over rule it. What she forgot was just because the normal retail staff HAD to wear black. Management were allowed to wear white. Just Nobody did cos it was hard to keep clean.

So what should I do? I know let's go and buy the thinnest cheapest most see through white long sleeve shirt I can find.

Now if you could only see her face when she came in next when I'm basically wearing a shirt more see through than tracing paper. (I'm talking you can see the colour shift from my individual chest hairs) and ALL my tattoos are on show for everyone to see while stood behind the tills talking to customers.

Needless to say I got to wear my short sleeved black shirt again after that.

Edit: finished a sentence.
Edit2: spelling

Thanks for the silver stranger.When I was 14, I was qualified fully in my country in a piano-playing performance qualification. I had worked really hard for this and was so proud, my parents too. I was too young to join paid orchestras (and they didn’t exist near me) so instead I handed out business cards to residents nearby in a fairly wealthy area and thought I could make some money teaching after school. Teachers in the area were charging €20 per half-hour so I charged €17 because of my age (edit: and *lack of experience* since someone got their knickers in a twist) and got very lucky that a few mums caught on and switched to me instead.

I quickly had 4-5 kids/adults to teach every single weeknight in an area I could bike around. This was roughly €400 every single week due to fluctuations of people cancelling and so on. An hour’s lesson was 50 min with a short water break and explanation of homework at the end. A half hour lesson was 25 min with explanation and homework at the end. I made all of this very clear and learned it was necessary through time to walk people carefully through homework and exam prep. 

These parents paid 10 lessons in advance every time, and I kept a calendar and updated parents weekly on where they were at. One parent would always ask for a full summary of all 10 weeks for all 3 of her kids and I was happy to provide it.

Suddenly one week she decided she didn’t owe me money for the next 10 lessons until I had “made up for lost time.” I was obviously very confused and asked her what she meant. She cited the reason that I cut 5 minutes off every 30 minutes and 10 minutes off every hour so I should teach that extra time before getting more money. 

Here’s the real kicker: her kids were horribly behaved. They were easily the most spoiled entitled kids I taught and often said things like “since we pay you, don’t YOU work for ME?” They were ages 6-11. She had also referred me to a lot of other parents so I was concerned about my jobs. Because her kids behaved badly and didn’t do homework I ALWAYS spent extra time on them, 5-10 min per week because they needed it. 

But ok SURE, you want me to work that time? NO PROBLEM. So I decided to tell this mother from now on I would set a timer and charge every minute on that timer and show her when I clicked it on and off, and gave a huge apology.

You can imagine her shock at the end of the ten weeks when she saw that the kids combined 30 hours was actually more like 36-37 that she had to pay. She never bothered me about timing ever again and rushed through every homework or exam prep explanation getting me out of the door :D

TL;DR - mum got what she deserved questioning the time I was teaching her kids when in fact I had been most generous with them. I made her pay all the hours with a timer.So, here in the UK, a 15-Rated film means that you have to be 15 to see the film, no exceptions. Back a few years ago, we had 2 ticket types at my cinema.  Adult and Child (it's since changed to incorporate a Teen ticket).  Child was Under 15, and Adult was anything 15 and above.

This guy comes in with his mates, back of the queue to get in, but can be heard throughout the foyer being all loud and obnoxious, and the generalisation I've found in my experience in the cinema is that if they're teens on their own and they're loud and obnoxious in the foyer, there's a high chance they'll be the same during the film and generally be a nightmare in the screen. I start to notice some other people in the queue looking over at him and rolling their eyes.

I get the pleasure of serving this guy. Comes up to me, still shouting over at his mates who are getting served by some of my colleagues, and asks for a ticket to see this 15 Rated film (can't remember which.  One of these low budget crappy horrors that have come out in their many sequels recently... Insidious, or Sinister, or Annabelle or whatever).  

He looks about 16/17, but since he said "a ticket", Work Script Autopilot takes over as I ask how old he is so that I can sell him the correct ticket type. Him being the person he is, and probably since he's gotten away with it before to get the cheaper ticket price, said he was 14.

The moment he said that, a massive grin washes over my face. "Sorry mate.  This film's a 15." holding back my glee at not having to deal with his bullshit for the next 2 hours.  "I can't let you in". No amount of begging and pleading would make me budge, so he asks to speak to the manager. Manager comes down, sides with me and he's on his way, day ruined. This is my dad's story, but he's not into Reddit.

My dad is a hard worker. This happened about 15 years ago. Worked for a company that fixed and rented heavy equipment (backhoes, scissor lifts, steamrollers, forklifts, etc.) His boss (the CEO of the company, whom he reported to directly) was a middle aged Italian guy whose grasp of English was tenuous at best. He understood what people were saying, but had trouble communicating his own intentions back clearly. On the other hand, my dad had zero grasp of Italian but spoke perfect English. However, he was a solid mechanic who would go on to make the machine bay of this company something approaching a Sherman production line a la 1943. Shit. Got. Done. And, even though he didn't always understand what the boss wanted him to do, he just focused on the reason he was hired: manage the repair bay, hire new mechanics, train new hires and off-site 'on-call' repairs.

Well, boss guy gets it in his head that my dad is going to 'replace' him as the leader of the company (because he's much better liked, speaks perfect English in an English speaking country and has basically all the department heads coming to him for help, even though he's technically only in charge of the repair bay.) And so, he calls my dad in, chews him out (we think, it was mostly Italian so my dad wasn't picking up on it, but the tone indicated as much) and manages to communicate that he's being fired for 'poor work performance.'

And my dad just smiles, shakes the guy's hand and leaves. And, thanks to his less than firm grasp on both the English language and business law, the boss guy just sent him on his way with his last paycheck and nothing else. So my dad started his own business. In the heavy equipment mechanic market. And, after telling all his old work buddies about the situation, suddenly got a bunch of new hires. And his old workplace suddenly had a lot of vacancies that the Boss had no idea how to fill (because the guy he'd hired to do that had just been fired.) He went under about 6 months later.

Sometimes, my dad drives past where the old shop was (on his way to a call.) When he does, he just laughs and laughs.

TLDR: A paranoid boss fired my dad because he was afraid my dad was muscling him out. My dad left and went on to create a successful rival business as a heavy mechanic repairman (and heavy equipment instructor.) His old job was shut down 6 months later.

Edit: For everyone who's been saying 'this isn't malicious compliance,' here's why I think it is:
When my dad was brought into the office, he knew right away that he was getting fired and he knew right away what the hell he was being fired for. Of course, the boss didn't say that the reason he was firing my dad was because he was feeling threatened by my dad's popularity and work ethic. Instead he just blustered through my dad's 'poor work performance' and fed him a line of bullshit about how 'he'd put up with it for a long time but enough was enough.'

And my dad thought about taking him to court. But then, as he tells it, a bolt of lightning came down from on high and he just reached out and shook his boss' hand. He knew that if he took the asshole to court, he might get money out of him (almost certainly would have) but his boss would have had time to think about things and try to force a non compete contract down his throat. By just resigning immediately, he knew his ex-boss would never even think of it until it was too late. And he double-timed it putting in paperwork to get his new company off the ground before ex-boss COULD think of it.

So maybe I didn't explain details and motivations clearly enough but, based on how my dad told the story, I think it definitely fits into Malicious Compliance.This is without a doubt the best outcome possible from a bit of Malicious Compliance I could have achieved. I was only aiming to support my wife's good deed, but this paid me great dividends. This is a bit detailed as it covers a long span of backstory with a very rapid response once the malicious compliance was engaged in. A TLDR is attached at the bottom.

**The backstory**

I've had a shoulder injury for over a decade, when it occurred I had an MRI and was told the cartilage was fractured and tendon torn, whilst healthcare is free in my part of the world the lack of income while I would be healing prevented me from doing anything till 2017 when I figured I had a well-paying job and plenty of sick leave available. So, I started the ball rolling on getting it fixed, I was initially put through physio to try and fix the problem (or at least strengthen the shoulder). I completed the physio and as expected the shoulder was still an issue (albeit stronger now). Forward to the start of 2018 and I had an MRI, I was told I'd hear from them in a few weeks to have a review....

...

...

6 months later after extensive nagging from my wife I finally called the hospital to see what was happening. Nothing like being told that the case had been closed. After a few firm but polite words my case was returned to the waiting list. Wife was happy, I was content to be back on the list (although rather confused that I'd been removed)..

So, I waited...

and waited...

and waited...

**The Setup**

My wife is a loving woman and I'm damn lucky to have her. After her nagging for me to chase it up falling on deaf ears (although this is also because my work hours make me unable to contact the hospital during their office hours) this tremendous woman decided to sort it out for me and find out what was happening, i.e. am I still on the waiting list? After all it was now almost 18 months since the MRI had been taken.

My wife contacted the hospital and after being transferred a few times was connected to the right department, unfortunately she got stuck with an absolute Karen. The first response from Karen after hearing from my wife was to tell her she's not authorised to discuss the case with her (I've made it very clear in the past that my wife is authorised to act on my behalf, I could only assume later that this may have been due to the reactivation of my status via phone). My wife tried convincing her that she didn't require any details, all she wanted was for Karen to confirm if I was still on the waiting list. Karen however wouldn't give up so easily and continued to block my wife's request. Could Karen call me to inform me of my status, No, blocked. Could Karen email me, blocked. As you could imagine my wife was getting a little frustrated by now. Finally, Karen did something useful, since she wasn't going to contact me, I could contact her. My wife reminder her that calling during office hours wasn't possible. Karen countered stating that's ok he can email us...

Wife: Thanks Karen, what's the email address? There isn't any on our paperwork.

Karen: That's ok, it's on the website.

Wife: I have a paper and pen could you tell me the email address.

Karen: It's on the website, you'll find it there.

Wife: Whereabouts on the website?

Karen: You'll find it on the website.

Wife: I understand you're telling me it's on the website, what I'm asking is where on the website is it? What should I be looking for?

Karen: I told you, it's on the website.

At this point my wife was frustrated and tired from trying to jump through Karen's hoops. She thanked Karen for her time and finished the call. Frustrated my wife contacted the local member of parliament for advice on how to resolve the situation.

During my evening drive I was listening to my frustrated, annoyed wife. She regaled me with the pointless call to the hospital and then her markedly better call with the local MP (member of parliament). I felt anger and annoyance. My wife had tried doing something lovely and had copped poor treatment from the hospital. My told me when I got home I was going to write an email to the Minister of health as that was the MP's recommendation... after a moment's thought I told my wife no.

**The Malicious Compliance**

I arrived home and told my wife that I was thankful for her time and effort, but it was alright I would take care of the situation now and I'm sorry that she'd had such a hard time that day.

I opened my laptop and downloaded a program. This program is designed for marketing, it will scour through a website and pull any contact details (email address, name, title, contact numbers, etc) and compile them for people to then cold-call employees of a company.

I typed up an email; detailing my case, history, being dropped off and returned to the waiting list, my concerns about the validity of an 18 month old MRI for surgeons and the supportive albeit succinct advice from Karen (I identified her department and name dropped her a few times in the email).

Returning to my email spider program I found a healthy 768 email addresses. :-)

After some thoughtful reflection I removed any email address that didn't belong to the hospital, leaving me with a still rather healthy 300+ email addresses. Copy, Paste into the To field. Then to continue to up my game I CC'ed in the department for the minister of health, the minister of health, shadow department for the minister of health, shadow minister of health and then the local MP.

I returned to my email and thanked the MP for their assistance, emphasising how thankful I am as we are in the middle of an election (It's amazing how helpful politicians are around election time).

I re-read the email one more time to make sure I had captured everything I had wanted... hmm, it needed just one more item to highlight the importance of the email.

*"I would like to thank Karen from Support Liaison for the limited support she was able to offer my wife despite her not being apparently authorised. I would also like to thank Karen for her clearly perfunctory instructions that the email address I needed to contact was on the Hospital website, albeit with no additional information as to the location of the email address I had to do some searching. Having followed Karen’s instructions I had found this email on the Hospital website. Admittedly it is only one of the 319 @hospital email addresses I found, I’ve presumed one of the remaining 768 email address not belonging to @hospital is not the one I am after (although I’ll assume no response from this email as an indication perhaps it is, or perhaps I should be trying the other Hospital sub-domains and associated websites?). If for some reason Karen’s instructions have resulted in this being inadvertently sent to the wrong email address please forward this to the correct department or Karen from Support Liaison (I’m sure with her cursory instructions she’ll be able to direct this appropriately). "*

With that little extra added I smiled and hit send.

\*\*As an amusing aside, I found over 3000+ email addresses when I included the sub-domains (I should point out that the Hospital is a large group of hospitals covering a large region)

**The Outcome**

***Week 1***

The following day I returned to work, in my lunch break I did my usual catch-up on emails. Except I noticed I had a few calls too.

9:11 - Missed Call

9:18 - Missed Call

9:25 - Email 1

Dear cyberphobia\_au,

Thanks for you feedback and I just wanted to update you and let you know that I have spoken to your spouse and given her the following information at this point.

&#x200B;

* I have logged your complaint and sent it to the Head of Unit for Ortho and Referral Management for investigation and response.
* I can confirm that you are on the Orthopaedic waitlist and have been since the 27.4.18.
* I have put a comment on our database under her details as emergency contact that states “*All information about appointments can be given to Mrs cyberphobia\_au as per      direct permission from Mr cyberphobia\_au.”*
* I will follow up and escalate the complaint about lack of support given to your spouse by the Patient Relations Coordinator she spoke to.
* I will keep your spouse and  you updated on the outcome of the Orthopaedics appointment as soon as I am advised.

I have a couple of questions I just need to ask you in relation to your concerns raised.

&#x200B;

* Do you wish to have any response or outcome from Hospital about this complaint relayed to the office of Hon. Local MP?
* May I please have your permission to put your email address on our database?

Please feel free to contact me if you wish to discuss anything further.

Regards,

Not\_Karen

11:23 - Missed Call (an appointment has been booked)

1:16 - Email 2 - Appointment Details

*\*\* I received an additional 38 automated email responses and another 5 responses from various individuals/departments wishing to contact me.\*\**

I responded to the email from the Not\_Karen and stated that I did not believe the details needed to be relayed to the MP at this point in time.

***Week 2***

I attended my orthopaedic appointment. The expected 2-3 hour waiting room experience was a brief 30 minutes to see the surgeon.

As expected surgery was the outcome.

I make my way to the desk to provide my details to be put on the surgical waitlist. The nurse behind the counter makes a quip about it being a priority.... *that's strange? I'm not in urgent need for this, I've lived with it for the last decade.*

I get told I should have some details sent out to me in the next week or so detailing my priority.

**Week 3**

I receive a call about my availability (standard sort of stuff), can I attend same day if they have a late cancellation (I need a few days at least to ensure transition for my work) .

On the Friday I receive some paperwork detailing that I am a priority 2 and should expect the surgery to occur sometime in the next 9 months.

**Week 4**

Monday morning, 9:20 - Missed calls

9:30 - Message from my wife - Call me

I call her during my lunch break, as she answers the phone I ask her 'So when is my surgery?'

**Week 5**

Thursday morning, I get stabbed, jabbed and arthroscoped. Kept in for observations and then released today on Friday. Only to come home and submit my first reddit post (typing this one handed has been a challenge)

*\*\* My wife received a call checking up on things and to inform her that Karen has undertaken a review of procedure and if my wife would like a formal apology from Karen... Whilst my wife was frustrated by her actions an apology wasn't needed, knowing she had been updated on how to handle things so others wouldn't face a similar situation was enough for us both... not to mention my exceedingly short turn around for surgery.*

TLDR; So, because I am defensive and supportive of my wife and she was told for me to email the address on the hospital website. I indulged in a little bit of malicious compliance and emailed 300+ email addresses from the website with a clear indication of sending it to a few thousand if I received no response. I not only found out I was on the waitlist, but I was seen to, I was seen to in record time.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

**EDIT -**

A huge thank you for the upvotes and awards.

Due to popular demand and to save people trawling through the comments;

The program I used to secure the email address was '*Atomic Email Hunter*', there are others like it out there too.

I am also based in Australia, despite the similarities to UK and Canadian healthcare.

For those who think Karen was let off easily I doubt the multitude of people who she works for/with who received this email would be thinking the same.

As an amusing/concerning side note the most interesting response I got from this was the Sexual Assault and Family Violence Counselling service. It took them 2 days before they responded, sure my email had nothing to do with that, but if it had a 2 day delay is a bit sad.Worked in a nursing home about 10 years ago as a RN on night shift. Had two small upper forearm tattoos (text)  upon hire, but usually wore a jacket to cover them. Was never an issue if I had my jacket off, always struck up a conversation about my ink and the meaning behind it. 

One day, the director of nursing announced that ALL tattoos MUST be covered at all times as to "not offend the residents or visitors". Okay, I worked at night, with patients who had some memory issues, so sure, whatever. Don't wanna "offend" anyone.

Malicious compliance- towards the end of my shift, I remembered the new rule. Management would be in soon. I took two large pieces of silk tape and covered my tattoos to prove the point.

Management (noticing the tape on each forearm)- "dalek_max, what happened to your arms?"

Me- "oh well you guys made that new rule that all tattoos must be covered, so I covered mine."

Management- "oh, I didn't know you had tattoos."

Me- "my point exactly. You noticed the tape yet never noticed my ink." 

Soon after, the rule was thrown out.This is from the 80's.  I was the East Coast expert on a big mainframe company network gear.  I was associated with the manufacturing plant, but I did customer site visits to help field engineering either install or more often fix installations that were not working.  

On customer visits, it was suit and tie. Since I often worked in computer rooms I never wore white shirts because of the dirt issue.  (Plus TBH they make me look like the Sta-Puff Marshmallow guy. ) Normal was an up and down striped button down shirt in a blue, pale green, etc.

Fly to Boston to work with a sales droid on configuration of a system they were trying to sell to a big bank.  Sales droid says minor change, first we need to go to this mandatory sales droid meeting headed up by the regional VP of sales.  Fine.

Get there, sea of white shirts ties and me in my colored shirt.  Sit in 5th row, room has about 50-60 droids.  

Regional VP gets on stage, doing his best "excite the troops to go out and sell millions" speech.  Clapping and cheering, etc.  Mid sentence he sees me and stops. 

"Hey you, where is your white shirt?"

Look around, figure he may be talking to me, so I point to myself.

"Yea you in the blue shirt.  ALL of my staff, everyone that works for me wears a white shirt".

"Ok, good to know, thanks"

"Thanks?!?! Get out.  And don't come back until you are wearing a white shirt"

"You want me to go, and not come back unless I'm wearing a white shirt?"

"Yes, get out now"

So I get up, walk to the aisle, turn and go "Hey, do you know who I am?" 

"No, I don't fing know who you are and I don't fing care. Out" 

"Super, then for the rest of you, I'm kiltedturtle the east coast expert in 'networking' product out of 'plantname' and I work for the Director of Engineering there. So I don't work for him, and it's unlikely that I'll be back since I don't own a white shirt."

Left. Flew home.  Frantic voice mails from the sales droid about his customer. 

Next day, dropped into Director of Engineering's office to give a trip report. 

He starts "So kiltedturtle, you were a big hit at the sales meeting.  VP of sales called to apologize and wants you to come back."  

"Nope, not going to happen.  He comes here, wearing a colored shirt and apologizes to me, I'll consider it."  

"He's not going to do that"

"Fine, not traveling to that region, I'll talk to people on the phone, I can do my job that way just fine" and walked out.  Called my sales droid and said we'd work on the phone, not coming back up.  Droid not happy, but understood.

Week later reception calls that I have a guest.  Go to lobby and there is my director and the regional VP of sales wearing a BLUE SHIRT.

Best apology ever!!

Edited to add: /u/Striderfighter asked why it was such a fast apology.  

So in the 80's network stuff was crazy expensive.  The networking part of the deal was worth ~$1+ million tying customers existing mainframes (fast host to host connections were new and a big deal) and some new mainframes; together so all in all $4-5 million.  And it wasn't going fly without some help.  So commissions for sales droid, manager, upper manager and VP of sales.  So a ton of money on the table for them.  

They got the deal.  And I got a surprise bonus. But I still had to go to Boston.

Edited to add:  Wow, this got huge overnight.  Thanks for all the awards!  And the points!!! And especially thanks for all the great comments!!!!This is short and sweet

Last Friday it was my daughters 16th birthday.
I kind of had force my son to take photos (he's 13) with my cellphone while she was opening gifts, he wasn't very happy about having the task.

I had to keep telling him to take photos, it looked like he was just standing there.

I haven't had a chance to look at the photos or move them to the computer. 

So this morning I go on my phone to look for a photo and discover that my son took over 2500 photos. He just held down the button for burst shots on everything.

Now I have to spend time deleting a multitude of redundant photos.My Dad was visiting us for Christmas and as usual, I got him to share some more stories about his youth and he shared a time where he used Malicious Compliance to not only shut up one of his bosses and get him into trouble.

Many years ago, back when Dad was a college student, he earned extra money for living expenses by working in a car manufacturing plant. The state at the time was a closed shop, which meant you had to join the union in order to work unless you were in an executive position. One of the rules said union set up at Dad's workplace was that no employee could work certain positions unless they had been trained for it. This included positions such as forklift operator and trash compactor. This was included in the contract and was a no break rule.

Enter George the manager (made up name). Unlike many in this thread, George was actually a nice fellow but to quote Joseph from *It's a Wonderful Life*: "He has the IQ of a jackrabbit" and didn't always think things through.

One Saturday afternoon, Dad came into work when George pulled him aside. "I need you to do me a favor, son...the trash compactor is jammed and I need someone to crawl in and unjam it. You're the smallest of us all so it shouldn't be a problem for you."

Now not only had Dad not been trained for loading the compactor but even he knew crawling in there would be a dumb idea. "Uh, George, I haven't been trained for this position."

George got all flustered and told him "Just do it."

Dad then got an idea for some Malicious Compliance "I'll do it but is it okay if I ask one of the other guys to spot me and make sure I don't get squashed?"

George said "That'll be fine, just make sure the job is done."

Dad then headed to his union shop leader Kenny (made up name). Like George, Kenny was a decent fellow but was very protective of his workers. Dad told Kenny what had happened and asked him to spot him.

Cue Kenny "turning at least five shades of purple" before storming to George's office. Dad told me the whole floor went silent as Kenny unloaded on George for trying to make "a poor college kid do something so fucking dangerous" and that "this will be recorded and written up." Kenny stormed out, leaving a frightened looking George quaking in his steel toed boots.

The compactor ended up getting fixed without someone crawling into it and George always asked if people were trained for positions before asking them to do it.The machine that takes in the bottles that have a deposit fee on them was broken. The machine couldn't scan the bottles, so the customers wouldn't get their money back. A customer told me about it, so i told my manager. He told me that i should take care of it because he was on break and the customers came to me. I told the customer that i couldn't help her and that she needed to come back some other time when it was fixed. My manager said that handling things in that way was also not acceptable. I started to get a little bit infuriated, so i decided to go back to the work i was supposed to do. Customers kept on coming to me with the same problem, so i went back to the manager who literally told me: ''you are at work, customers complain to you, it's your problem.'' 

I told my coworkers about it. They told me that i has happened before and that a mechanic was required to fix the problem. My manager got angry at me because i told him this. He told me that i needed to find a solution to the problem or i would get fired. I started thinking what i could do to fix it, but i couldn't figure it out, since i work at a grocery store as a 17 year old who has never fixed something like this.

Then, my stubborn side took over, so i decided to fix the problem my way. I took a broom, and punched a hole in the seal that keeps the bottles from falling down. Then, i put a big plastic bag on the other side of the machine for the bottles to fall into. My manager lost it and told me i need to fix it in a better way right now. So i put the plastic bag in his hands and told the 12 customers that were waiting for the machine to work to give their bottles to my manager, and he would take care of it. The manager then sent me home as he was raging and yelling at everyone. 

The next day i had to work again, and the mechanic was there to fix it. He told me that i made the situation with the machine worse, but that he had to laugh when he heard the story about my manager. I then heard that my manager got fired by his boss for losing his cool, and that i handled the situation very well. 

To this day i still wonder what story was told to the boss, but i still have my job, and the manager is long gone.Long ago in a land a couple hundred miles away, my father wanted to dress up the front corner of our property with a section of decorative fence and a few rose bushes.  Myself, being a tweenage boy and not having the good sense to be somewhere else, was drafted to help him one hot July Saturday afternoon.

We brought the new fence posts to the corner of the lot, along with a shovel and a post hole digger, and set about the task.  It was a long slow process, as the clay-heavy soil was fairly dry and hard-baked, and as such each hole was taking the better part of 20 minutes to dig.  This definitely wasn't on the list of things I wanted to spend my afternoon doing, but such is life.

Right about the time we started on the final hole Mom yelled to Dad from the house, announcing that he had a phone call.  As these were the days before mobile phones, Dad headed off to the house and instructed me to "Keep digging until I get back".

Lucky for me this hole went a bit different than the first four.  About the moment he got to the door of the house I busted through the clay layer into much sandier soil where I could get a couple inches of soil in one scoop rather than perhaps a quarter inch per scoop.  Easy peasy!

Now, I was a good kid.  I didn't cause trouble of any significant variety, I got good grades, and I helped out around the house when I got caught unawares.  But seizing an opportunity for malicious compliance was definitely among my personal strengths.

So I kept digging.  And digging.  Post-holer in, squeeze, post-holer out, dump, repeat.  Dad wasn't on that phone call very long, but I made good time and by the time I saw him at the door coming back, I was quite literally putting the post-holer all the way into the ground to the point where the tips of the handles were just below the surface of the ground, and I couldn't really dig because I couldn't open up the handles to squeeze the digging end any longer.  So, if I had to guess, I'd say that hole was about five feet deep.

Dad: "How's it going?"  
Me: "I think it's deep enough now."  
Dad: "Let's put the post in and check."  
Me: (Huge grin while he stoops over to pick up the post).

Dad proceeds to drop the post in the hole.  ***All*** the way in the hole.  See, these posts were maybe hip height when installed, probably about five feet long themselves.

So there's Dad, momentarily struck speechless, amazement washing across his face.  He looks at me.

Me: "You told me to keep digging until you got back." (shrugs)  
Dad: "You little shit!" (laughs)

Dad had to grab the post with his fingertips and pull it back out of hole, and it wasn't but a few seconds of work to refill the hole to the proper depth.  And to this day he loves telling the story of his maliciously compliant son.Several years ago I worked front desk at a privately owned hotel (non-chain) that had been a Days Inn five years prior.

The only way to book a reservation was to talk to the front desk staff. No online reservations, no third party reservations. About 50% of our rooms were sold to walk ins.

One holiday weekend we are booked full. Our elderly elevator is having some trouble with all the traffic and spooking guests so I close it and call for a repair man but it's 10 o'clock at night so I'm not expecting anybody until the next morning. All of our guests are checked in, our accessibility rooms are on the same floor as the lobby, so I'll just help out anyone with their luggage if they have more and put up a sign saying so.

In walks a woman I don't recognize from check-in. She plops a piece of paper in front of me and then  goes and gets lots of luggage. The paper shows her with a reservation at Days Inn at this address for tonight for a tenth the price we were selling before being fully booked. She comes back to the desk likely thinking that I have been checking her in all this time.

"I regret to inform you that we do not accept third party reservations; we are unfortunately are already booked for the night"

"I have a reservation! It's right there! I paid good money for it!"

"Ma'am, I believe you, unfortunately you are not in our system because we don't take third party reservations. They sold it to you fraudulently."

"You are just trying to steal my money! I have a confirmation number right there! I handed it you."

"Yes ma'am you handed me a reservation to a Days Inn. We are \[hotel name\], gesturing to a sign"

All of the signage inside and outside the building is correct.

"Also, this is for a fourth floor room, we only have three floors."

"I stayed at this DAYS INN last year on the fourth floor!"

This argument continues for a while with me keeping my cool, informing her that we are booked, all of our rooms are full, me insisting that we don't have a fourth floor, not Days Inn, don't take third party reservations, etc. Eventually she screams at me that I am going to take her to her room on the fourth floor, that she paid for, right now! I don't respond, just stare at her with a blank face until she slaps the desk and screams "Now!" again.

I don't mime making a room key, but I do grab my huge key ring and we both load ourselves up with her excessive luggage and climb the stairs. Once we get to the third floor I gesture to the third floor sign and tell her it is the third floor. I then use my maintenance key to unlock the door to the maintenance stairs which are not lit and she trudges up behind me not saying anything. I open the ~~floor~~ door to the tarred roof and walk outside. "and here is the fourth floor, I hope it is as nice as the last time you stayed here" I drop her luggage and go down the stairs back to the front desk.

&#x200B;

Honestly, had she been nicer to me I would have tried to help her get a room at a different hotel and submit documentation to try and get her a refund (or charge back) from the third party but since she screamed at me I left her and her luggage on the roof. Plus, she insisted she had stayed on the fourth floor, so that's what she got.

&#x200B;

EDIT: There was an option at the bottom of the stairs to go straight outside inside of coming by the front desk. I didn't see her again and she wasn't there when I went to lock the roof back up on my midnight rounds.

&#x200B;

EDIT 2: Wow. I can't believe the attention this got. Thank you everyone for all the upvotes, comments, and awards. It has made my week.

And yes, thank you everyone for pointing out my ~~quirky~~ incorrect spelling of 4rth.

I am going to make a couple of clarifications.

 For people concerned about her safety this was a flat roof with a 4 foot facade/wall around the outside. It was not open to the public due to it being a tar roof instead of finished, but I took breaks and walks up here occasionally.

&#x200B;

>I open the floor to the tarred roof and walk outside.

This was a typo. It was a regular door, not a hatch.

&#x200B;When I was a college sophomore, we had this professor, Mrs. Wang, in Religion Studies who would act like her subject should be our top priority. Although we came from different majors, Religion Studies is just a filler subject needed for students in this Catholic college. 

She wanted us to come every meeting because attendance is a part of her grade (which was fine by me). But she would give us too many research assignments for so little time. This class is a T-TH one. So if she gives us three research assignments on Tuesday, the outputs are expected to be submitted on Thursday same week.

This started a problem on all of us since we also have a lot of things to do from major subjects. But it would be a hassle to fail a subject like this. Retaking a major subject is acceptable. Retaking a filler subject is annoying.

One Tuesday, she gave us an assignment. A 4000-word essay to be submitted on Thursday. 4000 is a lot for us given the timeframe. And that week was the week before midterms, so it gave us a hard time.

But the catch, she wanted it on a single sheet of short bondpaper. Which is literally impossible to fit the 4000-word essay.

A classmate of mine, Nathan, asked Mrs. Wang about the single-page thing. Nathan asked if we could submit multiple pages of the essay to accomodate the 4000-word essay she was asking us.

“You are all stubborn. 4000-word essay in a single page. That simple.”

Mrs. Wang was already in her early-60s that time so I don’t think she had an idea of what a compressed 4000-word in a single page would look like when printed.

In every subject, we have a FB group for announcements, discussions between classmates and note-sharing. In some subjects, the teacher was usually the admin of the group. But since Mrs. Wang is not too fond of FB, one of our classmates volunteered to create a group for us.

The night before the submission, we were having a problem with our outputs. Some classmates who were done with the essay tried to print their outputs. The font was too small, even though the margin was already adjusted.

Here comes the malicious compliance.

Nathan, who was still a little pissed about the whole situation, posted a status on our group.

“Let’s give her what she wants. 4000 words in a single page.”

The comments were blowing up. Some commented they were thinking of the same and others were laughing. That time, the “hahaha” reaction button wasn’t still a thing, so literal “hahaha” were filling up the comments.

The next day, we were all excited about our plan. One by one, we placed our papers on her table. As she was scanning on some papers, she went ballistic.

“Why are the words in these too small?!”

Nathan raised his hand, “Ma’am you were clear about a 4000-word essay on a single page. That’s what it looks like.”

Mrs. Wang couldn’t contain her anger. She realized she was wrong. Instead of apologizing, she just told us to reprint our outputs and submit them on Tuesday next week.

We all agreed.

TL-DR: Professor insists on a 4000-word essay on a single sheet of paper... students happily complied


EDIT: To those who are curious about Mrs. Wang, here’s a summary. Aside from giving multiple repetitive assignments every single week, Mrs. Wang was not the most pleasant professor. Her traditional outlook in life and style of teaching was...

There was one time, she saw my classmate who dyed her hair red (not totally red, but a natural-looking red) and commented that “Satan likes to prey on people who color their hair.” Another time she claimed that some religions are bogus and cults and they pray on the devil. 

And although she didn’t really say it, I think she didn’t like non-Catholics. She would emphasized on doing the sign-of-the-cross every time coz “it wards off the devil around”. My favorite line of hers was when she was late during one of our sessions, instead of apologizing, she just said “better be late than never”. But she would get annoyed if WE were late. 

So yeah, it felt like a celebration outsmarting her one time.

EDIT 2: Sorry about some of the wordings above. English is not my first language, forgive me. What I meant is that she had questionable beliefs about religion in general. And she treated us more like high schoolers. Thank you for correcting me on that.So this happened a good 6 years ago now. I was just starting my IT career so I was a basic level 1 desktop engineer for a large financial company. My team consisted of me, a level 2 engineer and 3 managers - one for data, one for people and one overall manager.

Parking in town was either expensive or impossible and while management and supervisors got parking spaces in the huge multi-story next to the office, other staff members didn't get one and either had to pay the very expensive parking fees or park far away and walk. Being on a low entry-level salary, I opted to walk the 30 minutes into town (and often got sick due to bad weather). The level 2 guy lived a 5 minute walk from the office and didn't own a car.

When any of the managers were off, they offered their parking space to me so that I wouldn't have to walk which was very nice of them and greatly appreciated as it was saving me money too. One day, I got called into HR because somebody saw me coming out of the multi-story and got jealous and asked why I get a space and they don't. This HR manager was INCREDIBLY condescending and talked to me like I was a literal child with lines like "Back when I was your age, I thought the world owed me everything too" which is absolutely not my attitude but sure, go off on one like you know me. She said it wasn't fair on the level 2 guy because he might want the space too, she wouldn't listen when I said he didn't drive and even said to me he didn't want it after I asked if he was okay with me using the space.

At the end of the day I went into the management office and we were chatting about the day as we usually did and I told them about the HR meeting and said they weren't allowed to let me use their space anymore. The data manager then had a genius MC suggestion. She was a very selfless soul who sacrificed much of her time to help other people and this situation rubbed her the wrong way and she wanted to do something out of spite. She said that whenever any of them were on holiday, they'd just tell me that their parking space will be empty for the duration, NOT specifically that I can use it which is what we were told not to do from HR.

So the next time they were on holiday, I parked in their space and after a few days, somebody else got jealous and taddled to HR again. I was dragged into a meeting and asked why I was still using their space. I said that I just took a chance on an empty space I found in the multi-story (they were rented, not pay and display). She went and asked the data manager when she was back in if she said I could use the space, to which she said "No, I just said goodbye before I went on holiday for 2 weeks". HR then told her I was in her space in her absence and asked her if she wanted to raise a complaint against me. She said "No thanks, I wasn't using it anyway". Their hands were tied and there was nothing they could do to prevent me from using the spaces as they're allocated privately to the individuals for use even outside of office hours and only reclaimed when they leave.

TL;DR - My old data manager is a delightful human being and HR was a bitter old crow.

EDIT - alright, this blew up a lot more than I'd expected so I'm going to address a few of the common questions/comments;

*  Not in the US so I couldn't claim back parking as business expenses against taxes
* Lot of people talking about not being able to get sick from bad weather (really, THATS the part you focus on?). It was by far my worst year of sickness, maybe it was the exposure to other people on my walk, idk I'm in IT not a doctor but it definitely had an effect.
* Our contract stated that any perk (parking included) was not to be delegated to anybody else including friends, family or other staff members so yes HR had the power to question this and put a stop to it. Until we found a loophole of course.
* I'm now well aware of how fucked it was to have 2 engineers and 3 managers but honestly didn't think much of it at the time because it was my first job and I had no idea how actual businesses were structured other than what I was taught in GCSE business studiesIn our mid twenties my husband & I purchased and moved into our rather modest first house with our infant daughter. I may a big effort to meet & befriend our neighbours and all of them warned me to be careful of one particular person ‘Jane’. 

Jane had lived in the street for 3 years at this point and had earned herself the nickname “BigFatJane” as she was manipulating, intimidating and thoroughly awful. Jane ran a daycare from her house, but neighbours on both side reported hearing her scream at the children and leave them unsupervised in the garden. It’s important to note that Jane’s partner is a police officer, the neighbours were scared of retaliation if they reported her or stood up to her. It seemed Jane would use this to get away with her horrific behaviour.

Our house had a driveway with a dropped curb big enough for 1 car but we could fit both if you blocked in the first and only used the second car. Parking on the street was very limited and we had double yellow lines outside our house (not allowed to stop/park there). During some essential roof work our driveway was taken up by scaffolding and a skip so we parked in the street & my husband parked outside BFJ’s house. 

The next day when he went to his car BFJ came running down her path shouting at him. She screamed about his “anti social parking, that his car would be towed and that he could expect it to be scratched up if he left it there any longer”. My husband calmly explained it was a public road and she had not right to police the space. Her screeches at this point were loud enough that I (and several neighbour heard) and came to see the commotion. Her partner was perched at the door during all of this, saying and doing nothing. 

When she saw me on pavement with our daughter she pointed and screamed “You’ll have the Social on you if you don’t fck off! I’ll scratch you right up!” At this point I told my husband to come back and we were calling the police. She responded “Call the polic! I Fcking dare you! He’s (pointing at her partner) A police man! He’ll F*cking sort You out! You won’t know What hit you!” At this point my husband looked at her husband and said “is that right? And you’re agreeing with what she’s said!” The partner nodded and said “You need to Move or accept the consequences, you call the police, it won’t get you anywhere!” 

Funnily when I then took out my phone and dialled the non police emergency number (on speakerphone) and made a police report both of them Looked a lot Less confident. BFJ stood there open mouthed then grabbed her partner and slammed the door. And we haven’t heard from her since!

 Her partner was placed on suspension due to the allegation, and further allegations from our neighbours. He then returned to an admin role. After our confrontation BFJ was given a warning for a public order offence. However, due to a number of reports her daycare closed and she is no longer able to mind children. Their house is up for sale, however as she made a number of modifications without proper planning or works people it’s price is significantly lower than they expected and they’re in negative equity. All because of a parking space!

Edit: Sorry for the initial lack of paragraphs!In Germany (where I live) not all postal delivery people actually ring the doorbell. Some of them are assholes and just claim you weren‘t in. (On other occasion you are actually not in and the same happens). Then you get a notification and have to pick up your package from the post office within seven days.

At the post office they require your notification card as well as your legal ID. On this occasion however, i had forgotten my wallet. The lady at the post office would not make an exception no matter how nice i asked.
So i turned over the notification card and on the back there is a field that allows you to write down the name of a substitute person to pick up your package.

I turn to the person behind me in line. Ask them whether they have ID. They do. I ask them for their name, write that name on the card, ask them to pick up my package and stand by, observing the face of the post office lady who has no choice but handing out that package.

I am the sole communications/social media person for a small company. I went to school in this field and have done it professionally in a few different spheres. My boss, on the other hand, doesn't even know what a Facebook or Twitter page looks like or what any of the buttons do. Yet she still micromanages me all day every day and I'm going CRAZY.

I always schedule our email campaigns spread out enough so that people aren't getting bombarded (generally one per week at most). This is one of the most basic rules of comms and should be common sense even if you don't have a degree in this. Multiple times she has demanded that I post something immediately even though the next few slots are already filled with posts that are more time-sensitive. She always tells me to just send both in the same day and I have explained to her numerous times that that's a terrible idea (in nicer terms).

Well, I gave my two weeks notice this past Monday, so I don't care anymore about fighting for what's best for the company. This time, I said I was going to push back each of our scheduled posts by one slot so we can post the listing for my job vacancy immediately, because for once the new post actually is more time-sensitive than the others. Once again, she tells me to just post both the job listing and the one originally planned for that day. 

Fine! I sent out both. It's been three days and we've already lost 11% of our subscribers and nobody has yet applied for my job since that listing was buried.

I present stats on the success of our email campaigns, website, social media, etc. once per week to my boss's boss. I look forward to explaining this drop to him in a few days.So I had some "attendence" issues at an old job. Not really, the policy was that within five minutes of the shift is still considered on time. Well I had a manager who wanted to abruptly change corporate policy and define clearly that late = late.

So background, it's retail and I'm in my senior year of college. I'm not making a career out of this job, and I'm five years older than all of my coworkers. My immediate manager felt threatened by me, as I had previously declined leadership positions to finish school. He always had something he needed to "fix" about me even though I had seven straight months of "Rockstar" performance (exceeding metrics by +10% above goal) and I frequently aided in training new employees. Once again, this was a college filler not a career move for me.

I'm not a bad employee. However, I was a busy employee. My last semester working there I had five classes, and would be usually within a minute or two to my shift.

So manager one day specifies I'm late (it's 3:01 and my shift starts at 3:00) to which I said "marginally". He, in front of other coworkers decides he's gonna put his foot down. "no, combustablegeoduck one minute late is late". So I stopped my task and calmly asked him, "then what does it mean when I'm staying 45 minutes after my shift to help when we're short staffed?". And he said, "we don't even want to have this conversation right now", and left. 

To be fair he's not wrong-- he handled the situation wrong. If he wanted me to change something we could have talked in private, he wanted to swing dicks in front of the new hires. 

So I complied. I made it a point to clock in and out exactly when my shift starts and ends. It's glorious. A couple weeks later he tells me I need to do something two minutes before my shift ends. So I start the task, and two minutes later I said, "sorry manager, my shift is over!" clocked out and left.

My mindset is go ahead, try to fire the best looking employee on paper for working exactly his shift and not a second longer. 

He didn't want to swing dicks after that.

Tl;Dr A minute late is late, and I don't get paid overtime to work after my shift, so if your operation is so concrete that we need to be accurate to one minute of the schedule, you don't need me when I'm done.

Edit: someone wanted a tldrThis story took place back in the mid-90s. My wife and I were newly married and our daughter was still an infant. My wife worked in health care as a home care nurse, travelling from house to house looking after people. However, after our daughter was born, she did not want a job that put her on the road so much and shifts in the evening. So, she applied to be a cleaner at the military base near our community. Two things about our situation that are noteworthy, one is that my wife is a visible minority and second, as a health care worker, she logs everything as a force of habit.

The company that hired her was a national company. The base office usually had five employees. One had recently quit because her husband was moving with his military job to another part of the country. So, the local boss hired my wife to replace her.

The four other workers were tight. Louise was the boss, who hired her best friend Donna, Donna’s brother Dan, and Louise’s niece Tracy. My wife was a true outsider.

She immediately saw things were not quite on the level. Even though my wife was paid from 4pm to midnight, she was home by 8pm every night. She was also excluded from cleaning the buildings that housed the engineering and tenancy offices. Occasionally, when she would clean those offices she saw her colleagues rifling through desks and filing cabinets, photocopying documents and other shady stuff. My wife also saw Louise threaten a soldier with extra duties for not opening doors fast enough (Louises husband was a senior NCO in the unit). But jobs were hard to find at the time so my wife was willing to accept a little discomfort to her ethics.

However, after a few months, the racial epithets started. It started with a nickname. Then morphed into slurs and then rumours about her. They started telling racial jokes without trying to hide it. When my wife complained to the four of them that she was uncomfortable, she got called weak, and they threatened her employment. My wife told them that she would go to the head office.

So, she called the head office from work. Stuart, from HR, dressed down my wife over “women’s talk” and she needed to thicken  her skin and not be too sensitive. My wife countered that she would go to the authorities. Stuart said “no laws have been broken” so she should “go to the authorities”. Good luck. Later that shift, she was fired for attitude.

So, my wife went to the authorities. Just not the police. She went to the Human Rights Commission and to the military base headquarters.

She gave both photocopies of her logs. The Human Rights investigation determined that there was a work environment that tolerated racist behaviours. That garnered an apology and an acknowledgement from Stuart with a smug comment that they will henceforth include a clause about racial sensitivity in their employee paperwork. He even made a comment to my wife that essentially, this was “nothing”.

However, behind the scenes, the base had been doing their own investigation:

\- some of the people whose desks had been rifled in the tenancy buildings had reported that they suspected they had been snooped through. The dates of some of their reports matched my wife’s logs on the dates she was there

\- Louise threatening a soldier was followed up and it was discovered that Louise’s husband had chastised the soldier and arranged for hime to do 2 weeks extra duties. A violation of an abuse of authority statute

\- the contract with the base requried 40 hours of service per day. The base pulled the security and key logs showing that work was always done by 8 pm. The base was paying for 40 hours per day and getting 20 hours service

\- there was a clause in the cleaning contract that stated that federal government human rights regulations needed to be followed. The results of the Commission’s investiation determined that they were in violation

\- other bases were contacted to see what was going on with this company, and they found out others were having similar issues

As a result, the base broke the contract with cause. It was a 5 year contract broken after the 2nd year. Louise, Donna, Dan and Tracy were suddenly out of work.

The next cleaning company came in. All personnel had to undergo vetting for security. All cleaning was done during the day (preventing people from rifling desks), 40 hours was 40 hours, and cleaners were not authorised to engage soldiers beyond casual “how are you” conversations.

My wife went back to health care. However, every once in a while she wonders what Stuart thinks of “women’s talk” now.

&#x200B;

Edit to clarify a few points:

First, thanks for your comments. Makes me realise that even though I think the story is complete enough to tell, the odd detail could have been added to make the story more clear, yet not compromise identities of the people in the story.

I am Canadian. I grew up in bilingual communities (French/English) and my various school systems I attended growing up has had an impact on my spellings (realise, behaviour, skeptical etc)

The desk snooping was in the base housing offices. The four cleaners all lived in base housing. So, they were looking up gossip worthy material on their neighbours and friends etc. They were also looking to see what major contracts were coming for house repairs (eg. window replacement). It was not classified material.

While the four of them lost employment, they were not held accountable. The company that had the contract just laid them off. So, they were able to find work again shortly. However, just not as cleaners.

Cleaners had a reliability screening to work on the base even prior to this. However, it is as simple as a criminal record check, not much more. After this, the cleaners never worked in an area without supervision, and always during the same work day as the people in the offices.

The NCO who chastised the soldier was called to task for that. He ended up getting moved a year later, with a bit of a shadow following him. However, it did not last long and there was no permanent career mark left.

Finally, we were very young. My wife and I are (and were) not the type to rock the boat. I was brand new in the military and did not want to be labelled as a problem soldier. So, we remained quiet for too long. After this, both of us grew or confidence and were able to move on. We don't stay quiet too long when something is not right.

ThanksGoing to be slightly vague about my company.

I work for a company that has service contracts with lots of different municipalities across the country. Essentially we go to their town and service important equipment to make sure everything is running smoothly and things meet regulations. The department I work in is to call and email the heads of departments to have them renew their agreement so we can keep coming to service the equipment.

We send a lot of reminders because some places it takes a while to get things approved and people tend to forget about the agreement. Recently I had a gentleman, we can call him Bill, respond to one of my emails saying he doesn't need a reminder unless the contract expires. Okay easy enough, well two days after the contract expires, I send Bill an email. He is very frustrated and says he asked me not to email him unless it expired. I tell him it expires two days earlier. 

We email back and forth for a bit and it becomes clear he cannot find what he did with the contract. So I ask him if he would like me to send it to him again, he responds "send it to someone who cares." Okay, so I call the main line of the municipality and find out who is above Bill when it comes to decision making. They give me the email and I send it off. I get an email back very quickly asking why Bill hadn't handled this. I respond explaining I've contacted Bill a few times and he said he would handle it but then it never got taken care of. He then asks me to forward my email chain with Bill over to him so he can take a look at it. I was so excited he asked for this. 

About ten minutes later I get a phone call from a very upset Bill. Asking me why I would contact his boss and now he is in a bunch of trouble. I responded "Bill, it was not my intention to get you in trouble but I did what you asked. I sent the contract to someone that cares." 

I don't take a lot of pleasure in getting someone in trouble at work but I did what he asked so it really isn't my fault, right?

Edit: okay before I get more comments about it. I have explained a few different times in the comments that my last statement isn't totally accurate. At the time I didn't feel 100% great about having to go to someone above Bill but as the day progressed I got more and more pleasure out of it.  Bill was preventing me from getting my job done. Bill was risking the safety of other people by not taking care of this. Bill got what he deserved and I'm glad that I could be a part of that. Mainly I was trying to say that my goal is never to make someone's day worse or get someone in trouble but in this case it needed to happen and yes it felt good.When I was in high-school, I had the typical minimum wage cashier's job. It was store policy to ask for a legal government ID when a customer purchased cigarettes or alcohol. We had to ID every customer who looked like they could be under 35. If you didn't, and they turned out to be under age, you could be fired (if caught in an in-store quality check) or arrested (if caught by a regulatory agency). There was no way in hell 16 year old me was going to risk getting fired or arrested for a shitty minimum wage job, so I ID'd EVERYBODY.

Now 99% of the time, the person reacted amicably, handed over their ID, and went on their way. But on occasion, I would end up with some Karen or Chad who had left their ID in the car and wanted me to proceed without the ID check.

One particularly Kareny Karen (who looked to be in her late 40s) would come in to buy cigarettes, and never had ID. So I refused to sell her cigarettes, she'd pitch a fit, and storm out.

After doing this three or four times, I guess she had enough and bitched to my manager. I had to go on a break at this point, so didn't have a chance to actually look at her ID that time either.

The following week, Karen returned and once again tried to buy her cigarettes without ID. As usual, I requested a DR License, and the usual circus ensued.

Manager asked me afterwards why I still asked for an ID after he had completed her purchase himself the last time. I pointed out that I had yet to actually see the ID myself. Therefore, as per company policy, I couldn't assume that he had done his job and confirmed her ID. I had to keep asking until I confirmed her age myself.

She continued to come to the store and throw the same tantrum for a few more months before I moved away. I never saw her ID, and I refused to sell her cigarettes for a solid 6 months (I think?)

Edit, wow thanks for the awards and comments everyone!

Also, for those of you concerned that this lady didn't have / couldn't afford ID, she was driving a brand new BMW Z3? finances were not at issue.I already posted this story to r/pettyrevenge and someone said I should post it here....

To cut a long story short, I got fired from a managerial position in retail because I was technically the highest ranked person on duty when a minor security breach occured, despite the person who carried out the breach fully confessing, absolving me of blame and I was doing admin stuff at the time. 

Before my disciplinary I knew I was getting fired. I had put everything the company did on Google Drive and I also had the social media passwords etc.  So just before the disciplinary hearing I used Lastpass to change the passwords to as long as possible (Google allows 100 characters) and made them random letters, numbers, symbols with interspersed capitals. 

In my disciplinary I was told I was being fired with 4 week's pay as is standard as long as I followed procedure, including handing over the passwords. So I did.

I copied the passwords into a Google Doc on my phone, changed the font to lobster bold italic, and took screenshots of them (so they couldn't copy and paste), then emailed them to the owners.

Not all of them were 100 characters, but I had to give the passwords for PayPal, Google, Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

They didn't ask me for the WiFi password as that was still set to the same as when I started, but I did change it along with the router password, and inside the shop is a 4g blackspot. 

Edit: to those asking if they could have just reset the passwords....the Google password was linked to what I think was the owner's old number. The social media accounts were recoverable via the a Google email. And they have since updated their social media about 10 days after this happened so they must have got it eventually.

To those asking if I was an arsehole who deserves to get fired....well I never said I wasn't. But I didn't want to get onto the details of why the owners and I hated each other. But in my eyes, I was in the right, and in theirs they were.Early August 2018, I tried to break up a late night fight between my cat and my parents' dog, and I lost. Didn't realize at the time just how bad cat bites are, so the next morning when my hand swelled up I went to the emergency room, where they gave me antibiotics. I'd been on antibiotics twice already that year, for pneumonia and a UTI, so despite knowing my allergies to both penicillin and sulfa were on my chart, I made sure to request ones I wasn't allergic to, you know, because duh.

They gave me sulfa antibiotics and I almost died. Two days later I'm back in the ER and get different antibiotics. I have good credit and would like to keep it that way, so paid off all my bills as soon as I received them. Drama with getting additional bills later to the point where I called and asked the registrant to go through my account to make sure I had paid everything, and if I hadn't, I would like to pay it over the phone. Cut to months later, when I get some very angry calls from a collections agency trying to collect on the bills I had already paid. It took a three-way phone call between the ER, the collections agency and me to figure it out, but we figured it out.

Cut to the past two weeks, where I have gotten 10 different emails asking me to review the ER. 

One email, every business day, "How Did We Do?", "Reminder: Give us Your feedback!", "Don't Forget to Review!". 

So I did, on Yelp, Facebook, and Google, just like they asked. 

"This place almost killed me with antibiotics that my medical history clearly states I am allergic to. Then they had the nerve to send my already-paid bill from their attempted manslaughter to a collections agency - I'm likely not the only person they've tried to bully into double paying a bill. Now it's a year later and they've suddenly decided to hound me for a review."  
(paraphrased)

You can call me Karen.Very mild domestic situation, hope it fits, if not apologies. 

&#x200B;

It was time to paint a few rooms in the house, for well over a year my girlfriend would not or could not pick a color. She was to go out of town for the weekend to see her mother, I generally do larger/messier projects around the house when this happens.  I was tired of these rooms and prodded her again for a color, I wanted her to pick from the dozens of samples collected over the last year or so.

&#x200B;

She told me to go ahead and pick whatever color I wanted, she did not care. Now I have been with her long enough to know this is not true. I will end up repainting again and I hate to paint, so I devised a plan to make this work to my advantage. If I have to paint again I may as well prepare for it, so I did. I went to the local big box home improvement store and bought 15 gallons of white paint. I then proceeded to paint every room in my 1000 sq. ft. house, white. Ceilings, walls, and trim included. I thought it was beautiful, she on the other hand did not. She walked in and was not pleased in the least. It just went on and on and on, stark whiteness throughout the whole house.

&#x200B;

New colors picked and applied within weeks. I gave her a blank slate to work with and it helped her to visualize I guess. Or the "hospital glow" in every room got on her nerves. ;)This takes place in the “before times” when people could eat out and gather in large numbers. 

I used to work as a chef, for an owner who liked to micromanage things and was a bit narcissistic. I’d been working there about 3 years, getting good reviews, customers loved me, updated the menu.  Made everything from scratch, people used to think the place was open box/heat, serve food. Quality had gone up morale was great in my kitchen. Annual sales went from $850k, to $1.4 million, about maximum capacity for the space. 

The increase in sales and income went to the owners head. He was always spending money on frivolous things and squandering cash. Sound system, stage for the event space, ect. One example, I needed a new Alto-Sham, a used one would have sufficed, nope he bought the top of the line one that could be used as a smoker too $12k vs what I wanted could be gotten used for $1,500. Granted I enjoyed that piece of equipment, which after I left they no longer use the smoker function. Years later I still occasionally get emails invoices from a vendor and see they bring in precooked smoked meats now.

I was hourly, but then the owner realized during the busy season I and my Sous Chef put in 70-80hr weeks.  Doing this he realized I made more take home pay from his business than he did. At peak times he’d maybe work 40-50 hours a week.

So to save money he puts me and my Sous on salary effectively cutting my pay by about $10k a year. My Sous netted a loss of $2k/yr, if we were to work at our current level of effort. 

During all of this the owner is saying he is not expecting us to work over 40 hours a week, EVER.  He even has this written into our contracts. So with the extra time off at home with family it is ok, I still like the job and my staff. During the slower time this was great. Also during this time I had won a local award for my cooking, and the narcissistic owner was not too pleased.  He was no longer recognized as the creative force in the kitchen that bears his name, so his meddling and micromanaging increased. It had gone from “Its your kitchen CopChef do what you want” to “It’s my name and my kitchen do it this way”. Morale and quality began to suffer. 

Just prior to the holiday season my Sous wants to go back to his home country for 2.5 months, November, December & January peak crazy time for us. I have good help and am good with it, owner approved the time off.  

Owner thinking I am gonna save him some $$ that holiday season by working my usual 70-80 hours a week. Nope, cue the malicious compliance. 

I start writing the holiday schedule, Sous is on vacation, I have my 40 during key prep times and peak business times.  The rest if my staff gets serious overtime.  Basically the Sous and I carried a lot of the weight in the kitchen and could out preform most of our small staff. So with Sous on vacay and I only pulling 40 full time staff is now working 60ish hours a week, and part timers are getting 40.  Things are running pretty smoothly until the owner realizes I’m not there like I always am during the holiday rush. He’s in the kitchen more trying to micromanage my staff, giving them poor advice contradicting my directions and timing for events, screwing up the small parties my staff could handle while I am off. 

After a few weeks of this he realizes he’s going to be paying the staff out more in overtime than he saved on moving me and my Sous to salary. He starts demanding I work more hours to stop hemorrhaging OT to the kitchen staff. I show him my contract where I am not expected to work over 40 hours a week.  Now he says it’s just a guideline. I hold him to the 40 a week, it’s Christmas and now I can for once spend time with my family. 

Now with my Sous returning, I’m burned out from the constant micromanaging & gaslighting by the owner I hand the reigns to my Sous and change careers after 25 years in the industry and never look back. 

TLDR, micromanaging owner cuts my pay by $10k a year to save money, due to owners stupid spending habits. Says in contract not required to work over 40hours a week.  Busy holiday season only work 40, rest of kitchen staff gets overtime, and no money is saved.**EDIT 1:**  Thank you for the awards. I appreciate them all. 

**DISCLAIMER:**

The names and some of the situations have been changed to protect the identities, but the dollars and general nature of the situation is completely true.

**BACKGROUND:**

A year out of school in the early-1990's, I procured a job as a business analyst for a large, family-owned tech company. This business was located in the booming heart of technology at the time and was very profitable. As tech took off over the next decade, the company thrived and remained family-owned. What was a rich family and company became exceedingly wealthy with a valuation/net worth in the high 9/low 10-figures.

The family that owned it was quite neurotic, very moody and had a reputation as very ruthless (greedy) when it came to financing, deal-making, employees, etc. I truly believe this is what held them back from ultimately becoming a household name as a company.

As I progressed in the company, I gained more and more face time with the owners. I worked on some projects directly with ownership that really paid off and gained me even greater access to their inner circle. Now, like a lot of people at the time and particularly those who worked in tech, I was heavily invested in tech stocks. I discussed some of my investments and gains with ownership as casual conversation, though investing had nothing to do with my role in the company.

That is until one day in late-1999 when the owner came to me and asked me if I would invest some of his personal money. He wanted me to take big risks to see if they would pay off using 1 million dollars of his personal money. I was a bit hesitant, but still being in my late-20's and wanting to prove myself, I said I would. I asked for a written agreement where they acknowledged this wasn't my role in the company, was a personal matter between the owner and me, and to document my compensation for this side arrangement (20% of all profits).

Around this same time and by working in the industry I started to notice the weakness associated with a lot of tech companies. They just weren't living up to their hype and stock price and some seemed like they were starting to run out of money. I had no inside information, just a strong sense of which companies were struggling based on my work in the business.

Based on this sense I started using both my money and the owners money to short tech companies just after the New Year in 2000. For anyone unfamiliar with shorting, it means if the value of a stock decreases, the value of the investment increases. I had a few long positions, but my overall position was very short.

Since the owner wanted big risk and big reward, I used his money and obtained leverage or margin from the financial institution where I maintained both his and my trading accounts. The accounts were separate, but both under my name (again, I documented this and gained consent).

Well, both my account and his suffered some moderate losses in the first two months of 2000 before the bubble began to burst and both accounts, but his in particular, began to skyrocket.

**OWNERSHIP'S PETTINESS**

In June, the company began to suffer a downturn. We were still profitable, but since we provided tech services and products we were not immune to weakness in the broader market. I had not informed the owner of my short strategy. He came to me one day and asked how his money was doing, saying he suspected it was way down like the general market. To his surprise, I informed him that while we still had some money tied up in options (puts) and shorts, but based on the positions I had closed, there was $1.35 million in cash sitting in the account that belonged to him. Again, I still had a bunch of open positions which, if memory serves, were worth about a million on that date, but the positions I had closed had yielded $1.35 million in cash just sitting in his account (which was in my name).

The owner, either through ignorance or lack of attention, said "Great, $1.35 million. Fantastic work in this down market. Will you please wire it to me?" I responded that I would, but would be taking my 20% of the $350,000 profit, or $70,000, before wiring him the $280,000. I also reminded him I still had open positions that had yet to pay off or close, but I didn't state the amount. He, once again, appeared not to understand or comprehend the open positions statement, but instead totally focused on and became incensed about my rightful claim for $70,000. He went on and on about how times were tough, I should be grateful for a job, particularly at my young age, and the entire $350,000 was necessary for him and the company. I knew this wasn't true based on my position within the company. Worse, this was my first time personally experiencing the greedy and corrupt nature that served as the basis for ownership's reputation.

**THE REVENGE**

Now comes the revenge. Since, after two separate conversations, the owner didn't seem to grasp that the open positions would yield at least some income, and thus additional profit, I decided not to mention it again. I sent him back the entire $1.35 million and continued to manage the open positions to the best of my ability. And here's the kicker, the owner never brought it up again. He seemed to think the $1.35 million payment was the entire value of the account and never understood or remembered that open positions still existed. He never asked for records, tax documents or any time of audit or financials. Given the fact that he was dishonest with me, I didn't feel the need to disabuse him of that notion.

Ultimately, after a bit more net gain, I covered all of the shorts and exercised all of the options (puts in this case) for an additional $1.8 million. I worked for the company for 3 more years and owner never asked about it during my tenure, after I gave notice, or since. I know it's a bit crass and even shady af, but given his dishonesty with me over the $70,000, I felt justified in keeping the additional $1.8 million. I paid taxes on the gain (long term cap gain), and went on my way with a fantastic nest egg. Nobody has asked about it since and I have only told the story to a few people (and even then only after the statute of limitations passed).

The final ironic cherry on top of this sundae is that during my remaining 3 years I gained greater influence with ownership in position within the company because they considered me loyal for giving the $1.35 million back and not making too much of a stink about the $70,000 profit. Little did they know I got the better of them. The company eventually folded due to family disputes, but my understanding is that ownership walked away in very good financial position. They likely could have been a much better and greater company had they not practiced the same dishonesty that they showed me with their vendors, clients and employees.

Thanks for reading and hope you enjoyed.I replied to an MC story here and it reminded me of the power of building up a mob of people to get your revenge properly.

Background.

I worked in a building where I was a fire marshal. No extra money and a small amount of extra work but someone has to do it. I was also first aider and somehow got landed with arranging the christmas night out so maybe the building manager saw me as an easy mark. The only advantage that I had was the during a drill or real event I had absolute power; anyone not following an evacuation order swiftly was called up for disciplinary action. We had random drills about 12 per year, my job was to ensure that the building was clear, basically pop my head in each office space, toilets, kitchens etc and see that nobody was there and then take a register outside. 5 minutes tops. Anyone booked into the building that was not registered by me was in trouble. The drills were sprung on me as well as the building manager had the fire alarm keys and it made it a more realistic test.

The building manager was a dick. He wielded his small amount of power as much as he could and loved to report people for tiny infractions.

During one drill he hid in a cupboard and then called me into his office for failing to ensure that the building was clear. Apparently some people may run and hide from a fire instead of leaving the building. I got a wagging finger and told to do better next time or I would lose the marshal role, my 'job' was pretty safe since nobody actually wanted to take over and after hearing the story of me getting into trouble they absolutely did not want the job. The Building manager changed the fire marshal Process Instruction to include checking hiding places. This is a site instruction, he had no power to do so I later found out.  


MC begins. 

The alarm went off, the first after my failure to check cupboards. Every one left, crossed the road and stood in the assembly point in (and this is very important) the rain and wind.

I searched the top floor very carefully, opening up large cupboards, opening up boxes large enough to hide a person, looking under each desk in case someone was hiding. First floor ditto (UK so our first floor is US second and our ground is US first). By now people were cold and wet and unhappy but building manager refused to let them enter. He knew that it was coming he was well prepared for the weather, most people had light clothing on as the car park stood next the the building. They don't bother with coats in the 20 feet trip from car to building. Ground floor checked everywhere and finally the basement where the boiler lives and is a general dumping ground for old files and junk. That took ages but I was thorough. Very thorough. And slow. Thorough slow, not 'taking the piss' slow.  
I left the building, took the register and a mass of sodden people headed back into the building.   
I was massively unpopular until I showed them the PI that said I had to check all spaces that someone could hide they knew what happened at the last test and directed all the anger at building manager. It was the equivalent of the angry villagers turning up at Castle Frankenstein with torches and pitchforks. People were furious at him some. One of the office staff was a union rep and reported him to the site safety officer who went ballistic at him telling me to remain in a potentially burning building longer than necessary and a number of people went home to get dry clothes and the company had to give them special leave to do so or else the union would have to get involved.

He got shit from all sides, workers, union, management and site safety officer.

Most of the time nothing gets done when it is just you complaining but it really gets done when the correct people are inconvenienced.I don't know if this is the most appropriate sub for this story, so let me know if it belongs elsewhere?

I work security for a private business campus that has venues that are often rented by outside groups. One particularly large hall was rented by a local church group and we sold their tickets at the box office immediately in front of the venue. Without going into boring detail, there was only one way into the hall for the general public but numerous exits with cameras everywhere. Parking is free in all three of our parking decks, except in clearly marked reserved spaces, which will be important soon.

While visitors were still arriving for the event, our dispatch center received a call from our largest campus tenant complaining that a car was parked in one of their 24/7 reserved spaces and they need it moved asap. This company pays for these spaces and is constantly using them at all hours of the day and on weekends, which is why we have numerous highly visible signage for this row of spaces warning people of this fact and that towing is enforced.

We reviewed camera footage and saw that the owner was a woman dressed in fine Sunday clothes that were an almost painful shade of lime green with a matching hat. This would have been enough to identify her even in our large hall, but we then noticed that she bypassed the ticket line and made her way to one of the venue exit doors. She stayed there several minutes and, when one of the cleaning staff exited, she slipped in behind them. (We're still not sure how she knew she could do this, btw.)

As the supervisor on duty, I entered the hall and found her in one of the front rows sitting in a group of people. She saw me coming in my security uniform and immediately scrunched up her face.

Me: "Ma'am, can I-"

Her, interrupting me: "Now I juss sat down. What is it you want?"
She was already on the defensive and loud.. Not a sign of innocence in my experience.

Me: "I'm with campus security and I need to ask-"

Her, cutting me off again: "What you need to do is leave me alone. I'm sitting with my family and we're here to enjoy my nephew's concert. Ain't nothing so important you rent-a-cops need to be botherin' me like this."

Me: "Actually it is important. If you wouldn't mind coming with me, we can talk in the aisle and-"

(Note: she thinks I'm here because she didn't buy a ticket but I don't care about that. I'm trying to tell her about her car before we have to tow it. This is her only chance to move it herself.)

Her: "No, you ain't kicking me out of here at my own nephew's church concert."
Now she starts avoiding eye contact with me.

Me: "Ma'am, I'm not here about how you got inside this hall, I'm-"

Her, raising her voice even more: "I don't know what you're talking about but you NEED. TO LEAVE ME. THE HELL. ALONE."

At this point it was so comical that I remember getting the biggest smile on my face and telling her "That's all I needed to hear. Enjoy your show."

I left and had her car towed immediately. Two hours later she reported her car stolen to our security desk. The desk officer informed her that she parked in a reserved spot and that security had tried to make contact with her before the show began, according to our log. She loudly demanded to speak to whoever was in charge and that's when I came around the corner and introduced myself. The look on her face was priceless and she didn't say another word as I gave her the information for the tow company's lot, which was closed by that time.

Edit 1: I omitted her physical appearance, other than her outfit, as it was wholly irrelevant to the story as it unfolded. Those of you making this a race or political issue are disappointing. This is purely a wholesome story about a garbage human doing garbage deeds and getting garbage results back in her garbage life.Shortly before COVID brought all manner of traveling work to a screeching halt, I was finishing up a job and getting ready to book my travel home.  Normally everyone would just fly, and in my case that meant a nice short trip of about two hours in the air.  However, this particular location and the route back home for me had an extremely scenic train route that took about 12 hours.  And as a bonus, I could get a sleeper car for a pretty cheap price.  Less, even, than the flight.

I asked my boss if I there was any reason I had to fly instead of taking the train, as the latter would save them money, and he said it would be fine.  I didn't waste his time or mine by mentioning any of the above details.  I simply booked my ticket and immediately sent in the receipt for reimbursement.

Not 20 minutes later, I get an email.  Paraphrasing:

"WTF is this?  I thought you said you were going to book travel that would save us money.  What do you think you're doing booking a sleeper car???  You're not one of the big shots out here.  Send me a new receipt for your coach class accommodations."

Okay, as you wish: cue MC.

Since this happened so quickly, I was able to cancel my $150 train ticket without issue.  And since there was no way I was taking a 12 hour train ride in coach instead of a two hour flight, I booked my air travel like I normally would and immediately sent in the $450 receipt for my *coach class* flight.

I got yet another email asking me what the hell I was doing.  Now, I'm good at booking travel and I know how to find good prices.  I knew that there wasn't a cheaper flight to be had.  So I wrote back "sorry, this is the cheapest coach class flight I could find.  If you can find a better one, please let me know before the 24 hour cancellation window closes and I'll be happy to book that instead."  Clearly frustrated, they told me to stop playing games, cancel the flight, and just buy the damn train ticket.

I didn't.  I took the flight home and got reimbursed per company policy for my coach class flight.I posted one of the emails she sent in r/antiwork and they mentioned I should tell the full story here. To see the photos click the link below. 

https://www.reddit.com/r/antiwork/comments/rqq213/boss_fired_me_for_being_pregnant_and_then_didnt/?utm_source=share&amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;utm_name=iossmf


This last year during Covid had been a tough year for my family. My husband went from six figures supporting our family on his salary alone while we pocketed my entire salary to losing his job for 8 months.

I work in political campaigning which means I work on short-term contracts as an independent contractor. In other words if we lose an election I move onto the next race. I made a pretty good name for myself working on the lower levels of a campaign and moving up quickly. In my state this year there were statewide elections and I caught a lucky break and ended up the Campaign Manager on a statewide race. I am the youngest CM  (24F) to run a statewide race in about the last 20 years. When the primary came up we lost the election by 200 votes. While we lost the campaign, coming so close to winning and my age made me kind of a superstar in my field. After we lost I had offers from all over the state for jobs. The problem is I had just bought a house and wasn’t looking to relocate (like you often have to do in politics) or the positions weren’t high enough coming off being the top dog as the higher positions were already filled.

I got an offer to join a local campaign (so no relocation) but the salary was lower than what I was used to, I would however, be the CM again. 

However, I learned quickly my boss had a “holier than thou” personality. She made several comments about how “real” women breast feed and have natural births. I would later be able to do neither and it really screwed with my emotional well being. I don’t have time to list all the red flags but I was literally just waiting until my husband got a job to exit.

The campaign hadn’t been built out at all. There was no one other than the candidate. I ended up building out our entire team, consultant, fundraiser, staff, ect. Luckily I have made a lot of powerful connections in my time. I signed my contract and sent it in with the salary we had agreed on with the stipulation that if we raised enough money 3 months down the line my salary would be raised but could not be lowered at any point.  Just a few weeks prior I had also found out that I was pregnant and my due date was the week of the election and just a week after joining the campaign I was also in a serious car accident. Luckily my pregnancy was safe but I herniated a disc in the car accident and due to my pregnancy there were very few things that could be done as far as helping my back or pain management. If I did my job right that shouldn’t be an issue because my job can essentially be handled from home and staff could do the rest.

I had The team working in lock step and I was proud of the work I was doing even though only about 10% of my views aligned with the campaign. Then we hit a snag. The candidate’s husband got deployed to a rather dangerous place for a month and she completely checked out. She stopped fundraising, which means that everything comes to a halt in campaigning. She stopped putting in the leg work to win. We also lost our only lower staff member during this time. We knew she was worried about her husband so no one on the team tried to push back very hard. Eventually her husband came back and it was go time. There wasn’t a minute to waste and I was back to getting our operation working full speed.

One day she calls me up to tell me how 20 years ago her first job as a private school teacher was making as much money as I was now. I also live in an expensive DC suburb, not the backwoods where she grew up. I have multiple college degrees and this job offers no benefits unlike teaching. Not comparable at all. This is when I realized there might be a problem.

A couple weeks later, I told her I would need to take a step back from doing the other staff members job (mostly door knocking) because of my injured back but that we would hire someone. Unfortunately, due to the lack fundraising it made it hard to pay anyone else and those duties fell on her. CM’s do not typically door knock. We had a team meeting with the entire team and I started pressuring the candidate about all the things she wasn’t doing and there was a legitimate meltdown. She started yelling at me about how I wasn’t doing my job and her my pregnancy wasn’t her problem and how I was the reason everything was failing and then hung up on the entire team.

This is where the malicious compliance comes in. After this I decided to take a step back from doing all the duties that are typically handled by lower level staff and just focused on doing my job duties which weren’t being appreciated. I pretty much went radio silent and she kept nitpicking at everything. Everyone on the campaign started to grow uneasy but I told them to just hold out.

Well sure enough she calls me up and says, “Since you are pregnant and can no longer door knock you can either work for (state minimum wage) or you can find a new job.” Mind you, she knew my husband had been out of work for 8 months and thought I had no options at this point but what she didn’t know is that my husband had gotten a job offer that exact day. So I stopped her right there and thanked her for the opportunity and told her I would be working my contractually obligated 30 day notice at my current salary and then leaving the campaign. She then began to scream at me about how she wasn’t paying me a dime more and started listing off a list of issues she had with the way I was doing my job. I stopped her. Thanked her once again and told her all of my finishing tasks would be completed when I received payment for the last month I worked (Yes, she was a month behind on paying me) as well as payment for the 30 day notice that she was legally required to pay me whether I continued working or not.

I waited a few hours and she never finalized my termination in writing so I sent her a termination letter thanking her for the opportunity and once again repeating everything we had discussed on the phone. She sent me a nasty email again reiterating that I wouldn’t be paid for the previous month or 30 days and listed about 10 things that I had done to be terminated, including that I didn’t wear make-up to work every day.

I decided to send this email to the rest of the team and sure enough everyone quit except for the consultant. In 5 minutes she lost everyone she had. Then a friend of mine offered me my dream job working for him so all in all it worked out in my favor within 5 minutes of being fired.

Well, here where things get tricky. I realize that my contract that obligates her to pay me for the 30 days’ notice isn’t signed and I’m screwed. Well sure enough in her fit of rage she starts emailing everyone talking badly about me the only problem is I still have access to the campaign email and I’m seeing every email she is sending. Emails saying that she wants to keep me on staff but that I need to take less money, and that I shouldn’t have been “dishonest” about my pregnancy, so clearly I wasn’t doing my job that badly, she just wanted to pay a pregnant woman less. She also asks the consultant for a list of things that I did wrong on the campaign so that she will have cause not to pay me my contract. I notice that the consultant never replies to this email. He tells her that if she want to fight it to send him a copy of the contract and he will have a lawyer take a look at it. Well sure enough she sends him a signed copy of the contract and once again my contract is valid and she now has to pay me my severance. She has given me every piece of ammunition I need to get paid at this point as well as wage a discrimination suit for referencing my pregnancy as a reason for termination.

I hire a lawyer. She continues to pester me about turning over all of my work, the thing is since I’m an independent contractor I only owe her a final product if I get paid. I reiterate that she isn’t getting anything until I’ve been paid and she can take it up with my lawyer. She begins slandering me to everyone I know and continuing to send emails about me that I’m just collecting. She then starts calling every friend she has to bully me into giving her what she wants. My response to all of them is, “talk to my lawyer”.

In one final ditch effort she has the consultant call me begging me to turn over the stuff, the problem is that the consultant and I are personal friends and he’s really unhappy working for her but has contractual obligations. I tell him to tell her the same thing, “talk to my lawyer”. Five minutes later I get a call back from him saying that she has fired him because he refused to throw me under the bus and make up excuses for my termination when he believes I was wrongfully terminated. She fires him too and now he’s out of his obligations. He also tells me that the lawyer she sent the contract over to said to pay me.

In a matter of two weeks she is once again at square one with no one on her side, she is out of money and struggling. She finally emails me at 11pm that she is willing to pay me. Its nighttime and I don’t work for her anymore so I decide I don’t need to respond at that moment. Well she starts calling me incessantly and texting me, all of which I’m ignoring. By the time I wake up in the morning I have 20 texts and 5 missed calls. I tell her that I will need to talk to my lawyer at this point and I’ll get back to her after he responds.

Well, she goes nuclear. Twenty-minutes later I get a call from the police. She is claiming I have been embezzling campaign funds and stealing her data. I have to get my lawyer on the phone and explain the whole situation and why this is a BS claim. I offer the bank account information for the funds she claimed I stole and proved that they were sitting right there in her account she just doesn’t know how to access them because I’m usually the one who does that. The police officer thinks she is nuts at this point… because she is… but then informs her that it considered larceny to withhold my pay and asks me if I would like to press charges. I say “If she refused to pay then yes”. Within two days I received a check in the mail with my payment and I turned everything over. The funny thing is that my 30 day notice pay was actually more money than if I had finished out the contract with the reduced pay she wanted to pay me. I got an extra $700 and didn’t have to work for her for the remainder of the time.

She ended up losing her election in a swing district by 15 points.

Edit: for those of you wondering I left campaigning and will never go back. If you want to hear my thought on politicians check out the link posted above. I am not proud of my job nor did I love it but a girls gotta eat and good luck finding a company to work in America for that isn’t at the very least morally questionable.

Edit 2: thanks for all the upvotes and awards guys, I didn’t think it would get this much attention, I’m just tired of women being treated like they can’t be good employees and moms. On the plus side more people have upvoted this post than voted for her on Election Day.Last year my wife and I got married. My parents and sister live halfway across world, but that didn't stop them from coming over to celebrate. Since neither my wife and I get to spend much time with them, we decided to rent a house for a couple of days in a nearby wine region. You know: hang out, drink some wine, eat some cheese and have some quality family time. It had been 3 years since we last saw them.

A month or so before my parents and sister came over I got an email from the owners of the vacation house saying that they had sold the property, but the new owners were going to continue to rent out the house and they were going to honour the booking, so not to worry. All good. Two weeks later I got an email from the new owners saying the booking was still okay, but they were going over their records and said I still owed them $100 for the booking. I replied back with the receipt and booking confirmation that I was all paid up. Turns out the new owners unilaterally decided to increase the price of the accommodation, and I had to pay up. But they were gracious enough to say I could cancel at no cost but they'd rather we'd keep the booking and pay that little extra.

No cost for cancelling the booking you say? Within 5 minutes I had found another vacation house in the same region, there's literally dozens of them. I sent a quick email back to please cancel my booking and process the refund.

"We'd like you to keep the booking. Can we split the difference?"

"No thanks. Please cancel the booking."

"If you keep the booking, we'll throw in a bottle of wine!"

"No thanks. Please cancel the booking."

Good thing the refund came back with days.

Their reviews have been less than stellar on tripadvisor. I wonder why...A friend of mine in a semiconductor manufacturing company, was one of the hot shot marketing   
 & application engineers. On his own, he put together a series of seminars to show prospective users/customers the benefits of using a bunch of the company's integrated circuits in their designs. He went on to make short half hour videos that could be viewed online. The company signed a contract with him that stated they were his property. The company was acquired by a megacorp, and their legal people evidently signed off on his contract as well.  Queue MC.

He was a big man, 6'2", 230lbs, and in his late 50's. Also had q condition that caused a considerable amount of joint pain. His job required him to fly at least once a month, but because of the frequency he could upgrade to business class or better, and the extra room helped him with the pain of traveling. The company AA card was used for all travel, and his new (30's) manager decided that the company owned his frequent flyer miles and he couldn't use them to upgrade.  This got rather heated, and the manager wouldn't back down. 

So, the company offered early retirement to certain people over 59 who'd been with them for more than x years.  My friend stepped up, and got a bonus, and two days before the end deleted all the videos.  And, he gave them a copy of the contract reminding them they were his property, also stating the company couldn't restore them from backups and use them.  Several months later he ended up contracting for his former company, introducing his videos online, and answering questions afterwards.  I'm sure he was very happy with this arrangement. No travel, no boss hassles, and a nice check for each time he did it.This was ten years ago in Iraq, at COB Speicher. I was part of an aircrew that flew mission-critical nighttime flights. I wasn't a pilot, but I flew in a support role in the backseat. We were lucky enough to each have our own little private rooms (called a CHU). With an air conditioner in each room, and blackened-out windows, it was easy to sleep all day, then wake up at 16:00 or 17:00 and head to work.

We had big signs on our doors: "DAY SLEEPER. DO NOT DISTURB. COME BACK AFTER 17:00."

The contractor in charge of safety and maintenance of the CHUs (it was KBR, I think) decided one day they needed to inspect the smoke alarms and fire extinguishers in every room. It's a reasonable request. My boss gave KBR a list of rooms not to disturb until after 17:00. Of course, they ignored the list, and we were all awakened to workers banging on our doors and letting themselves in ("just doing my job, sir").

Aircrews are required by civil and military law to have adequate crew rest. It's more than, "hey, get some sleep". It's a strict number of hours before flying that should be undisturbed. It can become a very big deal, legally, if there's an accident, and it's later revealed the pilot or aircrew member wasn't given a chance to properly rest.

As inefficient as the military can sometimes be, it's amazing what a single well-placed phone call can do. My boss shamelessly cancelled the evening's flights, and called Colonel Head Honcho to tell him why.

We never saw KBR again. They avoided us like the plague.This happened to my Dad a long time ago but he loves to tell us the story:

My Dad was literally working the last day of his enlistment in the Navy. He worked in communications, but his supervisor decided to get some manual labor out of him on his last day by making my Dad put down new tile in one of the mess halls. Since it was a direct order, he had to comply and do the job. 

He carefully laid down perfectly spaced tiles  in the entire room. It took him the rest of the day, but he made sure that it was as perfectly lined up as humanly possible. Supervisor looks in the room, approves the job, closes the door and tells him he can go home. What he didn't realize is that my Dad used absolutely no glue of any kind. I don't know what happened the next day when someone actually discovered what he did, but I am sure it didn't go well for the supervisor.

He never heard anything about it, but was planning to play dumb and say he didn't know it needed glue, after all, it was a job he was never trained for.


Edit: This was in the US in the 1970'sI've been doing security for about sixteen years now, and about ten years ago I was doing on-again off-again shifts at a particular site (not relevant where). Anyway, I had a decent amount of annual leave hours under my belt, so I decided to take a vacation in a city down the coast, visiting a friend. The understanding was that while I was on vacation, my annual leave hours would pay out as if I were still working (but with 17% leave loading, woo).

So, about halfway through my vacation, the day after I'm due to get paid, I casually check my account, and the number is nowhere near what it should be. I go okay, maybe they're a day late.

Four days later, after I get home, no improvement. So I ring up work and ask them what's the deal. 

What I get back is that when I'm on vacation, annual leave pays out on my regular roster hours. But I wasn't getting regular roster hours, so they were paying me for about one hour a day, instead of eight. I said, "Uh, I went on vacation to use up annual leave."

They said, "Well, that's what the rules are."

So I stopped taking vacations. My annual leave hours built up. And built up.

The company doesn't like anyone holding a huge number of annual leave hours, because if someone decided to quit out of the blue, the payout would be AMAZING. (Saw one guy do this; he had enough hours to take the *year* off. Then he retired).

So about six months later they came to me and said, "Why aren't you taking vacations?"

I said, "I can't afford to. You guys don't pay out my annual leave hours while I'm off."

Silence on the other end. Then, "We'll see about that."

All of a sudden, the policy changed. I took a nice long vacation.**TL;DR is available at the bottom of this post.**

I work at a hotel as a night auditor, and this malicious compliance begins with a small bit of information I was told when I was initially hired for this position. When I interviewed for the position, and this is very important later on, I was told by the HR lady that the hotel paid a bonus ($100) for each foreign language I spoke well enough to serve our guests. Management cleared my $100 for speaking english after I passed through their evaluation period (my main language is portuguese).

At first, I was glad to be working in the night shift, mostly because my colleague then, Mr. Castillo was from Guatemala, so whenever any guests that spoke spanis showed up, he handled it and in turn, I handled any english speaking foreigners. Naturally, he did a lot more work since the amount of spanish speaking guests we receive is significantly larger than our english speaking ones. Meanwhile, Mr. Castillo was in the process of learning english and I had taken an interest in spanish so we helped each other out.

Not long after, Mr. Castillo got himself a job paying several times over what the hotel did and sadly, left me. My new colleague, a newly promoted bellboy didn't speak english (though he could understand some) and didn't speak spanish at all. In fact, he didn't even try to improve any of his language skills while I slowly kept improving my spanish, trying to use more and more of it everyday to serve our dear guests. As of the start of this month, I spoke to our frontdesk manager and asked him in plain spanish, what did I have to do exactly to receive the $100 bonus for speaking spanish. He was surprised but said nothing more since the front desk got busy with check-outs and my shift was up, but a few days later he mentioned he spoke to HR and informed them I was speaking spanish well enough to receive my bonus, and now he was just waiting to hear back from them.

A few days later, the HR lady asked me what size shirt I wore since they were going to be ordering new uniforms in the coming weeks, and took the opportunity to ask her about my bonus for spanish and she mentioned they were talking with our director about it. A day later she informed me they wouldn't be paying me the bonus for a foreign language since it was on file that I was already receiving it. I replied I was receiving a bonus for english, not spanish and she said she would speak to the director again and within a few days, all would be made well. Now I'm not really in a hurry to get my bonus, but it would be nice if they had cleared it already, as it would show up in my next paycheck, but guess what? They didn't. Our director talked to HR again, and my boss and told them that, even though I am serving our dear spanish speaking guests, in spanish, I don't in fact, speak spanish.

I'm far from fluent, but I can explain how the hotel works, direct guests to where they need to be and assist them with what they need, be it finding a pharmacy at 3am, getting a cab to go out and get drinks, or even hire an escort (yep), but apparently it isn't good enough for our director and my manager said he can't really afford to fight him on it. Okay, no biggie I guess, maybe we'll try again next year when I can speak a little better I thought. However, the cruel and unforgiving gods of the hotel industry gave me the perfect opportunity to strike back...

Earlier last week we received a large group of 30+ spanish speaking tourists, which in addition to our normal occupancy, meant we were effectively sold out for the week. Big groups are usually a minor incovenience when you're checking them in, but an even bigger problem when checking them out. Especially if they're 1 person per room, which means you basically have a huge load of rooms to check-out, one by one, while an endless line forms in front of the front desk. 80+ checkouts aren't unsual for our hotel on friday mornings, but 110+ is a problem. Normally when the morning shift has a workload this big, our front desk manager comes in early to help, but he couldn't this time since he took a personal day since his mother fell ill. That left our director with only one choice, to ask the night audit to stay late and help until our reservations people clocked in and could then replace us at the front desk.

See, my colleague doesn't like staying late, especially since he works at a second job with his father in the afternoon, meaning he only has the morning and early afternoon to sleep. I don't like staying late on fridays because of the amount of check-outs, which means it'll be forever before you can take a breath and even more so before you can leave. However this time our director didn't even ask my colleague and instead told me to stay late because we would have a sizeable workload and about a third of it would require someone that spoke spanish, or it would slow down everything to a crawl. I told him I would not be staying late that morning and before I could get another word him, he started yammering about how I'm wrong and I should be more of a teamplayer and the he would be very grateful for it. Wanting to get back to my sleep, I told him to ask my colleague and he said he couldn't, that they needed me and when I asked him why, he clearly stated "We need 2 spanish speakers that morning to make sure everything goes OK with the checkouts." Not one for missing an opportunity to get payback, I replied "Sorry boss, I don't speak spanish", turned off my phone and went back to sleep.

UPDATE: Sorry for holding out on the aftermath. I wrote this during my shift and as I was putting on the finishing touches, we had a server crash and I spent the next hour and a half trying to restore our backups and get the camera system up again.

UPDATE - Aftermath: After I woke up and turned my cellphone back on, I had several missing calls from the hotel and two missing calls from our frontdesk manager (good guy). I called back the hotel but the afternoon shift picked up and they didn't know anything so I called my manager's phone. He answered and asked me what was going on because the director was furious about me "hanging up on him" and that I was "refusing to work". I explained to him the situation in regards to my bonus for speaking spanish, and since the hotel was trying to hold out on me, I was going to withhold performance. Anyone who's ever worked costumer service know how much damage withholding performance can do, even if it just a little. In the end, my manager begged me to stay until our reservations people came in at 8AM (my shift ends at 07:20AM). I agreed on the condition that I would not check out anyone who spoke spanish. He reluctantly accepeted and said he would back me up in the following shitstorm that would happen.

What happened was that the group came down for breakfast precisely at 6:40AM, finished at 07:10AM give or take and went back to their room to collect their belongings. At this time, the two front desk attendants of the morning shift had arrived, as well as our bellboy, plus, there was me and my colleague waiting to punch out and go. We had already started checking people out and this day was particularly busy, we had 3 or 4 people waiting to be checked out, and it doesn't help that we only have 3 computers for 4 people to work with, with another computer for us to check the cameras. When 07:20AM came up, my colleague quickly picked up his things and left and I took over his spot. At this time the first few people in the group started coming down and they already had to wait since we were all checking out other people. A few minutes later I got the first one but I told them I couldn't check them out since I don't speak spanish and asked them to wait for my colleagues to become available. In the end I ended up refusing service to 10 or so people, which started forming a line right in front of the front desk, which only grew since other guests assumed they were all in line to be checked out. My colleagues on the morning shift were not happy at all, the guests were less than satisfied, and when the first of our reservations people showed up at 8AM, I logged out, punched out and went home. By that time, there was a 20+ line of people waiting to be checked out by 2 overworked recepcionists, only one of which spoke spanish.

In the ensuing shitstorm that happened, the hotel's director arrived at 8:30AM in an attempt to minimize the anger of the human centipede who formed in the front desk, started chatted with the guests and otherwise trying to distract them so they would be less angry and avoid giving the hotel a poor review. I got a mild chewing out by my manager for "poor work ethic" instead of being written up. True to his word, he backed me up when the director called him and HR for a meeting regarding my actions (you can't demand someone speak a language that you know they don't right?). I still haven't got my bonus for speaking spanish, and I let my manager know that I will not be speaking any spanish while on the job until they give in and give me my hard earned bonus.

UPDATE 2 - TL;DR: Management denies my bonus for speaking spanish, demands stay I late  to help check out spanish speaking guests. I agree, but refuse to speak  spanish since management themselves said I don't speak spanish so they  wouldn't have to pay me a bonus for speaking spanish. I refuse service to lots of guests, chaos ensues in  the front desk, I clock out before the hotel implodes.

UPDATE 3 - So due to the number of comments asking about how the bonus works, I'll just post it here. It is a monthly bonus, and the way to hotel pays it out is by adding it into the base salary, instead of specifically outlining it on a separate item on our pay stub. This means that it is straight up a pay raise, and as such it interacts with other things that go into our paycheck that use our base salary to be calculated. This means that the $100 bonus easily snowballs into being $150 - $160 when you take into account the +20% we get paid for working nights, +10% for handling live money, + overtime, + paid time off, + vacations.I worked for a multinational company 10 years ago, as the regional management running a 2-way radio repair shop, on the customer's main site.  6 direct report techs, and an admin assistant.

The techs rotated but the admin assistant and I were there every day.  Because I worked 205-250hrs every month in that office, for 160hrs of salary, I had a few things there as you can imagine.

2.5yrs into working there, I had annoyed my boss and lost the company lotto, so I was 1 of 4 people he downsized that year.  I expected it months earlier when he let the first one go, but wasn't going to work worrying about it.

One Monday my fresh tech was late and not answering his phone...  and comes in 90min late with my boss and HR in the vehicle.  Guess today's the day.

As part of the exit interview, they get to "all personal property"...  oh boy, time for some fun.  Most people have 1 box, I ended up with 5.  Coffee pot, toaster oven, microwave, my coveralls and boots (they tried to keep those, but I never submitted a bill)...  oh, and my shelf of notebooks (nothing was ever filed physically in my desk)...  my toolbox of electronics tools, soldering iron...

By the time I was done boxing my stuff up, there was 2 well equipped desks (of 4), no microwave, a 40 cup coffee pot, and no usb-serial cable to connect to the battery conditioner.

Found out from my admin assistant that my boss had to spend just shy of a grand to re-outfit the shop that week, before going home.


TL:DR Boss failed to realize how much I had brought to outfit a shop that I spent 50-60hrs a week at, had to buy it all himself before he left the site because the techs were pissed off.I came out to my parents as a trans man before the start of my freshman year of high school, and they were extremely hostile about it. So much so that they forbade me from using my chosen name at school or even with my friends. 

Well I thought that was a load of crap and changed my name in the school’s system on the first day. (It had my legal name listed but for most purposes my preferred name was used.) 

After about 3 months they found out about it and were Pissed. So they said to me 

“OP, YOU HAVE TO CHANGE YOUR NAME IN THE SCHOOL RIGHT NOW” 

So I was like “okay, I will” 

And so I changed it from Bob (not my actual name) to Bobb. 

The next day they checked the homework portal again and discovered I had indeed changed it, but not to my legal name. 

“OP WE TOLD YOU TO CHANGE IT BACK TO (legal name)”

“No, you told me to change it. And I did” 

My God were they pissed. I was grounded for a month and my phone was taken but it was totally worth it. 

So after that, every time they told me to change it I would tack on another letter. By the end of the school year my name was “Bobbbbbbb” 

Eventually they stopped grounding me and just. Gave up. I was allowed to use my preferred name the rest of high school, provided it wasn’t around them.

Edit: Gosh This really blew up!! Thanks for all the supportive comments, I really appreciate them. Having to live at home again with an unsupportive family has been really hard on me. All this has really made me feel like the world isn’t so bad. Thank you for the Gold and Silver too!!!

Note: my mom has started coming around and I’m planning on cutting of my dad once she divorces him for being a piece of garbage (including what he did to me).TL;DR below

Alright so for a bit of context I ve been raised in both the Netherlands and Spain and moved to Austria a few years ago. This allowed me to pick up quite a few languages along the way, but to this day I my language of preference is English since its the one I use most in my day to day lifestyle.

About 2 years ago I decided I wanted to give the tourism sector a shot, my German wasn't the best yet so it seemed like a perfect fit being like that able to work in a multicultural environment. In this hotel we had this cantina area where employees could eat their food and spend their breaks. Great spot for socializing.

After about a 6 months of working there i figured this was really not what i wanted to do with my life and thought it was a smarter decision for me to get a college degree and do something i truly love (which i can happily confirm ended up being the right choice). But first i would have to wait till  summer was over to enroll in the next semester so i planned to work halfway through the summer then quit to start studying and preparing for my first semester at uni.

After a staff meeting I felt pressured to share the fact that i was going to announce leaving later that week to hr (looked into the whole administration thing and was allowed to just quit on the spot till the end of the following up month so legally i was in a good spot). Of course the one HR employee that was there took it as a personal offense that i wanted to quit. She called me into the HR office and asked me bunch of questions and i responded very mathematically how i came to my decision and what my plans for the future were. So at the end of the conversation she decided to tell me that she would rather not have me speak English in the cantina area with our coworkers since it was disturbing the german speaking environment. I couldn't believe what i was hearing her say but okay i agreed.

For the following week as promised i didn't speak a word of English during my breaks with my coworkers just Spanish, Dutch, Catalan, French and Portuguese (everything except for German) with all the fellow immigrant coworkers i had become friends with.

The best part was to see her pissed off face of hearing me talk in Dutch with the GM of the hotel who happened to also be from the Netherlands, and i indeed did exactly as she told me to do.

TL;DR: HR told me not to speak English in (in her own words) "German speaking environment" during my free time so i complied by speaking every other language i knew except for German and English. So this was back during the 2008 government mortgage crisis.  Had great credit, a great job, and multiple credit cards I used to manage the different properties I owned, a personal card, gas cards, etc.  So one day I get a letter from a credit card company that rhymes with Apital Pank saying that they unilaterally were raising my rates from 13.99% annually to 27% annually.  If I wanted to keep my card (something many people during the crisis needed to do to survive) I had to agree to the new rate, otherwise they would close my account, I would not be able to make any more charges on the card,  and I would have to continue making monthly payments at my current interest rate until the card was paid off.

Of course I had done nothing wrong credit-wise to deserve this treatment from my credit card company (almost doubling of my interest rate) so I called their service line.  After being on hold for over 2 hours I finally got to speak to a CSR and after not getting anywhere with her, I had to hold for another 30 minutes to talk to her supervisor.  I was basically told (very rudely) that I could either accept the new rate or chose to close my account, those were my only two options.  Incensed, I said "Fine, close it" and they did.  

What they didn't know was that a week prior I had transferred all the balances from my other cards (Over $22,000) to their card without paying a transfer fee and at a promotional rate of 1.9 percent for one year.  But because of the law at the time, they could only charge me at a rate of 1.9 percent until the loan was paid (Here's the malicious compliance part)   

So here I am 13 years later paying the absolute minimum payment I am required to make each month, never missing a payment and never paying late (otherwise their 'default' rate of 27% would kick in).  Since the inflation rate during these years has been well over the 1.9% interest I pay, it's like free money!  I paid off every other creditor I had with the money I saved and don't even use credit cards anymore as I've been able to save enough to live on a cash only basis.  They've tried multiple times to get me reactivate the card or to transfer the balance to another super-duper account with lots of benefits for me (like paying a much higher interest rate!) without success.

The only thing I lament is that all good things must come to an end as my balance is now down to $1000 or less, but at least it will last another couple of years.

p.s. young folks:  I lucked out, I would have been up a creek otherwise.  If you don't have credit card debt now avoid it like the plague.  It's ok to get a card, you need it for many things in today's world - just pay it off every month.

UPDATE:  Had a lot of similar questions so I'm addressing them below

How is it free money?  A lot of comments about me still paying interest to Apital Pank - correct, I do, but this is how it plays out:  Instead of sending them a $1000 payment for example to avoid $19 dollars in interest in a year, what I do is invest those same $1000 dollars where I can get a much higher return - say 9.9 percent.  At the end of the year I have 99 dollars i've earned, I take 19 to pay the interest I owe Apital Pank and keep $80 for myself.  Now multiply that times 22K and 13 years.  Yes, I oversimplified for illustration purposes (I still have to pay some of the principal off, pay taxes, etc.)  Yes, I have consistently had a return above 10% of my investments so the model holds.

Inflation is not "well above 1.9%".  If you are a Keynesian, probably not, but inflation is not a rise in prices, it is a shift in the demand/supply of money which ultimately shows up in consumer goods.  This is where folks first see inflation and make the association that a rise in prices is inflation but it is not.  In addition, most media report on the CPI as if it were a measure of inflation, so folks accept those claims at face value and further believe a rise in prices is inflation.  The CPI calculation is secret, manipulated, and has changed over 20 times in the past - why?  Most entitlements are CPI based so a rise in CPI means higher costs for governments so they try to keep this measure low - ask anyone that depends on entitlements if their annual CPI adjustment keeps up with their expenses.

I don't care if Apital Pank knows I exist or not, or cares or not.  I care and am having fun with this.

I don't know what law made them keep the 1.9 percent - maybe some enlightened redditor has the answer.  I found out about them freezing the rate in the confirmation letter they sent me, the mentioned a "law" somewhere but don't remember what it was - consumer protection maybe?

RIP InboxI worked at a KFC for about 6 months as my first job, and this happened towards the end of my stay.

One of our managers, who I'll dub "Jay" is pretty strict with us in order to keep up with time and company policy, but we didn't mind as he usually worked on line with us, rather then sit in the office all day. And he does not have patience for rude people.

And on one typical military payday Friday(in towns next to military bases, all soldiers come in force on payday), we were slammed, and he was working register, when a lady orders one of our 12 piece buckets, biscuits and all.

 Now usually you can save some money by ordering them as a meal, gives you drinks as well. So as usual, he asks what drink she wants, intending to make it a meal automatically. She declines the drinks. He tries to explain: "Ma'am, if we make it a meal, you'll-"

And she cuts him off, with "I don't care, I don't need drinks."

As I said before, he hates rude people, so he immediately shuts up, smiles to me, says "Sandsnake7, can I get a 12 piece family fill up, and don't worry about the drinks." Before turning to her and finishing the order, which took a moment as we couldn't simply press the combo button anymore, rather we had to ring up all items themselves.. He then had to ring up every single item individually, which racks up the price given the amount of items. And then finishes the order, which was well above what the normal price would be.

It initially went off without a hitch, but unfortunately for us at the time,(retelling a funny story later wasn't really a thought at the time, rather we just wanted to keep the line moving) the family behind her ordered another 12 piece family fill up, but they ordered the combo.

As Jay was finishing up the second family order, the first one stepped aside to check the bags for everything, then they hear the price. Jay rang the second family for almost half the price of theirs, and she storms over.

"How come theirs is so cheap, we ordered the same thing." She asks.

To which Jay replies, wearing the standard issue customer service smile: "You said you didn't want no combo, ma'am, so I rang them up individually, ma'am, so you paid for them, not as a combo, but as the order you insisted on me making, ma'am." 

She then asks for the manager, claiming we were scamming her, to which Jay responds by walking behind the wall, and coming back two seconds later wearing his manager vest. And Jay says, "Hello, I heard we had a problem and I came to see what I can help with."

She grabs her food and leaves.Someone commented on a post I posted saying what I did fits here. I was in this crazy parenting group that has a lot of people with kooky opinions. Yes, there’s loads of anti-vaxxers, tons of pseudoscience & distrust of medical professionals, self-styled essential oil experts dispensing dubious medical advice, etc. 

One lady has been nonstop posting all sorts of craziness trying to convince people vaccines (all, not just the COVID vaccine) are dangerous. I snapped & posted one of her messages to IG stories, with name & group name removed so there’s no way of identifying her, calling it “the very definition of anti-vaxx”. 

She recognised it & even though IG stories disappear on their own in 24h, she insisted I remove it (it was already gone) and post a public apology, addressed to, “The so-called lady that didn’t vaccinate her kid, that u called her anti-vaxx.”

So I posted on my IG this apology post:

> Dear all, I have been asked by “The so-called lady that didn’t vaccinate her kid, that u called her anti-vaxx.” whose message I posted in my IG stories yesterday to issue a public apology (swipe to see request). I am so sorry I incorrectly labelled her as anti-vaxx & will instead just include screenshots of her words so she can explain her position in her own words. 

And I posted not just the original message, but 2 other crazy anti-vaxx statements from her. The original IG story post only reached 1,697 people. The “apology” post reached 9,716 people & full of comments of people telling her she’s an anti-vaxx Karen. A TikTok video I made about that crazy mom group jumped from under 10k views to over 45k views after the “apology”.This one is short and sweet. I went to the grocery store and after buying all my stuff I went to the parking lot. As I was getting close to my car, another one parked next to mine and opened the door wide open, hitting my car. "Hey! You just hit my card", the a$$h01e  just turned around and said "Just hit my car and we´re even, ok?" and walked away. Luckily there was a security guard nearby and I ask him if he witnessed what the guy said. The security guard just said "Yeap!" and turned away. He knew what was coming.

So I pretty much gather all my strength and kicked his door so hard with the bottom of my foot and left a huge dent across all his driver door. Just got into my car and left. I never had a citation, ticket or got contacted due to that.My first job when I was a teen was as a dishwasher in a coffee shop that was just open a month in my seaside town.

The owners had just left other jobs with a bit of cash and set up the place thinking it'd be easy money ticking over in the background of their retirements. Problem of course was they didn't want to work in it, but also didn't want to hire an experienced manager to run it either. As you can assume, problems ensued from the get go.

My MC was late on in the summer. My job was to clear and clean all the tables, wash and dry all the dishes and make sure the floor was spotless. The problem of course was that that takes at least 2 people to do on a calm day, never mind busy weekends in the midst of summer holidays and as the boss didn't work there, he assumed I could do it all by myself. Now I didn't have any frame of reference for how hard a job actually should be so for the entire summer I had been busting my ass doing all this and barely making it work. I had adopted so many shortcuts that the dishwasher never actually got used as the baristas were telling me to hand wash stuff as they needed to serve it. We barely had enough cups to have the place full of coffee guzzlers and have some dirty to wash in the kitchen. So that meant I was in the kitchen most of the time scrubbing, and barely having enough time to run out and lift dirty trays, but I still managed to do both. (Looking back now I actually had to physically run around the cafe at times make it all work, wtf) Of course the boss would walk in randomly in the day and I'd get a telling off for the floor being dirty, or a tray on a table. Didn't matter if the tray had been there 10 seconds, it was my fault.

Now I had dealt with this all so far, sucked it up and just pushed on thinking I must have just been slow.That was until the busiest day of the year, when we have a show in town. The place was full and with town so busy, people didn't even mind standing with no seats to have a drink. The boss gets called in as we are swamped and not coping (no cups, long queue of angry customers, people sitting at dirty tables). When he walks in he immediately points at every table with an empty cup on it and then says there is no cutlery, only to further add that the floor is a disgrace. I brick it and run out to the floor to clean and ask him to cover the dish washing for a minute (I had been stuck hand washing dishes just so that baristas had something to put coffee in). He's appalled, but complies. It's only when I get back I see he's obviously never worked back here before. He's actually spent the entire time I'm on the floor just packing a handful of dishes onto a dishwasher tray. The problem being that it takes ages to pack and wash and he hasn't cleared any space for my new dishes to be placed. I shit myself and ask him to help move stuff so I can set the new tray down. He flips it as if he's shocked I can't wash dishes in my own hands (bear in mind I've a tray of maybe 8 cups, teapots, icecream cones etc). He gets a space and the baristas start asking for cups. I start hand washing one to hand over and he scowls at me.

"Everything must go through the dishwasher.", and then he walks off to mingle at front of house again.

Alright mate. If you want it that way, then have it that way. I start packing up the dishwasher and try to organise the stacks of trays.

Not 2 minutes go by before 4 baristas are screaming for cups and teapots. I just have to tell them bosses new rules.

Boss now flies in and whips open the dishwasher before it's done telling me to start handwashing again. I start handwashing and he immediately follows with, "There are tables out there with dishes."

I had been pretty frightened of him to now, but having seen him start to lose his cool a little, it dawned on me that I was being overworked, and this guy didn't even know it yet. So instead of making any point or argument I realise the bast way to let him know is by showing him. I leave to get a full tray form out front. It takes a while to stack a few tables trays together, and while I was doing that he was sweating in the back following baristas cleaning orders, hand doing dishes as they were needed. Of course when I get back, there is again nowhere to put the trays and he's now scowling at everyone as if we had constructed the building ourselves.

Again when I say nowhere to put trays, I am including the floor, where trays were already stacked.

He then runs out when I get the trays unpacked into some stacks of dishes and he's back to the front of house.

I have then to start cutlery, anyone that's worked in a restaurant or cafe knows the bane of cutlery.

I'm nearly done scrubbing cutlery clean when Boss reappears and without looking pours coffee and tea onto my cleaned cutlery in the sink. At this point I can see he's defeated. He knows how precious my time is suddenly and he knows he's just fucked me over by doing that. His eyes are just wide with an aura of *fuck.*

He walks back out, still holding the now empty mugs and leaves me to start the cutlery anew.

Maybe a minute goes by when he walks back in and just asks me to tell him how I do my job.

**FUCKING FINALLY!!**

I wash and talk, telling him all the little tricks and tips for making sure shit is still moving out the front. I can tell now from his face as I relay how this place actually works that he genuinely didn't know. I can see somewhere in his head he's just realised how he must have been treating myself and other younger staff all summer to this point. He's sort of looking a bit broken. 15 minutes into working at his own cafe and he's broken.

The rest of the shift he had his wife come down and the three of us worked the full shift to close. At the end of the day he actually apologised for making me work like that and he'd always have staff on the accommodate busy shifts. I actually went to work for him every summer after that until I left college. I actually really appreciated his reaction to that day and always did a little extra than I needed to and in return he always paid me a little better for the extra work.

&#x200B;

TL;DR :Boss overworks me to death only to have to do the job one day with me and realise what he's been doing.

&#x200B;

Edit: Apologies for the NSFW tag, it was an automated response for swearing I guess. If you want your r/MaliciousErotica you'll have to go elsewhere.

&#x200B;

Edit 2: Great to see so many people talking about their horrific service jobs in the comments. We all share each other's pain; let's heal together.   
Also I see some outrage about hand washing in the comments and I understand that, but 16 year old me in my first job did whatever 20 something year old employees asked. I still made sure I was using piping hot water and soap, and after this instance nothing was served without being machine washed as we had staff to make sure everything ran smoothly.   
Also a few people calling BS as no disposable cups in a cafe, but for a bit of context this cafe is a way out from town by a beach (cold climate, not tropical). People come to get out of the cold, not grab a coffee on their way to work, so Boss didn't think to spend money on stock that he didn't need all too often (First month, he soon learned to keep better stock).  

I live in a subdivision connected to a major road. The road out of the subdivision has a traffic light. In the morning, nearly everybody needs to turn left for work. Even if you want to turn right, you are simply stuck because there isn’t enough room for more than one car. To compound the problem, the traffic light is green for no more than 5 seconds. We MAY get 4-5 cars out legally, then you have to wait another 3-4 minutes before the light switches.

 As you can imagine, this causes people to run the light, swerve around somebody they thought should have gone, etc. It's a grab back of "Idiots in Cars", myself included. If you roll up to the light and see that you are 15 cars back, you know you've just added 10 minutes to your commute simply trying to get out of your subdivision. 

 Well, because of all of our reckless driving behavior, the police communicated via our HOA that we needed to knock it off. They had a police car parked near our area every morning for a week to keep us on our best behavior. Our board tried to work with the city to lengthen the light, but to no avail. That's when a hero emerged.

 We get a random email to the HOA distribution list from an anonymous person. They laid out our plan for malicious compliance. There is a pedestrian crosswalk light at the before mentioned intersection that basically goes unused. In my 10 years living there, I’ve never seen it used. There just simply isn’t any pedestrian traffic. 

The subdivision hero devised a plan on how to use this crosswalk to our advantage. Basically, one person in their car simply needs to walk over and hit the “Push Button to Cross” and run back to their car. When to light switches, we now get 30ish seconds to alleviate our traffic jam. Everybody is joining in, and it’s hilarious. My oldest daughter got to do it the other day, and other cars in the line were rolling down their windows and cheering her on. It’s possibly the best neighborhood bonding experience possible. I’m sure our longer lights are screwing up something further down the line, but none of us really care. We’re now on our “best” behavior since we have about 5 times longer to get through the light.This is my husband’s story from a few years ago. He was an equipment salesman and had a company pick up that he brought home at night and on weekends. His company did not allow personal use aside from driving it to and from work.

Some salesmen took advantage of having a pick up and did use it for personal use and the company installed GPS systems on all company vehicles at the first of the year. My husband was pretty miffed as he really hadn’t misused his truck, but he figured he had nothing to hide, so he shrugged it off.In February, he had to attend a trade show on a Saturday. This triggered the GPS and he would got a nasty call from his boss who was located in another state. My husband had to provide documentation that he was attending a company-sanctioned event; he felt like he was being babysat. This happened a couple other times as well.

One Saturday that spring, he backed the truck out of the garage and onto the driveway to get the lawnmower out. After he finished mowing, he pulled it back into the garage. Yup, you guessed it, this triggered the GPS twice and on Monday, his boss called him and chewed him out. My husband tried to explain, but ”Lou” was mad.

“You know you are not to drive the company truck on the weekend!”

“I was moving it out of the garage so I could get my mower out. Does your report show how far each trip was?”

“They were .0025 miles each…(he paused as he seemed to realize how short of a distance these trips were)…but, well, that doesn’t matter. No driving after hours or on the weekends. This is being noted in your file!”

So on the weekends he either parked on the street or in the driveway.  A few weeks later, his compliance became malicious. We lived in the midwest where thunderstorms, tornados, and hailstorms are not uncommon. We were under a storm advisory with a strong probability of hail.

”Should you move your truck into the garage?” I asked my husband.

”You’d think so, but today is a Sunday and I am forbidden from driving my truck even a few feet, so it’s going to stay where it is,” he said.

As the hail came down (about the size of a quarter), he stood looking out the window at the truck grinning. He loved explaining the damage to his boss and reminding him why the truck was no longer parked in a nice, safe garage.  Edited to add: When he reported the damage, he reminded his boss that it was a shame he wasn’t allowed to move the truck into his garage when he became aware that a storm was coming. The boss knew damn well he had maliciously followed the policy. The policy was relaxed/reworded a few weeks later, not sure if it was a direct result of this.Not entirely sure if this story fits here, but I wanted to share it and this is where I think it fits best.

I am a broke college student. Not like the, “I spend all of my money on DoorDash and weed so I don’t have enough money to go out with friends,” kind of broke, but rather the, “I once ate a piece of cheesecake that I found on the side of the road because I was hungry,” kind of broke. 

Anyhow, I have managed to find a way to swindle a certain convenience store to unwittingly give me coupons that I could use to get free food every now and then. I had worked there before, so I knew how to take advantage of their coupon system as much as they had taken advantage of me while I worked there. Well, one day I had gotten $11 in coupons which I was very excited to use to buy myself some groceries. 

Now, convenience stores are great, but when it comes to groceries, well, they aren’t grocery stores, so options are a bit limited. Of course, for me it’s free, so I’m not complaining. 

So I’m walking up and down the aisles, looking for something slightly nutritious so that I can eat real food and not get that groggy “I’ve been eating nothing but peanut butter and bread for the last week” type of feeling. You know the one.

After grabbing some peanut butter and bread, a stack of pink catches my eye. My heart drops. Could it be? Do they have...meat? My legs pull me over to the meat stack faster than I can process this miracle, and I am suddenly face-to-face with a giant stack of packaged salami. Finally, some good fucking food. 

I grab myself a package of salami, and it becomes my new best friend. I imagine our life together. The sandwiches, the snacks, and best of all, the satisfaction of having a real meal. I put the peanut butter back and exchange it for some mayonnaise and mustard. Peanut butter had gotten me through some hard times, but sometimes you just gotta upgrade. I’m sorry, old pal. Papa just needs some meat. I go to the checkout stand with my salami, beaming like a maniac. 

After getting home, I am ecstatic about this meat, and I immediately unwrap the Salami. As soon as I begin peeling it, I realize my mistake. 

Instantly, the wrath of Genghis Khan charges directly from the meat to my nostrils with a weaponized stench that pulls at my stomach. This is no salami. This is a foul, vile monster. I try to reseal the Salami to contain its stench, but it is too powerful. The Salami refuses to be contained. Panicked, I scour the house for anything I can find to vanquish this terrible monster that has let loose in my house. I happen across a freezer bag, into which I throw the Salami. 

This displeases the Salami. Furious, the Salami begins planning its revenge. 

The freezer bag contains the stench for now, so I place it into the fridge to return to the store the next day. My thinking is that the freezer bag will subdue the Salami until the next day. But I am a fool. A jester, and a clown. Overnight, the Salami rebuilds its arsenal.

The night passes, and I am ready to rid myself of this foul demon. I open the fridge. 

The most putrid, insulting, horrific smell rips its way out of the fridge, grabbing me by the nose and tearing it clean off. The taste of salt fills my mouth, and I am unsure if it is from the Salami or the tears streaming down my face. I rush to grab another few freezer bags and contain the Salami as best as I can. The signature stench of the Salami has filled the room. It’s not going away on its own, so I open a window and head back to the convenience store with Salami in one hand and a receipt in the other. 

I arrive, and make my way to the cashier. As usual, I look malnourished and have baggy clothing, marking me as a “suspicious customer.” I go to send the Salami back from whence it came, but the cashier has suspicions of my return. Of course. 

“So why exactly are you returning this, sir?” 

\*Please don’t make me open the bag.\* The displeased Salami becomes eager.

“It smells really bad. I would open the bag, but I really don’t think that’s a good idea.”  
 \*Please don’t make me open the bag.\* The Salami knows what is to happen.

“Sir, I can’t do the refund if it’s in this bag. You need to take it out to return it.”  
 \*You are making a mistake.\* The Salami is preparing to strike.

“I put it in a clear bag, so you can scan the barcode through the bag. Trust me, you really don’t want me to open this.”  
 \*Please, for the love of all things holy, do not make me release this monster.\* The Salami is foaming at the mouth.

“Sir, I can’t do this return without you opening the bag. Either open the bag or take it home. I can’t refund your money if it’s in a bag.”

\*I worked at this chain for three years and that has never been a policy. I don’t know why you would make that up other than to somehow catch me in some act, but please, just trust me\* The Salami suddenly goes silent. It is ready.

“Are you sure?”

“Yes, it is our policy.”

No, it isn’t, but if you insist, then very well. Don’t say I didn’t warn you. I barely crack open the freezer bags, and the Salami, furious, bursts out with a stench so sour that even the Karen in line behind me pulls her mask over her nose (actually). The cashier begins coughing as I pull the Salami out of the bag. She apologizes profusely about the foul-smelling meat and scans the beast before issuing me $5.99 in store coupons. I take the bag with me, leaving no line of defense between the cashier and the Salami. You said you can’t accept bags, right? Well, I guess I’ll just keep these bags then. She tries using a store bag to contain the Salami, but to no avail, as the store bags aren’t airtight. You didn’t want my bags, so have fun working next to the Salami until the line dies down.

I grab two jars of peanut butter and buy them with the coupon, and head back home to have me some peanut butter and bread. Should have just stuck with ole reliable.*ETA: A genogram is like a family tree, but with extra symbols (e.g. a beer bottle for my alcoholic father!) and lines connecting each person. The type of line dictates the type of relationship- close, smothering, distant, estranged, abusive, etc.*

I studied social work in school... I found myself doing 3 genograms over the course of my schooling, 1 for Intro to Social Work, one for Sociology of Mental Health and then ANOTHER in my last year. I have some not-fun family history and trauma, and so these assignments were never my favorite, but my teachers for the first two didn’t pressure me to disclose only what I wanted and be vague. (One even said I could do a fictional family! Lol.) The last one did not.

See, one thing we learned was that bringing up a client’s trauma outside of a therapeutic environment can be harmful. We were BSWs, which are not qualified therapists. During intakes and assessments, we learned to tell clients that they don’t have to give more details than they wanted to. There’s a whole host of reasons behind this, but I’ll spare you all the lecture.

I brought this up in class after this teacher assigned an extensive genogram with an accompanying 5 page essay on what we learned about ourselves. A third of the class expressed the same concerns. His reasoning was “You might be doing this with your clients and you shouldn’t ask them to do anything you wouldn’t yourself.” (Not unless I get a graduate degree and become a therapist or psychologist!) The teacher also didn’t give us an answer when asked if resources for therapy would be provided if this brought up any student’s’ past trauma that they needed to talk about.

Oh, and of course, he added “This will only be shared with me and is 100% confidential, unless you choose to share.” Literally not any of our concerns, but I don’t want to share any of my deeply personal business with this man. 

The assignment did not bother me as much as the hypocrisy of it all!  I said “Between class assignments and therapy, this will be my fifth one. Could I turn one of those in and be given an alternate assignment?” He wouldn’t budge. He said I didn’t need to disclose anything I didn’t want to, but followed it up with “but I expect you to take this assignment seriously.” And when I turned in a rough draft with about as much as I was willing to disclose, he said it wasn’t detailed enough.

Alright, fucker. It’s show time.

I have a lot of family trauma that is NOT mine to disclose, and I rarely ever disclose it. At least not with anyone who would ever meet the folks involved. My own is embarrassing enough. But definitely not as bad as some. But I put all that shit down on there and wrote about it. Then, the following week, the teacher asked if any students would like to share their genogram, if they’re comfortable. My hand shot up.

I will spare you the details, but I basically gave the class a content notice to allow anyone to leave who may be triggered (a common thing in social work school), and then I just shared ALL of it. All of the relationships and why they were fucked up and why I hate my dad and my sister resents my mom and all that. Cheery smile on my face the whole time. The teacher uncomfortably thanked me for my bravery. A few students shifted in their seats, feeling uneasy. Others smiled.

Then my friend volunteered to share. She didn’t like the assignment either, but she’s not one to argue with teachers. Her presentation trumped mine (girl had a real messed up family), and by the end, she was red in the face and everyone was super uncomfortable.

Next person to volunteer to share was this girl who was in foster care, I’m not even sure if her sharing was malicious compliance? But hers was the most uncomfortable to hear. She started to cry at the end. Another student who also grew up in foster care, started to tear up.

The teacher cut us off after that.

Another teacher overheard and the following week, we had some serious discussions in class. I and the other students who shared were referred to the school’s mental health center (Lol). Another teacher I had a good relationship with checked in with me, and I told her what happened. I can’t tell for certain what went on, but it created a stink in their department. It’s been several years since I graduated, but I heard there is now an alternative assignment for the genogram.

So... lesson is, don’t tell social work students to do something that you tell them to never do to their clients, and you don’t get into social work unless you are traumatized AF.I just finished a big group project worth about 30% of our total grade. The groups were selected for us so I didn't know anyone beforehand. So like any other group theres always a slacker who just piggybacks off of everyone elses work. This project spanned the entire length of the term and this slacker just did the absolute bare minimum or nothing at all for each of our deliverables. 

So here comes the end of the term and we have to submit our final report which had to include a video demo of our app and this made up a significant portion of the marks. Of course the slacker puts it off till the last possible min to tell us he's not home and will be busy the day of submission. Our group was planning to record the last day cause the rest of the project had to be finished to demo it. So obviously im pissed cause this dude is just being a huge pain but I tell him "its all good man, we'll just cover your part in the demo!". He happily agrees as he wont have to do shit once again.

Here's the kicker, in the requirements of the demo **every** member has to be in the recording or you wont get any marks for that portion. Clearly this guy didnt read the rubric and so he thinks hes getting a good deal. If you didn't participate in the demo you get a zero for that portion. Bet this guy is gonna be confused why his marks are so much lower than the rest of us.My ex wife and I split because she cheated. So our separation was quite tumultuous (she still hasn’t apologized for the act of cheating and still denies it even though I know beyond any reasonable doubt that she did). I was incredibly hurt at the time and I’ll admit I wasn’t acting my best. But I still tried to treat her fairly. 


When she left we agreed that she would take over the payment on our car because she needed it for work. Our other car was totally paid off and I couldn’t afford the payment on the one that she drove. But I agreed to leave my name on the loan because her credit didn’t qualify (tbh I didn’t really have an alternative). I told her that she could keep it for as long as she made the payments. And that off she paid it off I would immediately sign her over the title. But if she started flaking on the payments I would have the car voluntarily repossessed. I also agreed to give her the washer and dryer on the condition that she take over the car payments. I had purchased the washer and dryer but had no use for them because I lived in an apartment at the time THIS IS IMPORTANT FOR LATER.

Well, we inevitably got into a disagreement over the parenting of our children (I can’t remember exactly what it was about tbh). And she randomly showed up with the car. Handed me the keys, and said “have fun figuring out how to make the payments” (she knew I couldn’t afford them). And then ended with a “and get all your s*** out of MY storage unit” (we hadn’t finished untangling the mess of items in our jointly owned storage unit, but she wanted it done immediately because she was mad). 

So I did what she asked. I went over that day to get my s*** out of OUR storage unit. While I was in there I saw the washer and dryer sitting in the corner and immediately remembered that I had only given them to her on the condition that she pay off the car. So I took them. I had absolutely 0 need for them at the time. But she had very specifically wanted MY S*** out of her storage unit. So who was I to argue?

She called me a day later screaming about it telling me that she had filed a police report. I just laughed knowing they wouldn’t do anything because it was my property. 

THE STORY GETS BETTER: as it turns out she was just angry and actually wanted the car back. Well the day after she had dropped it off on me I got into a freak accident and totaled it (everyone was okay). So she ended up without a car and I never had to make a single payment on it. The universe wanted to maliciously comply with her demands.I used to work in a mid-sized company in the engineering department. One of the managers started to get upset because if he walked around at exactly 8:30 (our start time) everyone was not in their seats. He felt that engineers were being too lax with their time. The edict went out that all engineers had to be in their seats exactly at start time.

I told my boss that I was not planning on complying because I was a salaried professional and expected to be treated as such and that if they didn't trust me to put in an honest week's work then they should fire me instead of micro-manage me.

The older (and much wiser) engineers took a different approach. They all showed up 5 minutes early to make sure they were in their seats at 8:30, but also set an alarm for 5pm and would literally drop everything they were doing exactly at 5pm and leave the building. 

Is the manager having a meeting that was supposed to end at 5 but is running a little late? No, at 5pm a series of alarms would go off and everyone would stand up in the middle of the meeting to leave.

Does operations need technical support at 4:55? They have exactly 5 minutes on the phone with the engineer before he will have to get off the phone.

Is someone trying to discuss a work-related issue at 8:28? Better wait a couple minutes because no one in the engineering department is answering work-related questions for another 2 minutes.

Needless to say the policy didn't last very long.Excuse any errors, it's my first time posting.

I'm a Type 1 diabetic, and I have an insulin pump. When I was in 6th grade my pump was wired, ie it had a tube that went from the pump, which looked a bit like a cell phone, to me. So, I have to take insulin after I eat and I had pretty explicitly told all of my teachers that I was diabetic, but this teacher was a bit thick and a stickler for the rules.  

My class had just gotten back to class after lunch and we were reading a book out loud. My pump beeped to remind me to take insulin after lunch, and I noticed Teacher give me a bit of a dirty look, but I ignored it and whipped out my pump to deliver insulin. 

Teacher: /u/ludwig19 stop texting in class! You know the rules. Please bring your "phone" to the front and report to detention (my middle school had a very strict no cell phones policy).

I was about to protest, but realized this would be an excellent opportunity for some MC. 

So, with a smug grin on my face, I walk up to the teacher with my pump in my hand, and it still LITERALLY attached to me, I hand her my pump. 

Teacher: what's this cord? Why do you have a chain for your cell phone. 

Me (deadpan stare): I'm a diabetic, and this is my insulin pump. 

At this point, her face goes sheet white, and I unclip my pump from my body (a bit of a maneuver because it was on my arm and slightly difficult to reach) and walk out of the class before she can say anything and go directly to detention.  When I arrive I tell the detention officer I was sent for using electronics in class. Before I even finish, a student from my class walks in and says I can come back to class, and the teacher apologies profusely and never messes with me for beeping or using any device. I work at a french fry stand during my free time to earn some extra money. Last week, we had this customer that was REALLY impatient. There was an old lady who paid before her. She wanted her fries to be first. I said "Sorry can't do that". She said she's going to be late for something. As I cook her fries, she asked me how much time does she have to wait to cook. I said 6 minutes. Only two minutes in, she asked me again! And at 3 minutes she wanted the fries. I told her that it's not yet cooked and is still cold inside. She said she didn't care. I told her to give me the money first. She gave the money, I gave the fries still cold inside. She took a couple of fries and ate them at the same time. She spat the fries into the little paper bag the fries come with. She wanted a refund I said "Sorry can't do that".

TL;DR: Impatient lady cant wait for her fries to cook. Gave it to her it was still cold inside.A few years ago I took a customer service job and my boss, Shirley, was the laziest, snarkiest person I've ever worked around.  She spent her day on social media and personal calls while her in-box grew. Shirley's boss rarely came around and was happy as long as Shirley didn't bring any problems to her, so of course, Shirley didn't; she buried any problems.

After I'd been there a couple weeks, Shirley was showing us some new procedure.  I don't even remember what it was, but it was something I'd done in a previous position and there was a much easier way of doing it.  I asked if I could make a suggestion.  Shirley instantly shot it down.  "No. I don't want suggestions or help unless I specifically ask for them. Just do what I tell you to do."  It was embarrassing and demeaning to say the least.

When Shirley went to lunch, the gal who had been training me asked me what I was going to suggest and I showed her.  She agreed it was much more efficient and she showed the others.  She told me they just worked around Shirley. They all disliked her and just waited until she was away to discuss problems and came up with solutions and left Shirley out of it.

A year later, the lady who trained me retired.  Before she left, she showed me how to run phone statistic reports...they showed how many calls each rep took, how long the calls lasted, how many rings before each call was answered; typical call center stuff.  She asked me to take over putting together a report including email statistics each month to send to the ecommerce manager.  Shirley was to give me the email statistics.

After the first month, I emailed Shirley asking for the email stats.  She ignored it.  After the second month, same thing.  I decided if it wasn't important to her, then I just wouldn't do it.  I figured if questioned, I would show the emails I sent Shirley reminding her so my butt would be covered.  Nothing ever came of it.

So things went for the next couple of years. Then came the announcement that Shirley's boss had been fired and while they searched for a replacement, Shirley would be reporting to the president of the company. She was terrified. He had her jumping through hoops. He had her submitting reports to him, attending meetings, answering questions.  She returned from one meeting frantic. She told the senior rep Angela that he wanted her to bring him phone statistics that afternoon and she had no idea where to get them.  Hmmm... I knew.  Angela knew I knew.  While Shirley sat at her desk trying to figure what to do, Angela came to me and said, "You aren't going to tell her, right?" I said, "Well, she once told me she didn't want my help unless she specifically asked for it, right?  Well, she hasn't specifically asked me."  We grinned at each other.

Shirley went to her meeting empty handed.  She ended up getting fired a week or so later.  I don't think it was because she didn't have the phone statistics, but that was probably one of many things that made it apparent that she didn't know what she was doing.

Edit: Thank you all for your comments and awards. Happy Holidays to all!So, this one dates back from years ago, when you would fill your income statement manually, like with a pen on a form. In those days, in my country, we didn't have a withholding tax system, but you would pay in year, say 2007, the taxes on your income of year 2006.

Of course the form would come by mail pre-filled, with name and details, and also some quite accurate amounts, because the state knows already pretty well how much you make. 

My family name is a bit complex, being multipart and with unusual letter clusters in the middle. Mistakes are understandable, but you would expect the Revenue Service to be exact on that matter. Unfortunately, they weren't. They kept misspelling it every year on the form, and on all the subsequent forms (tax statement, tax returns etc) they would mail me, despite my correcting it manually every year on my income statement. In black. Then in red. Then the following year with neon red Sharpies. Then one year later adding a sticky note. Then adding a whole letter. Then adding a letter and copies of my ID as proof. Etc. But they weren't budging.

It was quite irritating, because the tax statement has to be shown on several occasions when you interact with the State administration or justice. Everybody would notice the discrepancy. Everyone was understanding that it was obviously a mistake from the Revenue Service, but it was still annoying on so many levels, the most basic of which being a matter of respect for my identity.

After ten or twelve years of them not taking notice of my notes and corrections, upon receiving a payment notice still misspelled, I went in person to my local Revenue Service office and asked to speak with someone about that issue. I made it very clear to the clerk that they were wrong. He was adamant that they were correct (like I wouldn't know my own name...) and added, for good measure, that he couldn't change my name in their systems because he didn't have access to that blah blah. I was having none of it, so: cue malicious compliance.

Me: So, you said you were positively, absolutely right, about my name's spelling?

Clerk: ....

Me: I shall therefore stop paying my taxes. I am not the person on your forms. And there's no way you can come to me asking for that tax money, since the person on your forms doesn't live at that address, and in fact does not exist.

Clerk: *mouth is gaping, eyes are so wide open they're going to pop out*

Me: But in case you need that tax money, you know how to write my actual name.

And I left with a smirk.

I actually did not pay that tax installment (in those days, you paid your taxes in three installments over the year). 2 weeks later, I got a reminder letter, without the 10% penalty normally owed for late payment, and with my name correctly spelled. Shouldn't have wasted so many Sharpies over the years.

(Edit: added the mention about the payment notice for clarity.)I used to work for a big, global company at one of their many big sites as an operations manager. Loved the job, hated the company.

I hadn’t gone by my legal name in about 12 years at this point. Everyone knew me by another name; I used it everywhere, all my clients used it, and my name badge even used this name as there was a section for “preferred name” when I started right there on my application. I had zero problems up until the new HR manager arrived.

She was a nasty cow and especially disliked me. At around eight months working there, I still hadn’t received any business cards and had put in many requests for them over the time. I think maybe the new HR thought she was going to pull one on over me as she did indeed get my business cards printed and delivered all 300 to me...all written with my legal name.

I questioned this and was told it was “company policy” and that I would need to write my preferred name on each card if I wanted to keep using it. Even though there were several other managers who also didn’t use their legal names and yet had their business cards printed as they wished, I was singled out. She was so d*mn smug about it. And at this point, “malicious compliance” is really my MO.

I had never worried about changing my name legally as it had honestly never really been an issue. People will generally call you whatever you introduce yourself as. But, well, opportunity came knocking at my door, didn’t it?

I spent $160 and a full day at the courts changing my name legally and hell, while I’m there, I’ll just change my last name, too! I was never attached to it and this one is much better. I also went and applied for a new driver’s license and spent the rest of the afternoon faxing my new documents off to the many places that would need them. It WAS a lot of work and it did end up costing me about $200 all up, but walking into work the next day was the most satisfying day of my time there.

I was able to hand over my official Change of Name certificate and I personally handed the HR manager back all 300 brand new, completely unused business cards with my now-previous name. And to top it off she had to update all my files and my contract, send everything to Head Office to be completed, and then had to come crawling back to my office for me to sign each one with my NEW name. It probably explained the vindictiveness she displayed later but I ended up quitting not long after.

I doubt Head Office would have liked having to fork out for another set of business cards, either. And sure, I had to spend a bit of time and money doing it, but it was something I should have done a long time ago, anyway. I just got a little shove in the right direction and the payout was so satisfying.I originally posted this in as a comment in an askreddit thread but it was removed, so I'll repost it here because it's a pretty cute form of malicious compliance by a police officer.

I was a physicist at an engineering school and the older faculty liked to tell the story of a long-gone graduate student who tried to get cute with a police officer. He was speeding (going some 20 over the limit on I-95) and gets pulled over, and the cop asks him why he was speeding, etc. etc. Being a physicist, he explains that the sudden cold snap overnight caused his tire pressure to fall and he was speeding because the faster rotation of the wheels increases the heat and pressure within the tire and it was safer to be driving slightly faster on pressurized tires than at the speed limit on underinflated tires.

The cop, amused, asked if what he said about tire pressures and speeding was true, and the young grad student replies "yes, absolutely, I'm a physicist at MIT." The cop then goes back to his vehicle and returns with two tickets: one for speeding and one for knowingly driving with underinflated tires ("driving an impaired vehicle" or something like that).

Needless to say this poor fellow became a very good example of times when intelligence is not a substitute for wisdom, and why it's poor form to flaunt your education to get out of being an asshat in traffic or otherwise.This was about 20 years ago.

I was working as an hourly manager at a popular american fast food place (franchise, not corporate).  I had been there several years and had accrued some vacation time. I requested a week off (months in advance) to go on a hunting trip a few states away with my dad (who taught me to shoot and hunt). the vacation time was approved by the general manager of the store and I booked the trip (non-refundable).

A week before I was due to go on vacation, the head office decided to replace my general manager with one from a different store they owned. The new general manager decided he had to assert his dominance by rejecting my vacation time and stated that he didn't have enough managers available to cover the shifts. I argued that the trip was already booked but he wasn't hearing any of it.

I liked my job and didn't want to leave but there was no way I was going to miss this trip. I tried everything to get him to approve the time off but he scheduled me to work that week anyway.  He said if I didn't work, I'd be fired. I told him I was going.

I liked my coworkers and didn't want to screw anyone over by having shifts that needed covered so I got them all covered a few days before I left. The general manager wouldn't approve them working for me and still said I had to work. I was working the day before the trip (friday) and he knew I was leaving the next day no matter what. Part of my job was to schedule the crews shifts. It typically needed to be done by sunday for the following week, but on this day he said I had to  have it done that day.

cue the malicious compliance:

one additional thing to note, this was about 15 years after the most popular girls name was Ashley and the most popular boys name was Michael. that means we had 8 Ashleys and 6 Michaels working there. It was normally trouble to keep from having more than 2 of them there at the same time because of labor laws.

That saturday, from 11am-2pm (lunch rush) on the general managers shift, **Every Single One** of them was scheduled at the same time. I can only imagine the chaos when he wanted one of them to do something.

When I picked up my last check, another shift manager confirmed that it was as glorious as i had imagined.

Edit: labor laws had nothing to do with 'making me' schedule them together. It restricts their availability due to school and what time they cant work before or after so its hard to schedule them all at different times.My father has been a lawyer here in BC, Canada for more than 30 years. When he was starting out in his 30's he was hustling hard to support a stay at home wife and me, his young son. 

As he was very much a type "a" personality with not much patience he sped on the highways, often. And he got speeding tickets, often. However, he took every single one to court and had every single one overturned. The reason was quite simple. At the time Canada was in the process of switching over from Imperial MPH to Metric KPH and all of the road signs had to be replaced. 

Now the BC legal code specified that a "road sign" was legally comprised of two signs on a pole. SEE BELOW FOR A BETTER EXPLANATION OF THE WAY THE SIGNS LOOKED

Apparently at some point someone in charge of replacing all the signs with the new metric ones decided that they could save a considerable amount of money by printing all the information on ONE sign. But this no longer complied with the specifics of the legal code. So he would go back to the exact sign that he was ticketed because of and take a picture of it, and then bring the picture to court along with a copy of the laws in question. 

His defense was very simple. He would allow the arresting officer to take the stand and give his testimony regarding the issue of the ticket, and then show the officer the picture he took and ask them to identify whether that was the sign that he had sped past. They always agreed saying that it was in fact the very same sign. He thanked them and then dismissed them with no further questions. 

He would then bring the picture to the judge along with the bookmarked page of the BC Highway Act and present the judge with the exact wording of the law, followed by his factual argument that since there was only a single sign posted, it did not constitute a legal "road sign" as defined in the Highway Act. As I said before, every single ticket was dismissed and all my dad lost was a half an hour of his time.

This worked for almost a decade, with him overturning literally thousands of dollars of speeding tickets until the law was changed.

He still speeds btw.

TL;DR - bureaucrat cuts costs on road signs but they no longer fit the legal definition so my dad sped like a fucking madman for years with 0 consequences.

EDIT: an explanation from a friendly Redditor as my telling of this story was from a recollection of several years ago:

I'm old enough to remember when Ontario put the new signs up. At that time, they were a white sign with black lettering that said "MAXIMUM" up top, the speed in (obviously) giant font below that, and then, on a separate piece of metal below that, same width as the above sign but 1/4 the height, with black background and white text, "km/h". Maybe that's where the "two signs" part comes from. Over the years, the two signs were merged to become one piece of metal, and appeared to be two because the sign shop drew outlines around both parts of it as it had been when it was two. - from u/Jay911I have three older sisters, and the middle one, Pat, passed away a few years ago. I was thinking about her this weekend, and remembered a story that I believe fits here.

When we were kids, we had chores that we had to do around the house. The oldest two, Judy and Pat, had to do the dinner dishes (this was back when dishwashers were a luxury item most families couldn't even dream of).

Judy, being the oldest, would try to manipulate things so she got off light. Generally, this meant Pat would have to wash and rinse, while Judy would dry and put away. The washing, and particularly scrubbing of pre-Teflon pots and pans, was a real task, and finally Pat complained enough that Mom and Dad stepped in, and said the work needed to be equally divided. If one washed and rinsed one night, the other would the next night.

Well, Judy didn't like that, so she offered an alternative: each of them would wash, dry and put away half of the dishes. That was deemed acceptable, so the first night Judy went first, doing barely enough to qualify as "half", and leaving all the heavy scrubbing to Pat.

The next night, Pat went first, and the malicious compliance began. With Mom watching, Pat carefully washed and dried exactly half of the dishes: the bottoms of all the plates, the handles of all the utensils, and the outsides of all the bowls, glasses, pots and pans. When she finished, Mom smiled and agreed that she'd done her half, and sent for Judy, who had to wash all the tops and insides. And if some soap and water got on the part Pat had cleaned, well, that was Judy's fault; she had to clean what she messed up.

After that, they did the dishes together, and alternated who washed and who dried.

tl,dr: Oh come on, this is really short. Take a minute. Sheesh.

Edit: Holy crap, never expected this to blow up like this. Thank you all for the awards, comments and kind wishes. We lost Pat to breast cancer at 70; the best thing you can do in your life is see your doctor regularly, and take good care of yourself.When I was a teaching assistant, I used to work as a substitute teacher for very unruly classes (aka, the classes licensed teachers wouldn't accept). I had full responsibility, worked all hours, and my numbers showed that my class was making great progress. I just had some bad luck, that caused me to not finish teaching college at that time.

Because I didn't had my license, my boss came to me one day and talked about how I was actually 'too uneducated and inexperienced' to teach and that I 'must have had someone telling me what to do' behind me. I told her I didn't, but she didn't believe me and told me she'll be watching me like an eagle to see if I was fraudulent (changing grades and stuff).

I never did anything to my students, I'm not a cruel person and I didn't want anyone implying that I wasn't  doing my job as expected (they all got to the next year with scores higher than we would've expected beforehand).

But. I started to behave like a beginner student teacher, to my boss only! Asked really stupid questions like 'how can I make my class quiet? I'm really too uneducated to know so can you please help this teacher out by showing it?' (knowing fully well that my formerly disruptive class wouldn't ever listen to her). I called her for everything; a parent wanting to talk to me, a kid who fell down and needed a bandaid; anything. I made sure to tell her I was too uneducated and inexperienced to handle such a task and I needed to observe a true pro work. My colleagues got in on it too. They started pointing out everything I wasn't allowed to do, but expected to do and told my boss that she was being very fraudulent by expecting me to do so.

In the meantime I was discussing gamification, the need for programming and English in primary school, showing older colleagues new teaching methods and digital assistance... All the goodies.

After 6 weeks; she was done. She called me to her office and apologized to me for saying that I was too uneducated and inexperienced. And how she was renewing my contract and got some budget to pay for half of my studies.

I was happy to tell her I got a new job that would pay everything to get me my license and I would get full creative freedom, without being watched like an eagle. 

This was two years ago. I almost have my license and I still work at that awesome school that hired me, after the allegations of being 'uneducated and inexperienced' at my old job. I even got a reward and a trophy from the board for doing exceptional work and obtaining goals with my students.Not my malicious complinace, it's my dad's.  

TL;DR at bottom.

My father started working for a manufacturing company in North Carolina starting in 1983. Moving from general floor worker up into maintainence after going to college in the late 80s and has now moved up to salaried senior technician for the entire plant.

When he first started with the company they provided many benefits, dental, vision, health, 401k and paid vacations most of which are no longer offered but because of his time on the job he still receives the health and vacation time.

We used to go on vacations every year but after my parents divorce we stopped and he worked year round.

After he became salaried his hours changed to weekends and holidays so the bulk of his work week was only 24 to 32 hours in total (2 12 hour days, 8 hour days during the holiday season)

The company recently announced the end of paid vacations for all employees including the legacy ones which is where his malicious compliance comes in.

Every year Dad would request off for Christmas and New year's and would be told no, put the time in his time bank which he would dutifully complete.

Now with the end of paid vacations he's emptying out his time bank, 240 hours paid per year for 30 years, he's not going to work until the middle of 2023 just in time for him to retire at 68.

TL;DR dad was told to save his vacation time, did so until he had enough to take nearly 6 years off all paid.

**Edit: to answer all the questions, his vacation time was approved by HR so hes good to go on that account.**

**for those saying it is illegal to not give him his vacation days he only worked Saturday and Sunday and holiday days, christmas day and new years day, thats it otherwise he had 5 days a week off.**

**the only days available for use as far as vacation time were week days as the plant is on maintenance shutdown on weekends, his schedule is incompatible with vacation time.**

**hes was not the only one rolling time over, but as far as he knows he was the only one who ever rolled that much time over.**

**the reason he didn't take the cashout is the fact in my parents divorce my mother gets half of his pensions value earned from 83 to 91 which would cost him a sizeable chunk. while hes on vacation hes still earning pension time which will more than offset his loss to my mother.**

**Edit #2**

holy shit guys front page? So about 2 months ago, I went to Cuba with my mother. It was an all inclusive trip so everything was pretty much provided for by sunwing.

Whenever I travel, I like to bring with me this cute 500mL glass water bottle with this rubber pink casing I got while I was in China. NORMALLY this bottle wouldn't be an issue, there would be a few odd times when security at the airport would check it to make sure it was empty because it was clearly over the 100mL maximum. But they would all let us go without a hitch.

When we were traveling to Cuba, the bottle was checked and given back to us on our way there, but on the way back is a completely different story.

There were tons of people flying out of Varedero (where we were) the same day as us, so there were like two hundred people waiting to check in at only 3 check in counters. When we finally checked in, it had been about 2 hours since we got there. We were pretty tired from standing so we wanted to get through to the gates as fast as we could, so we took the shortest line in security.

There were 2 people working at each bag check area, at ours there was a lady looking through the screen displaying the x ray and a guy in charge of checking suspicious bags. When we put our bags on the conveyor belt, the lady began gesturing to her partner and pointing at her screen. The guy then proceeded to grab my stuff off the belt on the other side and asked us if it was our stuff to which we replied "yes". He carefully shuffled through the bag, but really just went after the water bottle because that's what I assume the lady pointed at on the screen.

The following dialogue is to my best recollection:

Him: "Is this your water bottle?"
Me: "yes."
Him: "okay I am going to confiscate this because it is against the rules to bring this on board."
Me:"But it's empty."
Him: "Yes, but but it is over 100mL and that is against the rules."
Me: confused, but did not want to make a scene and get kicked out. "No, that's for liquids."
Him: "no it's for the size of the bottle, and it's glass."
Me: "but we have this bottle that's also glass." this bottle indicates an 80mL bottle of hot sauce we brought.
Him: "that is under 100mL, so its allowed."

At this point I wasn't sure if he didn't know the rules or something because every time he answered, he sounded very unsure.

Me: "can I see where it states that I cannot bring an empty bottle over 100mL with me?"
Him: grabs a nearby plaque that labels prohibited items and points to a wine bottle.
Me: "but that's not allowed because it's alcohol."
Him: "no it's because it's over 100mL glass bottle."

His tone at this point indicated that his real intentions were that he wanted my water bottle because he's really just grabbing arguments out of thin air.

Me: just trying to test his nerves at this point "so if I had an 100mL GLASS bottle of alcohol, I could bring it with me?"
Him: "no because it's alcohol."
Me: "so is that! (Refering to the plaque)"
Him: "do you want to take the cover off the bottle before it is sent to be destroyed?" Handing the bottle back to me for me to remove the casing.

Keep in mind there was some more bantering back and forth, basically saying the same thing over and over again. I was really pissed at this point, I really like that water bottle and it was clear that the only reason he was confiscating the bottle was because he or the lady wanted it.

So I took the water bottle from his hands (he gave it willingly for me to take the casing off), but since the only problem he seems to suggest it has is the size of the glass, I can take everything else.

So I stared into his eyes as I removed the lid of the bottle and handed the rest back to him. His face instantly became red with anger and he aggressively threw the rest into the disposal bin.

I have no use for the cap or the casing, but he now has no use for the bottle and that's all that matters.

EDIT: wow thanks for all the likes! So I see alot of comments saying that TSA rules state that bottles over 100mL have to be in the checked baggage. That is only for bottles with liquids. As long as it's empty, TSA has no problem with it. Also I don't believe that TSA is who's in charge in Cuba (correct me if I'm wrong), so Cuba's rules are slightly different in a sense that they don't allow gels or aerosols regardless of the amount. But everything else is the same.
Another thing is that some people were confused as to why I thought the person wanted my bottle, but the tone he was conveying (which is hard to express over text) was that of someone who was making up rules along the way.
Many of you also suggested that I should have smashed it on the ground, but I didn't want to seem like I posed a threat to security and get kicked off the flight lmao. Despite working in a high stress, high tech sales role, I believe that when you’re on vacation (paid time off) you don’t work and disconnect. 

Whenever I was on PTO and my manager would request something from me I would email “Are you asking me to work on my time off?”

The answer was always something like “Yes. I really need this done.” After I worked I would re-claim the vacation time in our employee portal. 

I saved every email. 

Last week HR launched a new portal that allows us to see vacation time, sick time, etc. 

My vacation balance was about 2 weeks short. When I alerted HR to it, they said that they took back a chunk of time I had reclaimed because they felt I was abusing the system. 

Then I sent them every email from my manager asking me to work, documenting that it truly wasn’t time off. I also included a link to the state law stating that even a minute worked in the day counted as a full day (I’m salaried). 

My PTO balance was quickly returned.

EDIT: Sorry folks, but I won’t reveal my state outside of saying New England.This happened back in 2009. I was working part time at a doctor’s office while I was in nursing school. I was one of the receptionists and did all the filing and cataloguing and such. It was boring work, but the doctor (my boss) guaranteed me a job after nursing school so that’s why I did it. 

This particular doctor was an orthopedic surgeon. We had lots of patients coming in for MRIs, CT scans, and X-rays. This one particular patient, Frank, was scheduled to have surgery in a couple days and he needed to come and pick up his MRIs and X-rays from our office and bring them with him to his procedure (yes, looking back at how ass-backwards things used to be is so frustrating... all these things are 100% electronic now, and even back then they were too, but my boss was old-school). So anyway, I called Frank to tell him to come pick up his images but he didn’t answer. I called him again during lunch, but still no answer, so I left him a message. The following day I called him again, but still no answer.

It was imperative that Frank got his images or else he wouldn’t be able to have his surgery. So I looked in his file to see if he had any other contact information. He listed his home phone number, as well as his wife’s cell. I called his house and left a message, and I also called his wife, Amy, but she didn’t answer either so I left her a message as well. The office manager, Diane, told me to just call whoever was listed in his emergency contacts because if Frank didn’t get his images and missed his surgery, then she would have to do a whole new stack of paperwork to reschedule him and she didn’t want to be bothered. I looked to see if there was an emergency contact, and Frank listed a woman named Helen. Relation to patient?: girlfriend.

I told Diane I didn’t want to call Helen when I had already left a message for Amy, as it would put me in an awkward position. Diane said that as long as the patient listed them as an emergency contact, I could call them. She also said that it’s not uncommon for couples to be separated but still legally married for insurance reasons, and that this could possibly be the case for Frank and Amy, which I guess made sense. I really wanted to believe that no one would be stupid enough to put their secret lover as their emergency contact. 

I didn’t want to get fired for being insubordinate, so I called Helen and she actually answered her phone (I was secretly hoping she wouldn’t) and told her Frank’s images needed to be picked up prior to his surgery. She came by during lunch, got the images, and then left. I immediately called Frank again to let him know that Helen picked up his images and to not worry about it, but this fool wasn’t answering his phone, so I left him another message.

A couple hours later, Amy called back and said she wasn’t able to answer before because she was teaching, but she got our message and was coming to pick up Frank’s images now that school was done for the day. I told her that the images had already been picked up. I tried to be as vague as possible.

Amy: Who picked them up? I know Frank is still busy at his office and hasn’t had the chance to come get them.

Me: [again, trying really hard to be vague] We called someone from his emergency contact list.

Amy: Was it his brother, Steve? 

Me: [at this point I’m really nervous] No, not his brother.

Amy: Well then who?

Me: Helen.

Amy: Who is Helen? I don’t know anyone named Helen.

Me: I’m not sure, but since she was on Frank’s emergency contact list and no one else was answering their phone, we called her and she already came and got the images. 

Confused, Amy hung up. 

The following day was Frank’s surgery. The day after Frank’s surgery, my boss jokingly asked me “What the hell did you do to that guy?? He came in all pissed at me saying that my secretary told his wife about his other girlfriend.” I told my boss what happened and that Diane told me to call the girlfriend, and he understood. Diane tried to throw me under the bus by saying I didn’t tell her that Helen was Frank’s girlfriend, and that I had told her Helen was “just a friend,” and that she never would have given me the green light to call a patient’s mistress, but I reminded her in front of my boss that she had said it was possible for Frank and Amy to be married but separated. This bitch was trying to cover her ass because she probably thought it was some kind of HIPAA violation, but nothing ever happened. I was 18 years old at the time and just did whatever my superiors told me because I was really thirsty for job security after college, but I ended up not working there and went to work at a hospital instead.TLDR: >!Call centre removes limits on calls in order to raise customer satisfaction. I spend a month stretching my calls to be 4 hours long and make off like a bandit in the process!<

A brief story from my time in a telecoms contact centre. I worked for a rather large Australian provider that everyone knows and actively hates, mostly because its fun to hate them. In this story we were doing outbound calls to transition people onto the new NBN network. (for those of you unfamiliar with Australia's internet, it was 3rd world, literally, we were slower than Nigeria until we rolled out the NBN and upgraded to slightly faster 3rd world speeds...) Also worth mentioning, much like the company I worked for, the NBN was universally hated. Cause it was shit. Nuff said.

Anyway like all call centres we had a bunch of miserable hoops to jump through in order to bring our paycheck up to a level that could be considered humane. Our capitalist overlords refer to these hoops as KPI's. (Key Performance Indicators for the blissfully ignorant)

Anyway with the new campaign came a new set of KPI's. Conversion rate, active call time, after call time and customer satisfaction were the KPI's of the day.

Now these KPI's were normally all fucking bullshit. You needed to meet some fucking god teir numbers in order to collect a half decent paycheck. However in this particular case there was loophole. See due to the controversial nature of the NBN we were told to focus on quality over quantity. They wanted "An excellent customer experience" and the new KPI's were a reflection of that. As such quantity of conversions was not a KPI and when I questioned if we had time limits on calls I was told "We don't care what you do but long calls means a good experience so keep them on the line and get them switched over"

And so began the best work month I had at that soul trap. See before entering coms I was a salesman in aged care, and a pretty good one at that. And you know that stereo type of old people talking for eternity and beyond? Its a stereotype for a reason. Each morning I would log in, volunteer for the aged clientele campaign (which was easy because they were normally the hardest people to convert, fearful of scams, technology and such, so not many people wanted to do it) And then I would start to chat.

See when speaking with the elderly all it takes is a well placed poke or 2 and you can literally have them speak for hours. So for the next month, I took 2 - 4 calls a day (down from 20-30), had almost zero after call time (the calls were so long i didn't need it), had an 80% conversion rate and 90% customer satisfaction (turns out people tend to like you after you take the time to listen to them). Each phone call (assuming I wasn't told to fuck off upon introducing myself) would last 2 to 3 hours minimum, with my record being a 7 hour call to a lovely bloke named Stan. (he told some great war stories)

I ended up doubling my normal paycheck. And my managers, while not being entirely happy with my nonsense, put up with it because at the end of the day... those were the rules and KPI's we were given. I got my paycheck, the oldies got a good chat and my employer got to pay through the nose. Happy endings for all.

I proceeded to hand in my resignation once KPI's went back to normal. Which I, to this day, regard as one of the best decisions I ever made.

Edit: Obligatory edit to thank yall for the awards. Much Love <3

Edit: Obligatory edit number 2, so yall have showered me in more awards than I have received in my entire time on Reddit. Which honestly isn't saying much given I haven't been here too long, but hey, its the thought that counts. Big preesh all yall. So since some 11k people liked my last story of malicious compliance at work, have another!

At the time I worked in a cafe set over 3 floors, so my day generally consisted of 10 hours running up and down stairs.

I had slipped on some spilt motor oil in the car park on my way home and my ankle had bent underneath me; I had initially assumed I'd just twisted it, but several hours later it was still throbbing, as well as swelling up so much that it looked like I was hiding a pair of golf balls under my sock and turning a deep shade of purple. As my next shift started in less than 12 hours and we were short staffed as it is, I didn't want to call in sick, but I knew there was no way I'd be able to stand/walk on it for a whole day. I called my manager to explain and to ask if I could a) switch to the register for a few days, which involved much less walking than my regular role, and b) borrow one of the bar stools to sit on behind the counter so I wasn't putting too much weight on it.

I figured this wouldn't be a problem as we had other staff who could cover the floor and there's no issues with access around the register that the chair could get in the way of: I was wrong. Manager insisted that he wouldn't sign off on me having a chair without a signed doctors note verifying my injury, even after I sent him photos of my wrecked ankle.

As my GP was already closed, I headed to the 24 hour walk in clinic. An x-ray and a lot of poking and prodding later, the doctor told me I had to ice it every few hours until the swelling went down (which took almost a week) and keep all weight off it for at least a week, and wear a brace for another 2 weeks after that. When I explained what I did for a living, the doctor presented me with a lovely note explaining that I shouldn't be at work at all for at least 7 days.

I wish I could have seen my managers face when I called to explain that I didn't need the chair after all as actually I wouldn't be in work for the rest of the week and most of next week, doctors orders. Funnily enough I was never asked to produce a doctors note again for the rest of the time I worked there.

EDIT: not to be *that* person but this is my first time getting gold so thanks guys! You'll be pleased to hear that several years later my ankle heeled with zero longterm affects and I'm now in management myself, hopefully treating staff a lot better than I was treated. Also as SO MANY of you have pointed out, please go to the doctor if you injure yourself regardless of whether or not a dickhead manager demands it or not.
Worked for a shitty airline company. Let’s just make up a name... United Blairlines. At this company they started a smaller company that could hire and train people to run the planes, but pay them way less at certain airports. Where my colleagues at other airports were making over $20/hr, I was getting paid $10.25 for the same- and sometimes more- work. It honestly would scare you to know how little the people who are the ones that make sure your plane takes off safely are paid. All of us had two to three jobs to be able to pay rent, and we were all in the job for the benefits- free flights to anywhere in the country- on standby. Anyway I had a boss, we’ll call him Jim. I could tell many stories on how terrible of a boss he was, but this one has actual malicious compliance. 

I had to go to the hospital from the airport because of intense pain in my stomach. It turns out that because of stress caused by that job, my intestines decided to stop functioning. Anyway I spend the day in the hospital and then they gave me a note saying that I didn’t have to work the next two days. I told Jim’s boss that (since I hated talking to Jim) When I went back into work three days later. We had five people total to load all luggage, load the water, and push out five planes in a little over an hour. Already an incredible amount of work for so few people. We had our morning work meeting to discuss how fucked we were, then Jim asked me into his office. “Your attendance is unacceptable.” He said. Dumbfounded, I asked what he meant. “You’ve been late a couple of times, and now missing the past three days...” I said “Jim, I have the note from the hospital. According to work policy, that shouldn’t affect my attendance.” “I don’t care what work policy says. I’m going to fire you.” Again I cited work policy since we were “protected” by a union. I said “Jim you have to give me an attendance warning before you’re allowed to fire me for attendance. This is the first time I’m hearing about attendance, so you can’t fire me right now.” Jim said “it doesn’t matter, I’m going to give you a warning right now, and when I get back from vacation next week, you’re going to be fired, now go back to work, my decision is final.” So, I told my coworkers what happened. Then I decided alright well if next week he’s firing me, I’ll just leave now. Even though their day was about to be fucked since now four people were working five planes, they all said fuck this place, get out of here! So I left and went to get breakfast (this all happened at 4am.) 

As I’m enjoying my meal, Jim calls me. I happily ignore. He calls three more times and then texts me, asking where I was at. I told him “you fired me, why would I keep working for you?” No response. I try to soak in the sight of Jim running between planes like a chicken with his head cutoff. I don’t imagine any plane took off on time that morning. I get a call from HR, and the union rep, and the General manager, who is Jim’s boss. They all said Jim was wrong and asked me if I could come back to work it out. But quitting felt so good, and I felt such weight lifted off my shoulders thinking about not working there anymore, so I never went back.

Some more info. Although this isn’t so satisfying, it’s more a testament of United Blairlines complete lack of ethics... Jim got in really big trouble when he
had a guy who had a shoulder injury and had a note and told Jim several times he couldn’t do super heavy labor. Jim sent him to the bag room by himself anyway. Imagine having to lift 300-700 50-70 pound bags over your head per hour all while running between bag carts and the belt. Needless to say the guy tore his shoulder and had to get surgery on it. They still didn’t fire Jim. Instead they “promoted” him to manage the workers who did ticketing and no manual labor. As far as I know, Jim still works for United. My coworker still cannot move the way he used to two years later.I used to work for AAFES (Think Wal-Mart but on US Military bases) and I worked at the customer service counter where people would come to do various things, such as pay their star card (store credit card) bill. During this time the causalities coming in from Iraq/Afghanistan were pretty constant and shortly prior to this interaction I got briefed on what it meant if I saw the "deceased" card. I got the feeling we had several customers who died in Iraq and the policy was put in place as AAFES likely didn't want the bad PR on trying to collect debt from widows. Which, I mean is a good idea.

It meant the card was closed, all debt was written off, and all automatic payments were canceled.

Well if you've ever worked or dealt with AAFES you understand they are incredibly incompetent. 

Well one day I'm working and a woman comes up to me and says "I'm Mrs. Jackson I would like to make a payment on my star card" I said "That's fine, can I see your ID or star card?" she gave me her star card and I asked "And how much will you be paying today?" to which she said "$1,500" 

I opened her account, and in big bright red letters her account status was "DECEASED" her balances were zerod out confused I ask her how much she owed on the account. She said approx $4,000. 

Thinking maybe I opened the wrong account I asked if she had her star card so I could enter the exact account number. She gave me her starcard.

Same status, she's dead, she's owes us no more money.

And I said "Miss Jackson I have good news and bad news" to which she gave me a frustrated look and said "Whats the bad news" I said "Apparently your dead" she laughs and says "I feel very much alive" I nod my head and go "I agree, you do appear to be alive"

So she goes "So whats the good news?'

I smile and say "You don't owe us anymore money" she goes "what?" I go "Per our policy if a customer dies we close their account, and write off their debt" concerned she goes "Well is this going get sent to collections?" I ask "Were you past due?" she goes "no I wasn't" I go "let me call my manager" so I call my manager and I ask my manager "If a customer is declared deceased, do we send their debt to a collection agency" he goes "No, its written off" so I relay that information.

She starts to smile, and then she goes "So can I use my star card?" I go "No, its been closed but if you want to open another account you can"

So we opened another account (yes it worked and she was approved)

I dealt with Mrs. Jackson several times over the next year as she liked to come in person to make the payment. I nicknamed her Zombie a nickname which she embraced. When she would approach me I would go "Ah the Zombie is back" and she would smile and joke "Be nice or I'll eat you" we kept it as an inside joke my co-workers were always confused.

**Edit**

The Malicious Compliance is I allowed the system to say she was dead, and did not attempt to correct it.tldr: HR reject holiday request despite it being within the rules so I now maliciously push the rules to take a ridiculous number of days leave.

I work in a UK company that has a very good leave policy. I get 27 days annual leave and I can also build up flexitime and take up to 2 flexi days off per month. In addition, due to a screw up in HR, I am allowed to float all my public holidays; I was moved to a joint venture company for tax and legal purposes and when they took me back into the parent company they just adopted my contract from that company instead of getting me to sign a new one.

One day I put in a leave request for 3 leave days and 2 flexi days. HR person denied it as, she said, it was against the rules to mix flexi and normal leave days. The rules had changed some time ago to allow mixing but HR person told me that it was against the rules.

I took it higher and her decision was overturned but she did not like it one little bit. Thereafter, whenever I submitted a request with mixed leave she rejected it out of spite claiming that it was not in the spirit of the rules. It is an interesting view into her mindset that she refused instead of asking how she could do it too. She was all about stopping me so the fight began.

Easter was coming up and I was due to take 2 weeks off. The middle Friday of my holiday was also the end of my leave month and the Monday started a new month so I put in for 2 public holidays carried over from Christmas, 2 flexi days and a good Friday public holiday  and since the second week was a new leave month I used another 2 days of flexi, plus the public holiday Easter Monday and 1 day of public holiday from the start of the year. So my 14 days holiday in the sun cost me a single Friday which is 5 hours of leave time. She went ballistic but could do nothing despite trying to find any way to stop the request.

As a direct result of her trying to stop me I now make a point of building up and using as much flexi leave as I can just to see her pretending to smile as I hand in my request to her directly every single time. She grits her teeth so much I expect her to break a jaw. In 2019 I peaked and managed almost 60 days of leave all thanks to her. Maybe I should thank her.  


Update: Wow thanks for the response and awards. Still new to Reddit so this is a bit overwhelming. It is always nice to hear different views from people around the world but I am amazed at the responses from the US regarding how few days leave you guys get. That's truly shocking that some of you get no time off at all.

Thanks all.I used to travel for work fairly often, and the company I worked for had very strict reimbursement policies. You had to have a receipt for EVERYTHING or you wouldn't get refunded for it.

On one trip I was staying in the center of a mid-sized city, but the training I was attending was in the suburbs. There was a bus route I could take, and while it took a great deal more of my time it was WAY cheaper to take the bus than a taxi. $1.50 bus fare vs. approximately $40 for a cab. Problem is, there's no way to get a receipt for riding the bus. 

So, I email my company's business manager and explain the situation. Ask if I can please get reimbursed for the bus fare without receipts. The response comes -- no, any reimbursement requests without receipts will be denied, and I will have to cover the expense out-of-pocket.

Fine. Cab rides, twice a day, for a week. Totally allowable within company policy. Fares plus tips, the total taxi expenses come to almost $500. My boss questions the request, I show her the email from the business manager and explain that I tried to take the bus (which would have totaled $15. for the week.) but was told it wasn't reimbursable.

Over the following weeks, heated discussion ensues between the business office and senior management. Two months later, there's a new policy -- reimbursement requests for anything over $10 must have a receipt. Under $10? No receipt required....It was about 2 months after my 1 year anniversary at my last job. I caught a nasty flu around Christmas. 

I called into about the flu. They wouldn't accept emails even though I couldn't speak. On the fourth day my work required a doctor's note. I didn't want to spend the 100 dollar copay for a doctor to tell me rest and fluids.

Luckily I had a good general doctor. So when I called him he sent me a PDF I could forward. 

It stated Greedence has the fucking flu. He needs time off to recover and will come back when he is healthy enough. Greedence is not a grade schooler and should not need a doctor's note when he is sick.

My VP tried to call me on when I would be back but I kept directing her to the doctor note.On mobile, sorry for the format.

This happened about 7 years ago, I (M29) used to work in a store whose name sounds a lot like those cops that ride in planes. This particular day I was in the register when a well dressed guy and three women walk in, each takes a cart, start walking around and picking things out.

I was known for my no bs attitude on the register, you throw money at me, give me attitude, w.e, I'll do it right back to ya so when a coordinator comes to me 30 mins later and asks me to take the dude and his girls on my register, I already know we're in for a fun time.

They rolled up with these three carts FULL of clothes and not just any stuff, we talking shoes and boots that costs 300-800, expensive handbags, coats and more, I'm just there thinking "aaaw shit". So they walk up, I start scanning all the while these ladies are being unpleasant. Finally I get thru it all and total comes up to about 3k, dude reaches into his fly ass coat and pulls out a wad of cash, all crisp $100 bills and immediately I knew something was off, so i take the money and go to the machine to check it, first bill, doesn't pass, neither does the second so I turn back around and tell the dude the I can't take the money, before I even get a chance to fully explain, one of the chicks cuts me off and tells me to "take the fucking money and do my damn job"

Cue malicious compliance.

I say "you know what? You got it, let me get the manager so he can help". See at our discretion, we can decline a form of payment, say if two of your cards get declined? Gotta use cash, your cash don't pass? Gotta use a card or we can just tell you to fuck off, but if we suspect you're using fake money, we gotta try and keep you there while we get the cops. So I got to my manager, cash in hand and tell him what's up, he goes to the office and checks the money. Now the dude is nervous but just imagine his pants when two cops walk in and head straight for us, his horrified face made my day.

Cops take my statement and next thing you know all 4 of them are getting arrested, while one of the ladies is screaming and cursing at me, while I tell her in the most innocent voice I can pull off "you told me to do my job!"

Edit: thanks for the awards yall and I'm glad ya had fun with the name.EDIT: I haven't worked at this store for almost 7 years. I'm a teacher now, so thankfully I don't have to deal with customers now. Just some bat-shit crazy parents. 

I used to work as a checker/stocker at a grocery store. Our store manager (Mike) was a d-bag, and would always try to screw people. There was massive turnover at this store.

So one day, I get called into his office and asked why I gave overtime on my time card. I was usually scheduled for 1-10pm (hour lunch), but the store didn't close until 10, so I had to count out my drawer afterwards.

I explained this to Mike and he didn't care. He went off saying that I should be doing this earlier, and that I was to leave at 10 on the dot so that I had NO OVERTIME.

Got it, boss man.

A couple of weeks later it was Thanksgiving time. We had extra checkers, but from 8-10pm, I was the only one besides the manager who closed the store that day (Mike).

I made the announcement at about 9.40 that we would be closing in 20 minutes, and to please finish up your purchases to check out.

People started coming up to check out, and their carts were LOADED since it was almost Thanksgiving.

I go about checking them all out, but then the clock turns to 10:00.

I stop in the middle of my transaction. Call Mike on the store phone and tell him I'm leaving since I can't have overtime. Walk over and clock out.

There are still 6 to 7 customers with full baskets in line at this time.

Mike comes over and is yelling at me as I'm walking out. But I remind him that he specifically told me that I can't have ANY overtime.

When I got into work the next day, I was written up. But it was worth it. Apparently he spent the next 30-45 minutes checking people out.

TL;DR: I did what my boss told me to. He got stuck checking people out by himself for 45 minutes after the store closed. I work(ed) as a housekeeper at a small local hotel. At the beginning when I started (about three years ago), things were pretty peachy. I got above minimum wage and worked in an environment with a more relaxed working pace. We had more time than your average hotel to clean rooms and it showed in customer satisfaction. We had stellar reviews with customers raving about how there wasn't a speck of dust anywhere, how everything from the lamp shades to the bathroom drain was always scrubbed squeaky clean.

I loved my job and took pride in it, and when we had extra time, (which happened from time to time,) we would do some deeper cleaning like scrubbing all the walls inch by inch, disinfecting the whole bathroom, cleaning the blinds etc. Even though we all had some extra time, we used it to make sure the rooms were always up to a very high standard.

As a result of this, we got a reputation of being an affordable but very clean hotel, so our popularity spiked. Even before we got so popular (in our prime we were booked full about 90&#37; of the days) our boss made a pretty nice amount of money. We don't have a reception, we're self-service (you just get a passcode for your room via text message) so he saved money with that. He drives an expensive car and seems very well off. We were never struggling financially.

Then things started changing. We're a very close-knitted team of cleaners who have been in the house for years. A couple of us left at the end of last year (one moved to another state, another became a housewife after having a kid), and we started expecting newcomers to our team. They never came. Our boss claimed that it's hard to find workers for this kind of job. We never had anyone interviewed and I never saw ads anywhere that we're hiring, so I'm not sure he was even planning on replacing them. So our work pace got tighter. We managed somehow but there was no longer time for thorough cleaning.

Then, the boss opened a restaurant so that the guests could have breakfast. Cleaning it daily got added to our workload (and that place is massive, it takes at least 1½ hours to clean daily). At the same time, he also opened a separate airbnb-style apartment (three bedrooms, kitchen, living room and bathroom) for larger groups who wanted to reside together. Cleaning that fell on us as well.

So suddenly, we were down two people (there were seven of us initially) and shoved two massive new responsibilities. We asked our boss again to hire more people, but he said no and that "we've been having it too easy" beforehand. He also refused to add another hour or two to our daily working hours (currently 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.). We have six hours and everything needs to be done at 3 p.m. sharp because that's when the new passcodes start working.

Understandably, we were stressed out. There was suddenly far too much to do and our boss also simultaneously expected that we would keep up our usual cleaning standard. But when our time per room plummets from 45 min to 25 min tops (usually closer to 15), obviously we're not able to clean everything the way we did before. We would get yelled at when we got bad feedback because there wasn't enough time to clean thoroughly enough, customers who came in after our clean rooms were disappointed and took their business elsewhere. Also, my coworkers started calling in sick because they were burnt out. It was a mess, but our boss maintained the outlook that if he just pushed a massive amount of work on us, we'd somehow magically find an extra pair of hands and get everything done 100&#37;.

Last week, we had a meeting with my coworkers. We discussed the current situation and to my surprise, everyone was considering quitting. Out of loyalty to our long-time employer, the five of us agreed to have a meeting with our boss and try to persuade him to hire more staff to bring the hotel back to its earlier standard. A couple of days later, we had the said meeting. Our boss was still in denial and said that we just need to up our pace and do things faster. He cited that most hotels give housekeepers about 20 minutes to do everything. We pointed out that it's true, but in that case he can't expect us to clean better than those hotels. He scoffed and told us "If you don't like working here, then leave."

That was all we needed to hear. That night we had another meeting amongst us cleaners. We checked our contracts and realized there was no agreed on notice for resignation as we're at-will. So, we were all going to take his advice.

This morning, at 9 a.m. sharp, the five of us paid our boss a visit. The look on his face when we simultaneously slammed down our resignation letters and marched out, leaving no one to clean the whole hotel today, will warm my heart for the rest of my days. He was absolutely stunned.

He tried to call us to talk things over. Nuh uh, we just did what you told us to. Have fun replacing what was a motivated, loyal and dedicated team of cleaners who made your business bloom.

TL;DR Boss refuses to replace employees who left and simultaneously adds a fuckton of work to us employees who are already struggling and burnt out. When we try to tell him that we can't take it anymore, he tells us that "if we don't like it, then leave". We take his advice and all resign simultaneously without prior notice, leaving him in deep shit. Feels good man.So quite a number of years ago I worked at a large Pizza Chain. The one with the red roof.

Every Tuesday evening a group of 12 people would come in to eat. Usually within 30 minutes of closing time.

They would order 1 large vegetarian pizza, with hot peppers, and ask for the pizza to be well done. They would also ask for chillies on the side.

You might think, ok, what is wrong with that?
Well, a large pizza would be cut in 12 pieces.
This group would come in, take up a large space, only have water, order the one pizza, each person would have one slice, leave a mess and not tip.

They started asking for more hot peppers and complaining that the pizza wasn’t spicy enough. They also started sending the pizza back to be cooked more (it was already pretty dark).

Well, one day they sent the pizza back but this time asked for it to be remade not just cooked more.

At this point it was 15 minutes to closing, I had cleaned everything and was pretty much finishing up my shift. Of course the manager has to appease the customers.

So I start making them another pizza.

They want it spicy? Let’s give them spicy. I added a coating of chillies to the tomato sauce. Covered it with toppings and added lots of hot peppers.
They want it well done? Fine, let’s put it through the oven twice. (it was a conveyer belt oven. Normally well done is put in the oven 1.5 times).

This thing came out dark and just smelled spicy.

I cut the pizza and give it to the waitress. I’m now waiting to get an ear full after the customer complains. All prepared with my reasoning that I’m making what the customer asked for.

I finish my shift and the manager calls me over.
Turns out the customer did ask to speak to a manager... The customer said it was the best pizza they have had since they started coming and it was just how they wanted it. They asked if it could be made this way each week and left a nice tip.

EDIT:

Wow. I did not think my story would get so many likes. And my first award! Thank you!
For everyone wondering, yes the customers were Indian.

For others asking why I didn’t just say Pizza Hut. I always find it fun when others subtly describe the well known store / brand. 

As for the tip, it was split between everyoneAbout 10 years ago, my at-the-time girlfriend (now wife) and I moved from the area we went to college to an apartment near where we planned to start our careers. I say it was an apartment, but it was really the basement of a house that the landlord had walled off to create 2 "apartments" to rent. The place was kinda crappy, but the rent was cheap for the area, and we were close to work. 

Everything was fine for a few months, but the only parking for us was on the street out front - the couple that rented the upstairs "apartment" had rights to the garage and driveway (they paid more than we did). Suddenly my car got a couple BS tickets for parking on the street - I'm guessing some ass-clown cop needed to meet their quota - and my girlfriend's car got sideswiped in a hit & run. This crap had to stop, so we emailed the landlord (her preferred form of communication) to ask if there's anywhere safe for us to park. She replies, "Park anywhere you want." We had noticed that our upstairs neighbors usually eschewed the driveway to park in the front yard (they were horribly lazy), so we figured that would be a good spot for us too. We parked in the front yard the rest of the year.

We figured that would be the end of it. We finished our lease, left the place in better shape than we found it, and requested our $1500 security deposit back. After a couple weeks, we got a check for $700... WTF!?!?!? Since there was no explanation, we asked the landlord for one, and she replied that the deducted amount was to "re-sod the lawn", claiming that parking on it had damaged it. 

Now, I was the one who cut the grass at this house while we stayed there, so I was well aware that the lawn was more weeds and bald spots than grass - picture the African savanna in mid-summer. No one had ever lifted a finger to landscape any part of the property, but the landlord wanted to sell the house once the leases were up, and she figured she could get the renters to pay for a nice, new lawn. I complained to the landlord: didn't care. I put in a complaint with the local housing department: didn't care. I threatened to take her to court: didn't care. So, that's what I did - took her to small claims court.

I had never sued anyone before, so I was going in prepared! I took pictures of the entire front yard - the area that we "damaged" was actually one of the best patches of grass, though it did have a small rut that my tires made when the yard was muddy in the summer. I got testimonials from our upstairs and across-the-street neighbors. Most importantly, I printed out the email where the landlord told us to park anywhere. 

We were suing for $1800 to cover court costs and us both missing a day of work on top of the full security deposit. In mediation we said we would settle for $1400, but she must have thought she was in the right because she refused to offer a penny more than the original $700 check, which we never cashed. When we got in front of the judge, it was pretty clear that she had no evidence, hadn't prepared anything, and just assumed that us "kids" would fall on our faces. We did not.

We put everything we had in front of the judge and made our claim (he was impressed). He stopped us when we showed him the email to ask the landlord, "Did you really tell them to park wherever they wanted?" When she said "yes", the judge replied "Then what are we even talking about?", and that was that. Judgement in full for us, and that bitch had to pay to re-sod her own damn lawn. 

Next time you tell someone to "park wherever you want", you'd better mean it. Or at least don't try to fuck someone over when they comply with what you said! If you made it this far, thanks for reading!
This was around 10yrs ago. I’ve always been very technical minded & was able to read blueprints, construct complex devices, weld (mig, tig, stick. Certified in fact among other things.)
I took a high paying job with a company that made several things for railroads.
The job entailed most of my skills, I mentioned above. It was a very small department, in fact there were only 2-3 of us. But we got along great & challenged each other. Which led to higher production. (Sadly the one other guy in my department left for a better job which left me by myself.)
My supervisor was great as well; liked to joke around with me, left me alone to focus on my work & had my back when I needed him. We actually assembled Signal Enclosures & Mast & Ladder Houses for railroads.

Fast forward to 3yrs later & the owners buy a much bigger location & move the whole company. As you might expect, several departments get shuffled. 
Yep, my department gets folded into a completely different department that has no clue what I do. 
At first, it was fine but it starts to go pear shaped pretty quickly.
My new supervisor seemed good at first. But I quickly realize he’s a “snake in the grass.”
For example,  I had to help the prototype department assemble a new, lighter type of mast & ladder house. So I’m printing out issues & suggesting fixes, etc.
New supervisor is not happy. He keeps coming over huffing, groaning under his breath, standing over my shoulder, etc.
He finally interrupts and asks in an angry voice “How much longer will this take?!” 
I respond “I have 4 more hours today. And eights hours everyday after that.”
He looks puzzled. 
So I explain “This is my department. This is where I work. These are my responsibilities. So if it takes two months, that’s how long it takes.”
Almost as if to get the last word in he says “You work where & when I tell you!” And storms off.
Next day I’m called into the office & they force me to sign a letter that states, 
 I now work in my new supervisor’s department.
Fine by me.
I watch from a distance in my “new department” as all the stock, hardware, parts, orders, etc. of my “old department” begin to rack-up. 
And since I’m the only one that works in that department, or rather, used to work in that department…lol.
Nobody is doing a thing about it.
After about 2 weeks, my old department is a disaster. With items being thrown wherever it would fit. Orders had began to miss deadlines and higher-ups wanted answers.
Sure enough, I get called into the office where the new supervisor blames me for everything. But wouldn’t let me get a word in. 
Of course, they let me go without any reason or paperwork. The look of relief on my new, ex-supervisor’s face when I walk out was priceless. He had no clue what was coming…
I leave with a smile plastered to me face. Because I knew something they didn’t;
I was the only one that knew how to build the mast & ladder structures.
I relaxed at home for around 2 weeks because I knew I would be getting a call from them.
I ignore the first dozen calls. Then I answer : “can you come back & build, train new hires, etc for your department?” 
“Sure.” I say “for $20,000.”
(Now that may seem like a lot but it wasn’t. They made millions from these. So there really was only one option; pay me $20k or lose millions.)
Long story short, they went back-and-forth with me but finally conceded. 

I received $20k for two days work & they were helpless.
The cherry on top was my new, ex supervisor was fired for being a nitwit & costing the company $20k.

Edit;
Wow this popped-off! Thanks for all the awards! Didn’t expect that.
Sorry it was so long.
Some further information- I didn’t want to work for them again. It potentially would have been a situation- they used my knowledge & training of the new staff only to terminate me for some made up reason. Which I understand, nobody wants a disgruntled employee.
Why $20k? I bounced around on numerous figures but when it came time to say a number over the phone, $20,000 was the number that came out. No real thought. Could I have gotten more? Yes I think so. But it paid my bills, spent some, little vacation & gave me time to be picky about my next job.
Did I get another job? Yes.
As to your questions; could I train 2 new workers in 2 days? Yes. Did I do it well? No. The company wanted it as cheap as possible. So they grabbed two new guys from a different department with zero experience. The best I could do was show them the general process given their limited experience & my limited time.
As far as getting all the work up to date; in my dept. the expected prod. was 2 per day. My personal record in one day was 18 before I stopped (previous good supervisor told me to stop. “What the heck are you going to do after you finish a months worth of work in a day?! You’ll be sitting around with nothing to do or you’ll be going home early.” ) 
The first month I was there I set-up a series of jigs the allowed fast, repeatable results. That coupled with years of doing it meant I could build them in my sleep.My wife (f31) and I (m33), like many other Americans, are beleaguered under the for profit medical insurance industry. My wife gave birth to our precious first daughter in September of 2021 and we have been dealing with taking the little one to the doctor (already had an emergency room visit yay!) and what not when we receive the bill for the L&D at the hospital from September. We were charged over 20,000 dollars for a straight forward, regular delivery with an epidural. Even though I do not like our insurance, it covered a huge chunk of the amount due. That being said, there was still over 2,000 left. Well, with my wife being a teacher and myself being a state government worker, our income isn't exactly low, but neither is it high either. 2,000 out of pocket would put us into major debt. The hospital was very patient (at first) with trying to get paid until recently. 

I had been in communication with the hospital trying to negotiate the cheapest amount possible to clear the account. The hospital still wanted close to half of the amount in order to close the account out. I countered with what we could legitimately offer and consigning myself to the addition of yet another auto debit coming out of our bank account because they weren't going to accept my offer...but then the account representative kept interrupting me during the phone call and was being outrageously rude. I understand that we have a debt, and I'm not trying to welch on it, but don't treat me like dirt because of this piss poor system that was charging my wife over 50 dollars for one frigging Advil amongst other insanity. 

The account representative continued being nasty during the call and derisively suggested maybe I should go to the financial assistance program...so I did. I called the customer service line for that said program and in less than 10 minutes I was getting confirmation of the entire amount being forgiven. Apparently when you make less than 300% (my apologies. I previously had a multiplication sign when I meant percentage) the federal poverty rate and you go to most non profit hospitals, they will forgive the amount. The arrogant account representative tried to shame me into paying an outrageous price for services rendered and didn't want to accept my offer of paying some of the bill...so now they get absolutely nothing.

Don't accept the medical bills that you receive. Fight tooth and nail to get it down, and if you're lucky like my wife and I, you just may get it all cleared away!To start with, my boss had his moments. Sometimes he was a dick who would push off me on my raises or screw with my system, sometimes he would hook me up and make my life pleasant. This was not one of the latter. 

So, I had plans for vacation, but my boss decided I had to take my vacation time in  June instead of August because HE wanted to take his vacation in August and no other time would work. I lost some money as a result, but thats my fault for planning ahead I guess. 

Well. Ill start by saying...my position was vital, and being gone for 2 weeks, with nobody able to access my terminal, was not ideal for the business. 

After forcing me to take my vacation early, and losing a chunk of my deposits, He told me to change my passwords before I go for security reasons. Welp. That is exactly what I did. I didn't leave notes(its a security system. I dont leave passwords laying around.) I didn't leave anything for his part timers to work with. I did PRECISELY as he demanded. And when I go on vacation, my work phone does not ever get turned on. I straight up left it at home. (I told him on the way out the day before, that if he has questions, ask em now. He said " I know what I'm doing".)

Apparently, while I was gone 2 weeks, his part time techs ruined the server system, destroyed my work terminal, managed to screw up and lose several clients, got my account hardlocked(was easy to fix.) And all around, cost my boss about 100k in damages/profits lost. Most of these part timer techs were fired for the amount of property damages they did. For the life of me, I can't figure out how they ruined so much tech while I wasn't around. 

I still don't know how he runs a business. But he stopped giving stupid requests like that.

Quick edit: he also, had another master admin account i set up for him. But he lost the information I made for him, on a handy little laminated wallet card. So.....

Edit 2, electric boogaloo: yes the boss still left for his vacation. He did not admit he made a mistake, and things were not fully repaired or fixed when he went on vacation. Also, I booked my vacation with him, and and made my reservations in December. He knew for months.Hey reddit! Not 100% sure this counts but i want to share my story

I used to work in a Grocery store back in 2016, I was 16-17 at the time, (I don't work retail anymore) but i wanted to share this story i still remember to this day.

It was a pretty normal night right before the end of my shift (I was one of the few closers at my store) so it was just me, my supervisor, and a cashier (i worked the self checkout/customer service desk). My supervisor had just collected the tills and was in the back counting, and I was starting my rounds to take back the non-perishables that were left at the registers. (i also might add that our store had terrible camera placement, basically it showed all the registers, and the supervisors office door which is where the safe was, this is important later).

After putting up all the items that were left at the registers, I did my final checks of the store to make sure there were no misplaced/damaged item on the floor, I find a case of beer that was leaking in our beer/wine section and since i wasn't sure how damaged the bottom of the cardboard case was i had to drag it to the front so i could inform my supervisor about the damaged item before taking it to the back (we kept a cart(s) full of damaged items to be taken out by the morning crew).

Since the supervisors office is locked while they are counting the tills i call over to her and let her know that there was a damaged case of beer and i was taking it to the back. She responds with an absent "Ok, sounds good."

So I take it to the back place it with the rest of the damaged items, and go back to the front to see if there is anything else my supervisor needs me to do before I clock out, there isn't.

Next couple days are fine as I finish up the week and wait for the next weeks schedule to be posted, and I find out that I'm not scheduled for the next week, I figure there must have been a mistake as there was someone working at the same Grocery store who shared my first name. I go upstairs to my managers office and ask him about the schedule and why I wasn't scheduled.

He responds with a "Oh, My bad I forgot to tell you that you are suspended until the investigation is over, by the way can you train "your replacement" today on the self checkout/customer service desk?"

Me confused and annoyed at the moment don't really pay attention to the second part of his comment ask him what he was talking about.

My Manager: "We caught you STEALING that case of beer that you took to the back, and until the police investigation is complete you won't be working here anymore. Please turn in your uniform, name tag, and badge."

I AM FURIOUS, but I decide that I would just go with bit of MC in this situation. "Well "bossman" I took the DAMAGED case of beer to the back to be thrown out in the morning as per procedure, but since I won't be working here anymore I guess you will just have to find someone else to train "my replacement", since I clearly CANT be trusted." (I was the only person who could train someone for the Customer service desk other than him)

His. Jaw. Dropped.

The look on his face was priceless as I took off my uniform and handed him my name tag, and override card. I then proceeded to walk out get in my car and drive home.

About 2 years later I join the army, and I'm going for a job that required a Security Clearance, Guess what shows up? That suspension with an unfinished police report and the tapes from the security camera. I sit there with my interviewer as we watch the tape together clearly showing that I did not steal ANYTHING (needless to say I was approved for my clearance). I ask if I can get a copy of the tape, and my interviewer agrees, it took 2 years but I finally had the evidence I needed to sue for wrongful termination, but as the time is well over the statute of limitation, I am unable to actually do anything about it.

Either way I decide to go pay my old workplace a visit over my Christmas block leave and a couple people recognize me (including my old boss). He tells me that thieves like me aren't welcome in HIS store, and that I need to leave or he would be calling the police, I told him to call them, and that his claim would surely hold up when I showed them the copy of the video footage of me "stealing". (the store had one of my favorite muffins and honestly I really wanted one since they are only made there)

The police got called and did nothing and I got 3 muffins free of charge thanks to my favorite supervisor! WORTH IT!Story from a few years back, working in retail hell. TLDR at bottom.

Our store had been going through major renovations, official reopening, the works. There was a new department manager after I'd stepped down from that position, from too much stress and a lack of support from upper management.

A little about the new manager, she was a nice enough lady, but perhaps more ill-suited to the position than I had been. I was helping her learn the ropes of how our department worked. All fine except for a major inability to self-solve, which led me to turning my phone off outside of my working hours. She'd call me constantly in a panic with minor questions that plenty of other people in-store could have answered.

The store manager was an all-stick-and-no-carrot kind of person, who treated every question and issue as an inconvenience. She was a nightmare to work for even if she *liked* you, many good people quit when she took over our store. Myself included, after about 6 months. I'd worked for that company for 10 years.

There was one particular day, where we were already going to be short on staff and it was a busy shopping day (Thursday - pension day). I needed to leave by a certain time in the afternoon (lets say 3pm) for an important doctors appointment. I'd given plenty of notice but the day before I was told I couldn't go. It was too late to reschedule without being charged the entire appointment fee.

Cue whining from DM: But I *neeeeeeed* you, it's so busy and I don't have enough cover! What's this appointment for anyway?!

Me: It's an important doctors appointment. I'm not telling you any more because last time I shared with you, the whole store knew my personal business.

DM: But what am I supposed to do?!

Me: I don't know, you're the manager.

Cue later in the day, I'm summoned into the store managers office. I'm informed in no uncertain terms, that I am *not allowed* to leave early on this day, because the department is short staffed and they need me. Being a meek little thing I bend to my store managers will. I say "Okay" and shuffle off with my head down.

Now, I'm understandably upset, my fragile mental state is in tatters. I feel that this is all really unfair and somehow wrong, so I call the only resource I have: The union.

I'm crying and explain the situation to the kind lady on the phone. Now because there was never any paperwork submitted for leaving early (normally rearranging shifts etc was done verbally then updated in the roster), there wasn't anything she could do in an official capacity. But then she threw me a lifeline.

"You're going to the doctor anyway, right? You're within your rights to take a sick day, get your doctor to write you a note. They can't force you to come in, you can't get in trouble for it, and they will have to pay you for it."

So that's what I did. I did as I was told - I didn't leave early. I called in sick and just didn't show up at all. Instead of losing 1-2 hours of staffed hours, they lost a whole day for being unreasonable bullies.

The next day I heard all about how the department was chaos. I felt bad but it also felt good to set a boundary with these people that were taking advantage of my good nature.


**TLDR** Told I can't leave early for important doctors important. So I don't, take entire day off paid instead.I had worked at a small end rural internet company for nearly 6 years. It was family owned and they paid us all really well for the work that we did. Barely anyone ever left the company. In my position, I was head of sales and I controlled all software that was associated to clients. This had everything in it including billing addresses, service addresses and leads for new clients. It was an outdated program for sure, but it got the job done and it worked for us. Fast forward time and we are still doing our regular jobs when there was an unscheduled meeting thrown at us. We walked in and there were several new faces sitting on the other end of the table. 
They announced that they had sold the company to XYZ. XYZ seemed like an okay place to continue working because they too were local and the team seemed nice. I was told everything is business as usual and to not do anything different. 
 The transition took place and ever so often, someone from the new company would come to me and ask how we would do things and get a feel for it. I could tell they were trying to weed us out so I went balls to the wall with renewals on old accounts. They announced to me that I needed to go to the HR department around closing time. Having anticipated this, I saved all of my commission files and emailed them to myself. I went to the office and they laid me off on the spot because they do not pay commission to their staff. I said okay and that I plan on them still paying me commission for the time I was there as they had not discussed anything pay related with me yet. She said again we do not pay commission. 
I emailed my commission statement to the manager I was working with and basically was told the same thing. Fast forward to the next week when they realized they no longer had the credentials to get into our system and they called to ask for the information. I let them know that I would be happy to do that when I come up there to get my check for commission. I did not hear anything the next day and then I get a call that my commission check is in the office. 
I went up there, grabbed the biggest commission check I had ever made and gave them the credentials. Never tell someone business as usual when you do not intent on things being business as usual.Edit 3
many thanks for the awards guys they're  much appreciated





Whilst working in a job that I'd been doing for 15 years the company brought in a freshly manufactured degree waving manager.

Any problems within the production area I was always called in to troubleshoot for them and get things moving again.

Mr Fuckwittery the new manager asked me what I was doing one day and I told him that I was just thinking how to resolve a recurring issue in production.

His response was we don't pay you to think get back to your own job.

Ok Mr Fuckwittery on my way.

Cue MC.


Two hours later I get a call from the production supervisor asking for help as line six was down again.
Sorry Steve call the Mr Fuckwittery he's in charge and apparently I'm not paid to think.

Tannoy goes calling me to the office.

Mr Fuckwittery is a rare shade of red with anger.

Informs me that I need to go sort out the issue in production. Sorry sir I can't do that as I don't get paid to think and leave his office.

Smiling all the way back to my department.

Line in production is shut down for two whole shifts with people standing around scratching their heads.

MD comes to visit the next day and wants to know why the line is off.
Maintenance guy tells him he can't understand why it won't work properly. MD says has Tom had a look for you.

Maintenance guy says Tom won't come over because apparently he's not payed to think.

MD says who the hell said that to him?

Maintenance guy tells him Mr Fuckwittery told him that when he had just helped us out the other day.

MD calls Mr Fuckwittery to the line and tells him that I'd been with the company since he founded it and I know more about this production facility than the people who designed it. And wtf are you doing telling long term staff that they're not paid to think.

MD calls me to ask if I can help out as a favour to him. I Came across  and spent five minutes realigning a couple of sensors and the line was restarted. 

MD takes me to lunch offers me an extra 150 a week and tells me that the only person I answer to in future is him and him only.

To this day that manager still scowls whenever I see him around.




Edit apologies for being long-winded and any grammatical or spelling errors.
But tbh I don't care.

Edit part two. For the people who don't know what a managing director is.(MD)Not me, this happened to my sister in law. She's quite a lot younger than me and was working part time in a chain shoe shop whilst studying. After graduating with a business degree, she was offered a job managing one of the shoe stores. This obviously seemed like a fantastic opportunity for her first role as a graduate. She was on a probationary period for three months and after that her salary would increase, although the probationary period could be extended.

She HATED it. The owner would give her instructions and later that day his girlfriend would come in and give her opposite instructions, then criticise her for the way she had worked and micromanage her until she did it her way. The girlfriend wasn't part of the business at all but SIL didn't want to cause any issues, so didn't argue. However, it was causing her a lot of stress; I noticed she lost quite a bit of weight. It came to a bit of a head when SIL had spent a few hours sorting the filing out, then went to the shop to serve customers. When she went back to finish the filing, girlfriend had gone through it all and messed it up, saying she'd organised it differently for her, wasting hours of SIL's time and causing her more work.

SIL suspected they were going to extend her probationary period to screw her over, even though she was doing a great job despite being sabotaged and micromanaged. Her staff loved her and sales were higher. So she started looking for another job. Surprise, they extended her probationary period but she found a job paying more and 10 minutes from her flat. They wanted her to work ASAP but she was sure she had to work her notice period, which was 6 weeks. She asked me to read her contract to see if I can confirm. The notice was indeed 6 weeks...except for staff on probation. Either party could terminate with one weeks notice.

SIL tells owner she's quitting and giving one weeks notice. Owner is caught on the hop and can't find another manager that quickly. Tells SIL her notice period is six weeks, to which she takes great delight in pointing out that her probationary period has been extended and the required notice is one week.

SIL has been at the new job for quite a while now and is much happier.

Edit: Lots of people saying you can quit when you want. I should have clarified that we're in the UK (some of you have correctly sussed that out), where contracts can be enforced.

What could they do if she was contracted to a longer notice period and refused to work it? It's never happened to me or anyone I know but the internet tells me they could theoretically bill her for the cost difference to bring someone in to cover the remaining notice period, although this could be costly and unlikely.

Really enjoying they puns, trying to get through and give everyone an up vote 🙂So, I used to work for my grandparents on an oil farm in Texas.

I was 17, freshly graduated from high-school, and had moved from the Midwest to Texas to live with my grandparents and work on the oil farm they worked for doing some easy data-entry.  The building was essentially a tin building on the job site where my grandma and I (the only two office workers besides my grandfather who was the foreman) worked.  

Basically when the new hires would come in that had missed the initial hiring round I was the one that would make sure all their paperwork was in order and that they had all of their OSHA classes finished, and if any safety training hadn't been done I would just put in the VHS and confirm on a written copy that they had finished it "under my instruction".

This went on for two months with no issue until one fateful day, a regular Florida Man (record and all) came in as a new hire and came to my office to finish his new hire paperwork.  Once he was in my office I found he had no safety training to speak of and I informed him his next day or two would be spent in my office watching safety videos (all of this was paid of course).

He immediately flew into a rage, screaming about how he wouldn't "have some little girl teaching him how to do his job", which again I was a 17 year old female (at the time, I now identify as non-binary), and was only going through company standards and OSHA rules with him.

I went to my grandfather who was my boss at the time obviously very confused and uncomfortable and unsure of how I should proceed.  To which my grandfather said, "You wanna fire him?”

Cue my excitement, my grandfather follows me to my office and I, as a 17 year old, get to fire this grown ass man sitting in front of me.  I start directing him to gather his things and leave and he starts up a huge fit, yelling and cursing at me, before he noticed my grandfather standing in the door with his gun holstered on his hip (my grandfather usually kept this locked in a safe on the ground or in his truck, I hadn't realized until after he'd pulled it out just for me) and very quietly then he got up and left.

The most satisfying moment of my life.

Edit: Changed queue to “cue”, sorry y’all I wrote this drunk at 3AM.

EditEdit: Enough with the transphobia please, obviously gender has a lot to do with this story so I just wanted to include that I identify differently now.When I was a kid, probably 7-12, I’d routinely wake up at 5-6 in the morning with no alarm, perfectly rested, and decide I’d just go play some RuneScape before school. I was homeschooled at the time, so I had a good couple hours before I was supposed to start. 

For some reason my mom had a problem with this. She had a lot of problems with a lot of things but that’s another rant for my therapist. So naturally she decides to tell me that I can’t wake up at 6 anymore. So I thought as you probably do that she was being stupid, but of course not being brave enough to tell her so, went into my bedroom, and set my alarm for 6:*01* instead. 

When she woke up the next day and found me on the computer she of course started screaming at me. I waited patiently for her to stop, and then proudly announced that I had not disobeyed her, I had woken up at 6:01 instead. My victory was shortlived, as I then got my ass beat and was grounded. I never was allowed to wake up early again, and of course am now a lazy adult who would rather sleep as much as possible.

Edit: thanks to u/caufield88uk for pointing out I didn’t clarify: 
I woke up without an alarm when I was really little, but then started sleeping more and set an alarm because I genuinely enjoyed waking up early. I made it sound weird. 

Also: it wasn’t because I played video games. It was solely the waking up part. Never had issues with school because of it, was never tired. Wasn’t loud in the morning, didn’t wake her up. She was just a narcissistic pos.So, I have a Karen for a neighbor. She's a grumpy old C with a live in son in his 40s and no other family or friends. And when I say she's a Karen we're talking to the point that she came into my property to yell at our landscaper about a boulder he was installing... on our property (something about believing it would fall over... onto more of our property...)

A few months after we moved in we receive a letter trying the HOA saying they'd received complaints and asking that we make sure we're mowing watering and maintaining. I chalked it up to moving into a nicer neighborhood and made an effort to mow twice a week instead of my normal once, added a little time to the sprinklers, and figured all was good...

Apparently it was not all good as we received another letter stating the complaints had continued and the HOA wanted to talk with us to see what the problem was. 

I should note, we had just moved in not that long ago, and hadn't landscaped the back yet so were letting our dogs pee on the front at night, which lead to the inevitable patches of bright green grass that grow stupid fast. Now I'll freely admit I don't keep my yard to the level of some of my neighbors, but it was in perfectly good shape outside some green spots in an otherwise average looking yard and I do my best to keep things mowed and looking decent.

Turns our grumpy C had taken real offense to this and started complaining to the HOA. The "hearing ended up bring mostly incoherent rambling, but the bottom line was she didn't like how our lawn looked with the green spots...

While the HOA agreed this was not her business and definitely not theirs, I decided she was right and we should stop letting our dogs out in the front to pee as I also don't like the green spots. Now, I put them on the leash and let them do their business in her yard (read: tree lawn). And I'm clearly not the only one as her entire yard is now COVERED in pee spots and dead spots on her actual lawn which my dogs don't step for on. I'm pretty sure she's complained about everyone with a dog, and now the entire neighborhood takes their dogs to her yard.

The best part, she actually does a shit job taking care of her lawn, weeds and crab grass everywhere, she just waters it almost non stop. So today I got to report her to the HOA for her yard looking like total shit. If it were any other house (there are much worse) I wouldn't care at all, but this lady wanted lawns without spots so I'm just doing my part to enforce her rules...

EDIT : to everyone hating on HOAs - they're hit and miss for sure but in this case THEY didn't do anything but tell me someone complained and then tell her I wasn't violating any rules and they weren't going to be involved... Also, HOAs are often surprisingly easy to take over, you just have to skip the whining about how terrible they are and do the work instead. If the HOA is that bad, talk to some neighbors, tell them you're going to run for the board, and get them to vote for you. Then, help others do the same... and remember what you hated about the previous board. Be forewarned, everyone finds a reason to complain, no one is will to help out...

EDIT 2 : for everyone about green grass from dog pee... Urea -> ammonium -> nitrogen for plants... If you don't water it stays concentrated in one area, killing the grass. If you do water (or just spray the spot with a hose quickly) it's diluted and gives the grass a big boost of "organic" nitrogen fertilizerI hated my old apartment, needed to desperately get out and right when I was looking for rentals last year, coronavirus hit and everyone shut down. With less than a week on my lease, I had to jump at the first available home. Didn't even get to inspect it.I ended up with equally horrible property managers.

I didn't have a key on day one, had to break in to move in, they didn't tell me about the German roach infestation (it's okay, I used to do pest control so I managed) and so forth.Right when I lost power during Christmas (also okay, I live in the south, I didn't get too cold) I tracked down the original property owner and asked her if I could get out of the contract and just pay her directly. We investigated many options and the best way to get out of the contract was to just pay for the last remaining months and write a 30 day notice.

They call me and tell me that I have to write them a notice, signed and sent and received on the exact date 30 days from the leases end to be accepted or I will lose my $1,000 security deposit. They really stressed it had to be mailed and definitely on time or they won't be able to accept it.

Cue my pettiness.

I wrote a template letter, with a generic "this is a \[number of days till lease end\]- day notice .... I'm writing to terminate my contract and to receive my security deposit as stated...".I sent one out on my 103 day notice. Then another one on 89 day notice. Then another one on 73 day notice and so forth, basically whenever I remembered about it, I would change the date around, print it, sign it and then mail it.

They call me saying this is very unnecessary and that they got my message loud and clear. But they sounded pretty rude about it so I sent some more. 

I then received some passive aggressive emails that they will honor the contract and leave me the $1,000 deposit as I have sent them a 30 day notice. But they can be tricky and as I haven't technically sent them an exact "30 days" notice, I have some more letters to send. Plus again, they sounded pretty rude over e-mail.

Cue the final 15 day countdown till my 30 day notice letter. I upped the ante. I now have one letter per day to send and I have changed the fonts on each letter ranging from Papyrus to Jokerman to Comic Sans. My favorite one is the one where it's all bright yellow and barely legible. It jsut hurts looking at. Oh and better yet, I got the last batch sent as certified mail so I get an email that they received it AND that they had to sign it.

On my 34th day notice letter (now probably the 20th letter I've mailed), I received my cashiers check back. No message or anything.Fortunately I have four more letters to send. The best $43 on stamps I've ever paid. 

TL:DR I spam the lease office with 30 day notices till they gave up on holding to my security deposit

&#x200B;

Edit: Even though some are breaking rule 3 and wondering if this is some made up everyone cheered tale, heres a link to some screenshots and emails. |  
[https://imgur.com/a/d6Xbc4P](https://imgur.com/a/d6Xbc4P)Junior year of high school I had a real knob of a math teacher (hereafter,"Mr. K"). Always picking on students and lived on failing people. I had an A in the class come interim report time and he demanded everyone get it signed by their parents and returned. Usually this was reserved for folks with grades C or lower. I didn't bring it home and have it signed. Mr. K spent 20 minutes of class time sending all of us up to call our parents in front of the class who failed to comply. I was last and all the other students with failing grades were fussing and sucking their teeth.

I, however, couldn't wait. She has little patience for bullshit. When it was my turn, I call my retired Lt. Colonel mother, then middle school teacher in the middle of her robotics class. She was so worried that I was calling because at the time I was having a lot of health issues and had regular standing appointments on base to get injections every single day. I tell her Mr. K asked me to call because I didn't have my interim signed. Thinking I was failing, she demanded to know my grade. I tell her I have an A in the class. At this point she politely requests that I hand the phone to Mr. K. He has the smug look and just stares at me, thinking that I just got in trouble. 

Quickly he turns around and everyone can hear her barking at him for wasting her time enacting useless policies and how dare he waste valuable class time as one teacher,to another. He's quietly mumbling "yes ma'am, yes ma'am." He hangs up the phone and resumes class.

I was never asked to call my parents again in his class.

Edit: I speak to my mother every day or so and read her some of the things y'all said. She was in stitches. My father was the airborne ranger, so she doesn't often hear that she's the badass one. You guys really made her day. Thank you. 😄A few years back I worked for a small ish company ~100 people. We had a web service which was notoriously poorly maintained by IT. The service worked on IE, but was buggy on Firefox, chrome etc... occasionally when a new version of a browser was released the webservice stopped working until IT got around to fixing it. 
 

So one day IE releases a new version and it breaks the web service so I submit a service request to IT. I wait a few hours doing other tasks but eventually get to a point where this problem is literally preventing me from doing my remaining work. 
So I go down to the IT guys desk, he's playing games on his phone, and ask him about the issue. He says the issue is not currently high enough priority and it won't be addressed until it becomes a priority task. How do service requests become prioritized? They have to have multiple people report the same issue. 
He then says "if you want me to work this issue make sure someoneone else has the same problem. It might just be a 'you' issue, not a browser issue."

So I go and tell all my coworkers to install the newest version of their browsers to see if an ongoing issue has been fixed. Before long no one can do any work. The webservice is down for everyone on the newest versions now. He gets bombarded with service requests and the issue becomes prioritized. I come in the next day and the web service is working properly.Background: I have worked for copy shops for a very long time. I worked as lead production in multiple Kinkos, and subsequently I can make the copiers pretty much dance to any tune I set, due to learning their ins and outs. 

Anyway, for a variety of reasons, mostly I'd moved, I got a job with a competitor(Ikon) that stationed me closer to home[contract positions at client locations], in an incredibly busy, paper oriented, banking company. My boss was a rather ... stubborn, close-minded woman, who liked to insult her underlings, of which I was one.  When I started, I began streanlining her processes. Most of her time was taken up by physical labor which the copiers could do automatically. I pointed this out early on, to which she said, "That's the way we've always done it, and I like it this way."  There was an implied threat at the end of that. Thankfully, we worked opposite schedules.  So while she was there, business as usual, but I was blessedly alone for 6 hours after she and the others left. 

And shit got *done* while I was alone at work. Turn around times would drop from 24 hours minimum, sometimes days, to less than 5 hours. The clients learned that if they brought their projects in after my boss left, they'd get them much sooner. All of this leads to the blowup.  

Boss Lady = BL

Project client = VC

Me = Trance354

There are other co-workers, but they didn't speak up. 

I come in to the basement shop early in the afternoon, and there are stacks of paper *everywhere*. Massive collation job. Which the copiers can do automatically, of course. I open my mouth to say as much, but,  

BL: "No! Dont touch anything. No touchy!"[She's a 20-something Italian **girl**woman with maturity issues]  "Start working on the next job. I don't want you touching this one.  VC is going to get this in the time I specified, not one second earlier."  I don't think BL liked VC, BL's husband had gotten whiplash looking at VC one time, so there was a bit of jealousy.

So I look at the email, and start pumping out jobs. All collation, ironically. Really small, really complicated jobs. All done and picked up by the time BL was packing up to go home. 

BL: "I'm going home.  Don't touch anything. This job is off limits." 

Trance354: "This job is off limits, don't touch it."

Five minutes after she leaves, VC calls.  

VC: "Is BL still there?" No. "I have massive edits to that job, it's like a whole new project."

Trance354: "She point blank told me not to touch *that project*."  

VC: "If the project isn't done by morning, I'll lose my job."  

I know this is hyperbole, but I have a way around BL, so, "Send it to me as a new project, cancel the old project by email, sent only to BL, not to me, and I'll see what I can do."  

VC is appropriately appreciative, and sends the files over.  I set the machines up, and everything starts printing. All I have to do is refill paper and put the automatically collated products into massive binders. 

Everything is done just before quitting time, and VC is already there with her superior, looking at the process BL was using, versus just having the machine do it. 

VC: "Why was she doing it this way?"  

Trance354: "I really don't know, but if I had to guess, I'd say her bonus was tied to her profit. This company is paper reliant, so saving on your monthly copy allotment is out. If she does all the collating by hand, each time we touch a sheet of paper, it costs you money. And it is likely not a discounted, or included, cost in your contract. It probably isn't much, each time, but it can add up, especially at this company." 

VC and her boss thank me for getting everything done so quick, and I head home.  

Next day, I get to the copy center,  and right off....

BL: "Go home."  This woman is livid, "Go home. Don't come in tomorrow. I don't care who calls, you're suspended."  

I go home and proceed to go on a massive bender.  Because there's no work the next day, I turn off my phone. Prevents angry drunk dialing.  While checking my phone, I send a message to VC, to I tell her I will be out for a couple days, and to expect a production slowdown, and to pass it along.

While I'm out of the world, my boss calls. And calls. And calls a lot more. She leaves messages about coming back in, getting work done, etc.  

Turns out VC's boss called her boss, the CEO, and told him about the job I'd done.  CEO liked the job and wanted to thank me ... And VC may have had them check the contract.  And an order came from "high up". All the bells and whistles I usually have the machines do. Turn time was faster than BL could manage. 

I was on the verge of being fired, so I reached out to a friend at a kinkos I used to work at, about noon on my 2nd day of suspension. They agreed to the same pay rate, and I was hired. 

I informed BL and said my goodbyes to VC and the rest of the ladies. 

BL was fired a week later. I heard through the grapevine it was poor human resource management. VC unhappy, her boss was pissed, and *her* boss was .... not happy.  

Sorry so long.A few years ago my best friend and I rented a tiny 2 bedroom flat together. This place was kind of terrible; my friend's room had a hole cut into the wall so the last foot of the bed would fit (this became a 'mantlepiece' in the next room), the kitchen was the size of a child's playhouse kitchen and the upstairs neighbours spent all ours of the day and night screaming at each other or having loud sex. BUT, we were mostly happy because we were over living with 6+ other people. We paid £75 a week each + bills for this place, which was pretty standard for a 2 bed flat in our area.

Then 6 months into our 1yr contract the landlord sold the terraced house our flat (and 5 others) was a part of to a middle aged married couple who were first time landlords. They were the kind of people who thought they were smarter than everybody else and I got the impression they thought property management was going to be the easiest thing ever.

We had no problem throughout the sale process, we were assured nothing would change, we didn't interact much with the landlord before anyway. Then 2 weeks after the sale we got an email from the couple saying that we owed them £20 each more a week. Basically, in our contract it stated our rent was £75 each a week about 10 times, but there was one typo where it said our rent was £95 each, so they said they could legally charge us £95. We laughed at this, but when it became clear they were serious we reached out to the letting agent and got them to put in writing that it was a typo, our rent was always £75, and they even gave us the original advert for the flat with the correct rent on it. We thought this would be the end of it. We were wrong.

The couple insisted on coming to our flat for an in person meeting. When they got there they said that they asked the old landlord about it and he was shocked that we'd not been paying enough for 6 months now and the rent was always £95. I didn't buy this because they had nothing in writing, but I made the argument that OF COURSE he would say that because he wouldn't want it to seem like he sold under false pretences, and if we'd been underpaying by a total of like £160 a month why had he never spoken to us about it?? They said that he was a busy guy with too many properties, then the husband spent ages condescendingly explaining mortgages to us. Then they declared that if we did not start paying them the higher rent, they would evict us and we had 24hrs to pay or 30days to get out and they left.

Honestly I think they saw two 22yr old girls and thought they could scare us into paying more money. What they didn't know is that my friend and I are very pleasant until you piss us off and we become vindictive motherfuckers. We decided that night that if they wanted to evict us from this shit hole we were gonna make them do it properly and if they were so pedantic about contracts and rules we were going to stop letting ANYTHING slide.

The couple woke up the next morning with an email from our lawyer (my flatmates brother, a bored lawyer with time on his hands) requesting a formal eviction notice in writing and laying out a record of last night's conversation. Thing was they didn't actually have legal grounds to evict us because even if we went to court and a judge favoured their interpretation of the contract (we were advised this was unlikely) we still didn't owe them more than a month's rent, which would have been their only legal way of evicting us because we were otherwise great tenants. By 9:15am they were ringing us, but we ignored them and emailed that our lawyer had advised us to only communicate in writing.

We then sent an email informing them that the fancy new front door they just installed could not be unlocked from the inside without a key, which violated fire safety laws and unfortunately if this wasn't rectified ASAP we would have to report it. We then sent texts that showed them repeatedly entering our flat with less than 24hrs notice, and did they know that this was illegal? Maybe we should talk to the other tenants because if they're doing this to everyone then this could be quite a problem...

After about 3 days of this we received a very nice email saying that they don't agree our rent was supposed to be £75 each a week, but they would graciously allow us to finish out our contract at that rate. By this point we'd found a flat triple the size for £80 each a week and wanted out of that hamster cage, so we offered to move if they signed mutual surrender forms. They eagarly agreed. 

The best part was that they stubbornly tried to rent that flat at the higher rate, despite us telling them it was a terrible idea, and the flat was empty for over a year. And because they had agreed to end our contract early they got stuck paying the council tax, not me!I just witnessed the most beautiful piece of malicious compliance at my local supermarket. It has a deli counter where you take a paper ticket and wait your turn. There's a digital display that shows the next number, but when it's quiet, the staff often just serve the next person without advancing the number of the display and it gets out of whack. 
Today was one such day. I pulled ticket #87 and the display said "29". There were 2 people ahead of me at the counter, some guy who was apparently 85 and what turned out to be a Karen at #86.
While deli girl is helping man #85, Karen launches into a tirade about the display being on 29, yelling at the young girl behind the counter that she was lazy and causing  confusion. I just rolled my eyes and threw a look of understanding sympathy to the girl behind the counter as she finished up with guy #85.
What happened next was priceless. Karen sees #85 leave and launches into her order. Deli girl cuts her off with a saccharine sweet smile and says "one moment please ma'am", picks up the clicker for the display and clicks it over, and over, and over again until it reaches 86. It took quite a while. 
Needless to say, Karen was pissed! She GLARED at the girl behind the counter the whole time, while I stood there with a huge grin on my face. And the best part? She couldn't even criticize,  because she was the one going off about it being wrong. 
After finishing Karen's order, deli girl tried to apologise to me for the delay. I told her she'd absolutely made my day! 
It's not often you see service staff being able to deliver a customer service slapdown, but when you do, it's glorious to watch!The usual, TL;DR at bottom, on mobile yada yada.

I am a social worker with a moderate sized nonprofit compared to the city we are in. We serve individuals with disabilities in a variety including on site and in the community.

About a year and a half ago, our exec director retired after 15ish years. They were an awesome person, but due to age and some health problems, had kind of checked out or running the organization. The new director came from a much larger for profit organization, and seemed to feel that money is king, and the only way to be respected is to be feared. She was a Monster in every sense of the word.

Now, being a nonprofit, our pay isn't fantastic, and the benefits aren't stellar, but the one thing they were good at was the vacation roll-over. We were allowed to keep 200 hours of roll-over, and while it took some time to build up, those of us that had been there a while tried keeping our hours somewhere around there (this is our vacation and sick time put together). New director decides that our entire vacation policy is too generous, and 1, cuts our accrual rate (I personally lost almost 2 full weeks a year), and the major kicker, tells us we can only keep 80 hours of roll-over.

Again, I get it, COVID hit us hard, everyone has to be expected to make some cuts somewhere, but see, the problem is, she told everyone this the first week of October, and we had to be down to 80 by January 1st. Anything over 80 just goes away. We tried negotiating, we tried offering alternatives, we asked for exemptions by a few months. She would absolutely not hear it, and finally said the next person who asked about our PTO policy would be walked out of the building. So, my coworkers and I came up with a plan.

Enter the compliance. I will admit, this only worked because the rest of our administration team felt the director was horrible, and Also lost their PTO time too. We All put in for vacation at the same time. Even those that really didn't need to because they were closer to 80 hours anyway. We literally had 85% of our staff off for weeks at a time. We worked it out amongst ourselves that we had just enough staff to ensure work was done to keep us compliant with the state, but anything above and beyond that ground to a halt. I also need to clarify that we are Not an emergency service, so the clients we serve did not lose our on essential supports.

Well, our board meeting comes around in December, and the new director has to try and explain why there was such a drastic drop in revenue over the last month and a half. Apparently she didn't give a good enough answer, because the board started talking to the employees and SR management for the first time since the new director came on. Let me tell you, we did not hold back. After hearing the horror stories of some of the other stuff she was doing, the board promptly decided that having her in charge was (according to the all staff email that got sent out), "Not going to lead us in a direction that would lead to long-term success and stability for our organization", and kicked her ass to the curb.

I am happy to say they found a new director who has already gone above and beyond what we could have hoped for, and our staff and most importantly our clients are hopefully on the path to many years of success.

TL;DR Crazy new director fucks with vacation time, starts a path that eventually gets her canned.I used to teach intro-to-college courses.  Freshman sessions where we'd go over study skills and campus resources and how not to drive yourself nuts.  Fun class to teach, especially for me.  I love deconstructing classroom norms.  (I usually started every semester in street clothes, with a backpack, hiding among the students and complaining about the late professor).  
Once, for an exam, I offered the students any resource they wanted.  After all, I had made the test to be about *interpreting* information, rather than memorizing it.  Bloom's Taxonomy don'tchaknow.   If they could look up a term they'd be able to better reason their way around it.

Most brought books and notes, a few brought laptops and note cards, etc.  One student, however, came to my office hours right before class.  
Student: "Mr. ReverendBull?"  
Me:  "What can I do for you?"  
Student:  "If I don't have access to a resource, you'll help us find it, right?  Like in that library literacy unit we did?"  
Me: (not catching on yet)  "Of course!  That's what I'm here for!"

Student: "You said we can have *any* resource we wanted for the test, right?"  
Me: (thinking nothing of it, expecting open book assurances or the like) "Yep, that's what I put in the syllabus.  What're you thinking?"  
Student: "Great!  I'd like the answer key to the test please."  


I had to take a second and then just grinned, proud as can be.  I'd pushed them all semester to think outside the box and carve their own way, and this audacious little punk came up with a perfect plan.  
He got his answer key.  And because I had also allowed group work, the whole class got it.  


(Luckily, most of the test was measured more on rubrics (e.g. short answer responses as opposed to multiple choice), so they still had to come up with a way to phrase it in their own words).Hi everyone. This is my first post on this sub, and this happened just now. This isn't that exciting compared to other posts but here we go. 

I work in a lab that employs a LOT of people nationwide, kind of irrelevant but whatever. We get a lot of cases from doctors and hospitals all across the country everyday to run tests they order. Because of the sheet amount of cases we get daily we have a lot of QC that needs to be done by the end of the week, and if it doesn't get done by Saturday night, we have to do a rotation every week to finish it. My actual supervisor said "we have to stay 4-6 hours OR until everything is done". 

There's this cynical, old woman who works in my department. She's a massive pain in our ass and sends endless amounts of emails a day, about fixing things that aren't broken, doing something wrong even though we follow her directions, all while she's doing none of her own work. She also happens to be the "lead" of our department even though she never sees any of us because she's in the back office, not in the actual lab, she works third shift. 

Today is my rotation. It just so happens to be my birthday weekend (my birthday was Friday) and my coworker who I'm doing the rotation with brought breakfast burritos for the two of us. Thankfully there wasn't a lot of work last week and there was minimal QC to do. After we stayed for an hour and were 80% done with our work we took a paid 15 minute break. 16 minutes later we come back into the lab and she starts yelling at us because we went over our time, and she leaves the lab and calls our manager who basically said it doesn't matter since we're still getting the work done. Old Woman comes back and says that we can't leave until the work is done (even though she'll be leaving in about an hour)

Okay then.  

We finish all of our work about 10 minutes after we came back from break, but since we're still on the clock we're deciding to stay for the entire 6 hours doing mindless work (cleaning already sanitized stations, deleting emails, dusting keyboards, changinf pens, etc) which will cost the company about $300 more (bc of OT pay) on our paychecks. All because we were one minute over. 

Like I said, this might not be as exciting as other posts on here, but this is the first time this overworked and underpaid oncology lab worker is doing something like this.I used to work part time at a sandwich shop during college, about 9-10 years ago. The shop had a high turnover rate, and I was there the longest, so I basically learned everything in the store. One day we had a health inspector come in to evaluate the food safety, temperature readings, food storage, etc. I had to slice the tomatoes for night shift, and the inspector took issue with the “dirty” slicer and asked if it had been cleaned first. I said yes. He asked if I used the scrubby thingy (I forget what it’s called, it’s like a wire scrub on a stick). I said no, you don’t put your fingers near the blades, you just spray it off and dunk it in sanitizer. He chastized me, so I was like, okay, show me how to clean it “properly” then. If there was a way to do it right without getting hurt, then I was willing to learn.


My coworker and I stood there and watched him jam the wire scrub between the blades and pull it back, and of course it got stuck. He shoved it forward again, jamming his knuckles into the blades. He started bleeding everywhere.


My coworker had to shut himself in the walk-in freezer; he was laughing his ass off. I just looked at my manager trying to help this idiot inspector get a towel and whatnot and said “Yeahhh... I’m not cleaning the slicer like that.”

Edit: The slicer looked like this https://images.app.goo.gl/hMqt2GBqdvQCwNSa8TL;DR at the bottom. Not native in English, so apologies if something doesn't make sense.

&#x200B;

I was just a customer, but hot damn.

I had a hotel room booked for two nights, from a 5 star well known hotel chain, that rhymes with Boliday Finn. Room was smallest/cheapest, with 2 double-beds, probably even located below parking garage. That was about only room available, so it would have to do.

&#x200B;

About a month later, I arrive with my buddy to basically drop our stuff in the room, so we can take off right away, while the sun is still up. In the lobby, there is about 200 person group shouting all at once to the two ladies manning(?) the desk. After making plans for few minutes to store our stuff elsewhere, the desk attendant notices us, as we clearly were not part of the huge group, so she waves us over, past the large group, and starts to handle our check-in.

She politely asks us to fill the traveler forms while she's looking up my reservation. I thank her and try to make pleasant conversation about this and that, complementing their uniforms and the hotel, trying to improve the sour atmosphere the angry mob has been generating all around.

While we are filling the forms, angry man next to us, who was apparently the leader of the lobby-mob, keeps shouting, loud: "I demand that you arrange us extra room with two double-size beds! We had late addition to our travel, and they need a room with two double-size beds! RIGHT. F\*\*\*ING. NOW!"

Apparently, the arguing has been taking a place for quite a while already. She tries to get a word in, but gets interrupted: "I don't care if your stupid shit hotel is full, it's your job to give us place to sleep! Stupid woman. Get. Us. Another. Room! And double-size beds! Don't try anything else, I'm not interested of anything else! You idiot... I wonder how you can keep your job, if you can't even arrange a room for us."

Every time the main desk attendant tries to talk to the angry man, he rudely interrupts her, with more and more shouting. Only thing I can do, is to keep smiling at the ladies, sympathetically.

She: "We don't have double-size beds available, but we do have---"

Him: "I don't want to hear! Just do your job and press the buttons to make it happen. You must be mentally slow, don't you? Two double beds, or is that too difficult for you?"

&#x200B;

The clerks shares a tired look with each other, but suddenly both have this lamp lighting above their heads. They converse for a moment (using their native language) while pointing their screens and then proceeds to tell me: "Our apologies, Sir, but unfortunately we don't have your room with two double-beds available for you, which you had booked for. As you see, we are a bit full today." while she is gesturing to the mob in the lobby.

My heart sinks a bit, until she continues: "So, because we are fully booked, only room we can offer to you, is the executive suite at the 24th floor, obviously for no extra cost. Unfortunately, it doesn't have two double-size beds..."

She takes eye contact with the angry man and continues: "...but it has 4 king size beds. Each in their own en-suites."

Angry man drops dead silent and is just staring at us. His mouth just moves like of a mouth of a fish, who is stranded on a dry land.

While looking at me again, she continues: "I hope you accept the free room upgrade, with our most sincere apologies in behalf of the hotel management. And of course all the room service is free, including the refreshments available in the suite kitchen and suite bar areas, and all hotel VIP facilities are in your disposal 24/7. Please do enjoy your stay and let us know if there is anything we can do to make your stay more comfortable."

She dings a small bell and piccolo takes our bags while gesturing towards the fancy separate elevator at the side. I'm so shocked that I can mutter only a little bit of thanks and follow the piccolo.

&#x200B;

While we are making our way towards the elevator, the main-desk is explaining to the angry man: "Sir, I'm happy to inform you that we were able to make arrangements to have single room with two double-size beds, available to accommodate your extra guests. That will be 199€ added to your bill."

Man snaps out of his trance-like state, and shouting resumes: "What the f\*\*k!? I don't want some single room with double-size beds! I want free executive suite too! Why the f\*\*k does those f\*\*kers gets the f\*\*king suite and I get some shitty single room!? This is unacceptable! Why did you give my better room for those two f\*\*\*\*ts instead of to me?"

She now has much more commanding tone, and she responds: "Unfortunately, Sir, our 'free executive suite' is not available. It is booked now. I tried to offer you king-size, but you were having none of it. So will you take the single room or not?"

I can't tell accurately what was said next, but I'm quite sure it is lots of cursing and throwing more insults from the man (using the man's native language). All I have is this shit-eating grin while the bell-hop closes the elevator doors, taking us up.

&#x200B;

Maybe half an hour later when we head out to check the city, the lobby has been cleared. We go to the desk to thank the two attendants and give them both good tip, that we easily save with the free room service, over the expensive hotel restaurant. Unfortunately, our schedule doesn't allow us to enjoy the free hotel VIP services much, but the ladies definitely earn a little bit of extra.

It was great experience for us and I still remember this clearly, after a long time. That front desk girl... she was truly maliciously compliant with the angry man.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

TL;DR: Angry man wants extra room with two double beds, from a full hotel, and accepts nothing else. I get upgraded free to executive suite with all the benefits, so hotel can accommodate the angry man in the broom closet that I had booked, matching his required parameters for the small bed-type.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

To add: The executive suite was absolutely fantastic. Only downside was that I would have needed to bring my own helicopter to use the helipad on the roof, to fully enjoy the privileges included to the room. /s

Also, there was 3 bowls in my toilet: a regular one, a bidet to wash my arse after using the first one and third one was something that I still don't know what it was or how to use it. I was just standing there, my arse squeaking clean, staring the third bowl and thinking: "Is this some sort of a rich joke that I'm too peasant to understand?"

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

EDIT: Thank you for the gold, mysterious stranger!

Second stranger gets ^(a little bit smaller) thanks for the silver too!

Also, Piccolo = Bellhop / Bell-boy. No idea why my brain give me this word to use in the text. Bad brain, bad.My two kids are in a stage of telling on each other for EVERYTHING, and today I got to serve up some malicious compliance because of it.

The house rule is that they are not allowed to watch TV while eating meals.  This morning Kid 2 decided she wanted her breakfast, while Kid 1 was still watching his show.  So I got Kid 2's breakfast and she sat down at the kitchen table to eat it.  Technically the TV is still visible from the kitchen table, so this is a bit of a gray area, but I was going to let it go (hadn't had my coffee yet and didn't really want to pick that battle).  However...

>Kid 1: "Hey!  Kid 2 is watching TV while she eats!  She's not allowed to do that."  
>  
>Me: "It's ok, she is sitting at the kitchen table like I asked her to."  
>  
>Kid 1: "Yeah, but she can see the TV from there.  That's not fair!"  
>  
>Me: "You know...you have a point.  Turn the TV off.  You'll have to watch your show later."  
>  
>Kid 1: "Wait, what?"

The TV went off, and I got to drink my coffee without having to listen to an episode of Pokemon in the background.

TL;DR: If your sister doesn't get to watch TV, neither do you.When I was 12ish my family and I went on a camping trip with my mentally abusive pill of an uncle and his family. 

One day we went to a beach that was a 5 minute walk from our campsite. I got there first and it was super windy so I spent forever struggling to get my towel to lay still. 

Now when I say it was windy, I mean it was whipping up sand windy and any sort of movement sent sand flying through the air. It was great. 

When I finally got settled it wasn't long till the rest of the group started filing onto the beach with my a**hole uncle leading the way. My uncle decided to lay his towel out about 3ft from where I was sitting. As soon as he finished he looked at me and demanded that I move myself and my towel somewhere else. 

To this day I cannot remember what his reason was for making me move but I can tell you it was absurd and I was thoroughly annoyed. So I got up and grabbed my towel in a very aggressive manner causing a wall of sand to fly up and slam into my uncles face. 

I'm pretty sure he wanted to kill me that day, what with all the screaming about how I did it on purpose and got sand in his eyes and mouth. But I swore up and down that it was an accident so the rest of our family believed me and they told my uncle he was acting insane. By then everyone on the beach was staring at us so he had no choice but to stop making a scene and hate me in silence.

I most definitely did it on purpose.This was a few years ago when I worked in a 4 star hotel chain that would be very well known and was part of a larger company that had hotels of varying status. I was about 24. There were a few of us who worked primarily in room service and the breakfast shift was always a solo shift.

One morning I started and as was customary I started doing my prep, folding napkins, setting up 5/6 trays with pastries etc. per the pre-ordered breakfast cards so I would only need to grab the correct tea/coffee and hot food later aswel as a few extra all purpose trays for the people who call for room service last minute.

I just get finished with this when the Duty Manager (I can't remember his full name but nickname was Prem) bursts into the kitchen with a dirty plate in his hand and sees me in my area while putting it in the pile of dishes for the kitchen porter. He tells across the kitchen "What are you doing? It's so crazy out there that I have to help clear tables and you are back here? Get out and help!"

I replied that I had not gone up and walked the halls to collect the trays left out overnight yet and he yelled some more and repeated that if he, a manager, is clearing tables, I better help regardless of if my job is actually in a different area.

For the record, Prem was a menace. I witnessed him yell in college girls faces until they cried several times. He would also routinely pick on anyone that was minimum wage floor staff.

So I walk into the restaurant and the supervisor (Jen) is at the door and sees me walk in. She covers for room service and has worked it in the past so she knows I should be collecting trays now so that the place doesn't look like a warzone upstairs. She asks if I've done this and I say no, Prem sent me in to help because it's so busy. She says it's not very busy at all, the don't need me and I should go upstairs and collect the dirty trays.

I walk back into the kitchen and Prem is still standing there. "What are you doing? I told you to go in and help!"

"I went in and Jen said they don't need me and told me to collect the trays." 

He then accuses me of going to her and asking can I go collect trays to get out of helping so I tell him he can in and ask her if she called me or if I approached her. This satisfies him that I'm at least not lying but he's still not happy.

He says "I'm the duty manager. Manager. Jen is a supervisor. I'm higher up so you do what I tell you. Go in there and help clear tables. I don't want to see you going up to collect trays."

I go back into the restaurant and Jen looks at me confused. I tell her that Prem insists that I help and won't let me go upstairs and says he out-ranks her so she says I should join the guys at station 1 and help their area.

Breakfast passes and I pop out a few times to do my room services and come back with not much issue.

My shift is until 3PM and breakfast ended at 10:30AM. At this point nobody has been upstairs and housekeeping will have been putting out dirty trays. 

I get a call on the room service mobile from a housekeeping manager saying that floor 4 has a dozen or so trays in the hall.

"I'm sorry the duty manager has prioritised other areas at the moment and has said I cannot go up."

I start doing my afternoon prep, polishing cutlery and the like. About 12PM I get another call, this time from the housekeepings top manager. She tells me there is trays everywhere and I politely apologise and explain that my duty manager has used the exact words "I don't want to see you going up to collect trays." She accepts this without question and asks that I help when I can.

At 2PM I get a call from the hotels director of operations regarding the trays. At this point there are trays in the hallways on all 7 floors and the place looks filthy. Again , I politely explain what instructions I've received from Prem and this is accepted without further question and he says he will inquire into it.

3PM arrives and I have not heard anything else nor have I cleaned up the pig-sty upstairs. My replacement arrives and I tell him what happened and apologise for the fact that he will have to collect these but tell him why. He laughs and decides to leave it until somebody else calls and informs him they are there.

Shortly after this Prem 'left' the company.

TL;DR: A manager on a power trip told me not to do an important part of my job as I had to help somewhere I was not needed. I left that part of my job alone for my full shift and advised all his superiors that he had advised me not to do it when I was questioned about it. He 'left' the company shortly after.**Update**: First of all, wow! Thank you all for so much for your support, understanding, and awards. I'm newish to Reddit and I was completely overwhelmed with the responses to this post, so I apologize if I didn't get to your comment. I've had a number of folks suggest I put up a photo gallery of barely-compliant outfits, and I would very much appreciate suggestions for how/where to do that (subreddits only, not an insta fan sorry). I'll be off of the grid all next week but I can start putting some together after that. And to those of you who disagree with how I handled this situation, know that I don't hate you. I just think you're wrong.

The shelter I've (30M) been working at for a couple of years now is over 30 years old, and is quite notorious for keeping things that way. The daily notes are physically kept in binders, 80's-style punitive measures are imposed on clients in conflict, and the electrical panels are labeled with cards that went through a typewriter. You get the idea.

The floor supervisor (over 20 years in that position) emphasized that even though jeans were allowed, we needed to strictly adhere to the dress code. That meant button-up or collared shirts, no logos, only long pants/dresses, no hats unless you're outside, no visible tattoos, etc. In other words, dress nothing like the vast majority of the people we serve. "We're meant to dress they way they should aspire to dress," said the supervisor. I was told other staff -including staff above my paygrade- have long hated the dress code and unsuccessfully tried to change it for years. None of them were bold little shits like me, though.

Given my previous experience with underserved populations, I also knew this was a terrible idea. Generally speaking what people in these communities lack in financial resources, they make up for in their abilities to read people and navigate emotions. If they think you're an authority figure or acting inauthentic, many will outright write you off. And for the most part they have a great social/emotional radar.

The dress code said men's shirts must, "... have visible buttons *or* a collar." I sewed two buttons near my hip on a plain t-shirt and wore it in. They said nothing the first time, but had a meeting where they "weren't pointing out anyone in particular" and updated that specific part of the policy to prevent me from doing it again. Next I wore capris. After all, nothing about pant length was mentioned either. That time the code was updated and we were informed via email. Still no one-on-one conversation about it.

A few months and minor malicious compliances later, our workplace gave us logoed t-shirts with the institution's name and website on them. Hooray, we thought! We will at least be able to wear t-shirts now. Nope. After a week of several coworkers wearing the shirts *they gave us*, we got an org wide email that the shirts did not comply with the dress code and should not be worn during work hours. Knowing me as the office rabble-rouser, several pissed off coworkers came to me independently to ask how they too could rebel. Enter this story's biggest malicious compliance.

As a minimalist, I had no desire to hold onto a shirt that I would not wear. We had no input on the design/color of the shirts, and I simply did not need it taking up space in my closet. The most reasonable alternative would be to turn the shirt back in and explain that, so I did. Coworker #1 was moving soon and didn't need an extra thing to pack, so she also turned hers in. #2's partner hated dark green (the shirt's color), so he turned his in. This happened all they way to 25 total employees, with some borrowing other's excuses.

After 5 days, the supervisor had a box with two-dozen shirts sitting in his tiny office. He actually has to keep them on his desk, and I can hear him bumping his hand against them when he uses the mouse.  3 months later they are still there. He's not dumb; he knows those shirts are an "F you" that lives in his office.

He cannot donate them to the shelter due to some other ridiculous handbook rule about organizational spending, and he bikes 6 miles to work so driving them home isn't a reasonable option. He's tried putting them in general office storage, but his boss has said the shirts are the supervisor's problem since he ordered them. Currently he's just stuck. We know it bothers him, but he knows he can't bring it up since it's his own rules that prevent us from wearing them.

No dress code changes so far, but the top-of-the-year meeting regarding our handbook has dress code on the table. 3 of the people who returned shirts are a part of that advisory board of 5. I'm cautiously optimistic that we'll finally be rid of of some of the dumb, short-sighted elements of our dress code come February.

TL:DR The homeless shelter I work at has a dress code that drastically sets staff apart from the community we serve. I convinced several coworkers to turn in their non-compliant clothing. My boss has since had to deal with a pile of clothes on his desk.A previous post reminds me of a situation a few years ago...  

I was a Dispatcher for a Plumbing/HVAC/Basement Waterproofing company, but I was more of a coordinator. I handled customer bookings, scheduling, some parts ordering, dispatching, etc. As I used to say, "I have more hats than a hat rack".  

Now my techs had their own tools, and I did my work on the computer. I kept bugging the boss for a better computer, and he never got me one, so I built a system at my own expense and brought it in to the office. My techs had "personal tools", so this was mine. As a matter of fact, 10 years later, it's the system I am typing on now. It has a 4-core processor, and a graphics card capable of supporting 4 monitors. To give you a better idea of how long ago this was, I paid $350 for a 60gig SSD. I used 1 monitor for the Dispatch software, one monitor for Google Maps with traffic overlay, one monitor for Outlook, and one monitor for QuickBooks to issue invoices and purchase orders.  

When I gave notice, My Boss, The Owner and I agreed on 3 weeks notice as an exit strategy. Unknown to me, The Owner was convinced I was bluffing, and was just hunting for a raise. He refused to hire a replacement. My Boss was more of a Field Supervisor, The Owner handled the office and Admin.  

Finally, the DAY BEFORE my last day, at 2pm, I was introduced to the new hire. Seriously? You intend to have me train a guy for a complicated pivotal role in a few hours?  

I was on a 44-hour schedule, 10 hours Mon-Thurs, and Friday I was off at 11am. I said my goodbyes and at 11am, began dismantling my computer. First thing I did was format the hard drive, as I told them I was going to do. Fortunately for them, the data was all backed up on the server...except for what had transpired that morning, despite my repeated warnings to trigger a backup into the server at 11am.  

The Owner came out in a bit of a panic when he saw me taking apart the computer, as he had forgotten that it was me that owned it, and now his Dispatch station had no computer. He asked if I could leave the computer behind, and I declined. He set my replacement up on an unused antique computer in a cubicle. It had a fucking *CRT* monitor, was slow as molasses. The job was hard enough with 4 screens, I can't imagine doing it with one.  

This guy wasn't a dummy, but there's no way I could have trained him in a few hours. He had the bare-bones of the processes, and that's it.  

By noon I was out the door.  

My Boss spent the remainder of the day and most of the next week in the field, leaving The Owner to deal with the fallout, and it was legendary. Nobody could handle it. The replacement quit, just never showed up on the Tuesday, and nobody else in the office could do what I was doing. He dumped PO generation into Accounting, which pissed them off with the extra workload. He tried to handle Scheduling and Dispatching himself, and pissed off a lot of the techs. He stuck one of the CSRs into training for the role, and she wasn't the brightest bulb in the chandelier. The best part? I used to handle after-hours on-call, and since there was nobody with enough experience, The Owner had to answer his phone at all hours of the night, 7 days a week.  

That's when the exodus started. Over the next few weeks many of the good techs bailed, jobs were screwed up. I heard that he had 2 basement waterproofing jobs, each worth 5 figures, double-booked. The company hit the wall, hard.  

How do I know? About 3 years ago I reached out to My Boss on Linkedin, and he had moved on to another employer. He offered me a job, and I took it. We get along famously, and he has told me all kinds of stories about the shit that hit the fan when I left.  

...and all they had to do was buy a new computer, and give me enough time to get the new guy in the groove.  

TL;DR - I gave you my notice. If you don't hire a replacement because you think I am bluffing, then watch me comply with my notice. The rest is YOUR problem.This is a cool story about the acts of malicious compliance of my grandfather, who died a couple of weeks ago.

Setting the scene: a week after graduating college (first in his family), Grandpa, a very gentle, non-confrontational kind of guy with a mischievous streak, gets drafted into the US military for the Korean war.

Act I: During basic training, he "forgets" to wear his glasses to target practice. His sergeant refuses to let him leave until he's hit the target at least once. Grandpa is a decent hunter, but now he can't even see the target. They're out there for hours. Finally, the sergeant comes up and tells him he hit the target. Grandpa checks the target. The hole was made from the other side, obviously by the sergeant himself.

Act II: Grandpa and his friend are told to go to San Francisco and to take a boat to Tokyo from there. When they get to SF, they see a long, long line to get on the boat. Grandpa's never been to SF before. He convinces his friend to visit the city with him instead of standing in line all day. They have a great day, and come back to the port in the evening. The boat has already left. They get yelled at. A lot.

Act III: The US military finds out Grandpa learned how to use a typewriter in college. Instead of sending him to fight, they let him stay in Tokyo as a secretary to a general. The general keeps sending him out to get things signed. It's hard to get people to listen to a non-officer, though. That's what Granfpa tells his boss when he complains about how nothing seems to get done. Next thing he knows, Grandpa's been promoted. Now he can order people to sign his forms.

Act IV: Grandpa finds out that 1) US soldiers in uniform ride Japanese public transport for free and 2) if he donates blood, he gets the week-end off that week. He starts donating blood. Every. Single. Week. And travels all over Japan on the week-ends.

And that's how he met Grandma.

Edit: Thank you so much for the love and well-wishes, everyone! Grandpa had a great life and died peacefully with lots of kids, grandkids and great-grandkids near. We miss him, but he lives on in his stories. 
About the blood, as several of you have pointed out, every week is a lot. It might have been plasma, or the army might not have known/cared, or I could be remembering wrong. I'll ask some family if they remember and keep you updated.This story comes from Melbourne, Aus, where the liquor laws are pretty strict. TL;DR at bottom.

We had a local pub near work that did $5 wines/beers during happy hour. It was a bit of a dump but we didn't mind. Three of us would go regularly every Friday to relax. We usually bought rounds for each other, so 3 at a time, or maybe just 1 each if not all of us wanted a top up. Since this is a modern world, we'd pay by debit and just tap our card on the little machine. Simple. Easy. 

One week I get to the pub before the others so I went to order a wine for myself and reserve a nice table in the sun. When I went to pay, the bartender informed me of the manager's new rule: to pay by card is now a $20 minimum. For cash, a new ATM had been installed in the corner that only gives 20's and charges $3.50 per cash-out, of which the bar gets a good cut. Now I know it costs for every electronic transaction to occur, and it's not unusual to find small coffee shops asking for a $5 minimum to cover those costs, but $20 was outrageous, especially in a dive where all drinks are dirt cheap. It wouldn't even cover a usual round for us 3. The bartender had to shrug and insist it was the manager's new rule. I tried to argue against it, since I just wanted a single glass. The manager came out and firmly reiterated that I'd have to either buy 4 wines or get cash from the ATM. But I refuse to spend money in order to access my own money.

I ask for 4 wines. 

Now, I am a petite woman, it doesn't take too much to get me sloppy. I paid by card and sat there at the empty bar and *pounded* these 4 cab-savs with the same speed that I'd usually nurse one. By the time I had finished, my friends were still not there. I asked the bartender for one more glass of wine. The manager was also still there, cleaning glasses. He told me again what he was instructed to say before: there's a $20 minimum, so...

I ordered 4 more wines. The manager looked pleased that his system was working. He was pretty smug about it all and wouldn't budge on any customer's request.

Before I paid for my second 4-glass round with my card, I asked the bartender, within clear earshot of the manager, a pretty basic question:

'You've both got your RSA's, right?'

All bartenders and bar owners are required to possess a Responsible Serving of Alcohol licence, obtained through the state's Commission for Gambling and Liquor. It's a heavily regulated industry, and a pretty strictly-enforced licence. Plain-clothed officers will try to catch out bartenders who don't carry their licence on them while serving drinks, and they'll sit to observe in bars for wreckless behaviour, such as knowingly serving alcohol to an inebriated customer. I am not someone with any legal authority, but I know enough people in the bartending/casino industry to be aware of the laws. 

'Of course, why?' the bartender asked. He probably expected me to pull out a badge, but I am just a customer who wanted a glass of wine.

I explained that it seems pretty irresponsible to serve a small woman 4 drinks simultaneously, when all I was asking for was one. Seems as though, by the bar's lack of attention, I have become quite drunk, and now you're about to happily process my second purchase of 4 drinks, knowing full well that I'm here alone. 8 drinks in less than an hour? Does that seem *responsible* to you?

The smug look on the manager's face quickly turned to anger. 

'I think you've had enough, then.'
'No, no! You've already poured 4 more. Here, take my card. Go on. Can't let all that wine go to waste. I mean, all I wanted was one, but if I HAVE to get 4...'

The bartender was very confused and a little worried. Losing their RSA would mean losing his job. The manager refused to process my order, and angrily poured 4 glasses of wine down the drain, a loss far greater than the small electronic transaction fee that would have come with my basic wine order. 

I was sad to see the wine go, but I was happy to tell them that I'm reporting them to the state commission for breaches of their RSA. A petty move, but the manager chose greed over customer service and got what he deserved. I actually downloaded the complaint form online and began filling it out there at the bar, all while my body was now feeling the full force of 4 smashed wines. I was giggling while doing it, and slurring my words while asking for the manager's name and today's date. The bartender was very apologetic, and knowing none of this is his fault, I happily kept him off the form.

By the time my friends arrived I was pretty drunk. After telling my story we decided to go somewhere else, and we definitely never went back. I don't know what came of the complaint exactly (likely a big fine) but the place shut down about 6 weeks later and became a brunch cafe. Seems like they lost all their regulars to a $20 minimum rule. 

TL;DR: Local pub tries to enforce a $20 (4-drink) minimum. Turns out it's not a responsible way to serve alcohol, especially to someone under 5'3.

Edit: Opening a tab is not a regular thing here. Many small bars, including this one, don't do tabs.I used to work at this one coffee shop, my first chain coffee shop after working only at local or family run ones. Simply put, it was hell. Owners would micromanage everything without knowing anything about how the business ran, never listened to their staff, and only cared about the money. Typical out of touch owners of a business.

I was hired to replace a manager that had walked out of one of their locations, leaving it with only part time staff. I was told I was being hired on as the "acting manager" until they either hired someone else or they felt I would be a good fit for the position after my 6 month probation.

I won't go into everything that went wrong because there's a lot but to summarize, it was literal hell. I was expected to cover all no shows (which had me working 90-100 hours a week), I wasn't allowed to fire anyone no matter how many things they did wrong (someone actually showed up to work drunk and I *still* wasn't allowed to fire them), and any changes I wanted to implement were shot down (like replacing old parts in the espresso machine, shortening our hours to save money on labor, bringing in items that customers would always ask for).

I was stressed, over worked, and irritated as hell when the owner comes in to talk to me about sales for the store. We weren't making enough to warrant the hours I had scheduled and he wasn't going to pay me any more over time. I would only work the hours I'm scheduled and if someone no showed, I had to have someone else cover those shifts. I tried to explain to him that I only came in when no one else would cover, it just so happened that the people he allowed to continue to work here had terrible availability. Making the schedule was already hard enough, getting someone other than myself to come in on their day off was next to impossible. On top of all that, I had to learn the ropes myself. There was no one to train me so all the managerial knowledge, ordering, scheduling, I learned myself. No one other than me knew how to order coffee, had the numbers for the repair guys, anything other than making coffee and using the til, I was the only one that knew.

He wasn't hearing any of it.

**Owner:** "All I'm hearing is excuses. This is your store. If you can't handle running it. I'll start looking for someone who will."

**Me:** "Wasn't that the plan though? It's been 3 months since my probation period ended and you never gave me the manager position so I assumed you were looking for someone to take over."

**Owner:** "I think it's in your best interest to take some time off. Start thinking about your position here and whether you actually want to start moving up (I had mentioned in the interview I was looking forward to working my way up in the business)."

**Me:** "I can't. There's no one to cover me."

**Owner:** "You're taking this time off."

**Me:** "Is this a paid break?"

**Owner:** "No, consider this a time out for you to get yourself sorted. Take the two weeks to rest and we'll see what your position will be like when you get back."

**Me:** "Owner, I can't really afford to take that amount of time off. I can't even take 2 days without having to come in and cover."

**Owner:** "Don't worry about the business right now. It'll run without you."

Now, to put into perspective, I was basically the manager at that point. I made the schedules, I did the orders, I knew the codes to the safe and the alarm. I wasn't allowed to hire someone to assist me and no one worked enough time to be able to cover even half my shifts. I knew this, the staff knew this, customers knew it.

I made sure to block all work numbers and spent those 2 weeks looking for another job. I managed to find one after a few days that paid significantly more. I sent my resignation email to payroll and the owner (knowing he never checks it), deleted my account off the POS system (being a manager means I have access to it from home) and spent the rest of the leave catching up on well deserved sleep, having blocked all work numbers. I'm not getting paid so I'm not working.

According to my coworkers, shit started going wrong the next day. One of the openers didn't show and the next staff member didn't have keys. Owner wasn't answering his phone so they left a message. Owner didn't show up until one of the regulars called asking if the place was closed down. He showed up 4 hours after they were supposed to open.

Orders weren't done, inventory was missed, 4 no shows, you name it, it went wrong.

Owner tried every way he could to get a hold of me, even using a customers phone to call me (too bad I didn't answer any calls that weren't in my contacts already).

After 2 weeks, I turn my phone back on and get a call the same day from Owner. We agree to meet the next day.

**Owner:** "So, you've had some time to think."

**Me:** "I have. It's really given me perspective on my position here."

**Owner:** "We can start you back on your normal hours for now and we're looking for a manager to take on more of your responsibilities."

**Me:** "Oh, that's good. I'm actually quitting."

He was silent for a few minutes. I think he was waiting to tell him I was kidding. Sucks for you buddy, I'm serious.

**Me:** "I've already e-mailed payroll and removed my log in from the computer. Here are my keys. Good luck."

And I left. Owner tried calling me a few times but stopped once I told him to check his e-mail.

I was on okay terms with some of the staff that worked there and apparently majority of them had quit after I had left. Owner did find a replacement pretty quickly but without anyone to train them (owner didn't know anything about running the business), they were fucked from the get go and left pretty soon after they were hired.

My petty ass is always checking reviews from customers and employees and they have consistently sucked for the past year and seem to be on a downward trend over the past year.

**TL;DR:** Owner forces me to take 2 weeks unpaid leave, place goes to shit and I take that time to find a better job, land said job, give my 2 weeks via email knowing he won't check it, and quit the second my vacation is over.

**EDIT:** Holy shit thank you everyone for the awards! I finally got to premium! Now my avatar gets a sweater <3  
This particular job I had was soul crushing and I'm lucky to have a story like this to share with others that have gone through similar shit. If someone is dealing with an owner similar to this, I highly recommend brushing up on your knowledge of your local labor laws. There are sadly way too many owners that try to get away with shit like this.

To clarify a few things, I'm from Canada. Forcing me to take leave was not actually legal of him to do. I was tired and so worn down that I just didn't want to fight anymore. I took it as a gift of all the days off I missed from all the over time I worked and that was it.

For those wondering about whether or not I'm owed overtime, thankfully I'm not. Another manager task I had was organizing hours and submitting them to payroll. Owners didn't have control over that, the managers (along with me) were in charge of that. There was a rule in place where we had to get approval from the person who made the schedules for overtime and that was me. So I got paid my overtime. Thank fuck. Even if I did have some money owed, I personally just want to leave it be. It was hard enough getting my last paycheck from them, I didn't want to put any more energy into these guys than I had to.

Again, holy shit thank you all <3 I hope you are all doing alright with everything that's going on in the world right now and are TAKING NO SHIT LIKE THIS.This happened today and my brother and I are still are laughing about it, except Gabrielle (said stepmother) and Dad (who is embarrassed).

Dad came into town to visit my brother (let's call him Mark) and me for a few days and brought Gabrielle with him. Gabrielle has her good traits...but she does have this one really nasty trait. She is notoriously picky/critical when it comes to food. You know the stereotypical snooty and rude French character in movies/books who always complains "that is not how this is done in France"? She's this way when it comes to food.

Going out to eat with her is embarrassing. She constantly sends back food, is insistent on food being made a certain way and always demands certain things done a certain way. One time, she asked the waiter to bring some mustard to the table...not 2 minutes later, she called him back because "the mustard is old, bring us a new unopened bottle". More than once, I've had to apologize to the wait staff on my family's behalf and told the manager that I will vouch for them should Gabrielle leave a bad review on their site.

She's made waiters and managers cry, she's \*that\* bad. Honestly, I have no idea why Dad puts up with her when she does that, even though I know he's just as embarrassed as Mark and I are. We can only chalk it up to Gabrielle having a magical hoo-ha.

When they got here yesterday, for some reason, they insisted they wanted to go out to dinner. Dad recommended our new favorite new diner, which is known for its breakfasts at any time of the day. We live close to a major interstate and the saying about truckers knowing all the best diners and holes in the wall in all 50 states and then some is true.

It's a greasy spoon in every sense of the word. Right out of the 1950's, every leather booth filled with truckers or locals, waitresses who automatically know their regulars' orders by heart and don't put up with crap from anyone, a bustling kitchen and while spotless, is just worn enough to let you know many people have been there.

In other words; it has character.

It may not look like a 5 star restaurant, it has some of the best breakfasts you're ever going to eat.

I was hesitant to take Gabrielle there if only because I didn't want to ruin the staff's day. Mark and I have been there enough times that the wait staff/cooks know us. However, Dad wanted Gabrielle to experience "a true American classic" and was offering to pay. So off we (reluctantly) went.

Luckily, we got there during a not really busy time, so I told Dad to find a parking spot and I would go in to get us a table. The reason I did this was so I could warn the staff about Gabrielle and apologize in advance for anything she did. Fortunately, our usual waitress (let's call her Mary), thanked me for the warning and warned the rest of the staff.

We go in, get our booth...and Gabrielle tries pulling her usual stunts. I won't go into everything she did because we'll be here forever but I'll leave a highlight reel.

1). Gabrielle sent Mary back three times with the coffee because (in order "it was too cold", "it was too hot" and "not enough cream". Finally Mary (who doesn't let anybody push her around) just slapped the coffee pot on the table along with the cream/sugar and told Gabrielle to make do because she wasn't going back to get her damn coffee. This made Mark and me chuckle and Gabrielle steam.

2). While waiting (and probably still stewing from Mary's little come back with the coffee), Gabrielle decided to accost Stephanie, who had just started and tell her to get some fresh biscuits. Not ask. Tell. Poor Stephanie (who is understandably anxious about her job) does as told and then Gabrielle made a fuss about the packets of butter not being soft enough, despite Stephanie explaining that all the butter was kept cold for safety reasons. Gabrielle made a snide remark about how Stephanie couldn't wait five extra minutes to let the butter soften...which made Stephanie tear up and me about ready to tell Gabrielle to go fuck a French chef if food was that important to her.

3). When our meals did arrive, Gabrielle was quiet during the meal, not making comments. I was unsure what was going to happen as a result. Either she really liked it (which I doubted, seeing as I've never seen her compliment anyone's cooking whenever we've gone out) or she was planning some nasty barb (which I feared). When Mary dropped off the bill, Gabrielle took it before Dad could and said she was paying. Because I was sitting next to her, Gabrielle left a big fat 0 in the tip line and left a note about "It's cute that American chefs think they're good cooks when they've never stepped in a real kitchen before. Prove me wrong" before closing the little book the receipt came in and hiding it so nobody else could see what she wrote.

I was *pissed* when I read that note and was about ready to slap Gabrielle. I know the chefs/servers who work at this particular diner learned their skills on the job and, if you ask me, they have every right to be as proud of their work as someone who went to culinary school would be. While I'm looking at going to culinary school myself to become a pastry chef...I respect people who've learned by working in kitchens/on the floor because they have first hand experience.

I took out $100 using the ATM at the diner and gave it to the staff as a tip along with an apology for her behavior, embarrassed and angry. Fortunately, they didn't hold it against us (except Gabrielle) and told me that Mark and I were always welcome back.

I also decided I was going to get back at Gabrielle.

There was a benefit to this lockdown. During this time, bored out of our wits and wanting to better our skills, Mark and I have been binge watching recipe and cooking how to videos online along with practicing. And while I don't like bragging...I'd say we've become quite good. We know how to smoke our own bacon, cure corned beef, make creamy scrambled eggs and bake flaky croissants...and that's just a sampling.

When we got home, I told Mark my plan and he was grinning ear to ear.

The next day, while Gabrielle and Dad still slept, Mark and I got up early and got right to work. We prepared scrambled eggs, home cured/smoked bacon, biscuits and a fruit salad. Dad woke up early and smelled the breakfast, waking up Gabrielle by saying that the kids were making breakfast.

Dad came downstairs first and Mark asked him to set the table. Gabrielle came down as we were finishing up and she sits down, not offering to help.

While Gabrielle commented about how it smells just like a restaurant she went to in France and couldn't wait to taste everything, Mark and I served Dad and our plates before putting everything back. Gabrielle looked at us, confused.

I looked at her, "Oh, I thought you were going to a French cafe for breakfast" I said. "You did write on the receipt at the diner that you thought it was cute Americans think they're good cooks if they haven't set foot in a real kitchen and you wanted someone to prove you wrong."

Dad looked at Gabrielle, his eyes wide as all the color drained from Gabrielle's face. "You wrote what?!"

"Well, hop to it." I said, sitting down. "Enjoy your French breakfast with your French chefs."

Gabrielle's face reddened before she left. I don't know if she was embarrassed or angry...but we were able to have a nice breakfast without any of Gabrielle's complaining.

She did come back after getting breakfast and has been nice and quiet all day. Hopefully she's learned her lesson and Dad grows a backbone.

UPDATE: (Jan. 27th, 21) RIP my Inbox! Holy smokes! I'm glad most of you enjoyed my story and had their own stories to tell about Gabrielles in their lives. I'm so sorry you have to deal with people like her as well...they really are the worst and give both good French and stepparents a bad lesson.

Dad and Gabrielle were supposed to stay with us for a few days before I returned to work next week (all 4 of us got sick with the Bug at one point or another during the last 6 months and have remained symptom free, thank goodness so no need for us to quarantine once they arrived). They left this morning...but not before they had a vicious argument last night after my brother and I went to bed. And when I say vicious, I mean it was so loud we could hear every word. Thank God the neighbors couldn't hear otherwise we might've had the cops called on us.

Dad chewed Gabrielle out on what she wrote on the receipt and reminded her that she had promised him she'd be on her best behavior. After all, this restaurant was special to not just Mark and me but Dad as well. Gabrielle defended her actions, saying that it was not what she likes, etc...until she finally blew up and revealed the real reason she threw that tantrum in the restaurant.

It turned out Dad was planning on surprising Gabrielle on a trip to one of the best restaurants in town to celebrate the anniversary of their first date (which was yesterday). She had found the reservations by accident and thought they were going to it the night they arrived when he was planning on taking her tomorrow to make it a real surprise.

So us going to the greasy spoon instead of the super nice expensive restaurant really upset her and she thought he was catering to his kids instead of her. The argument finally ended when Dad took to the couch downstairs, fed up with her BS.

So they left this morning...Dad did tell me before they left that he was going to have a serious talk with Gabrielle about her behavior and that until she learned her manners, he was not going to take her out anymore, even to our place.

Hopefully that will be either the wakeup call to Gabrielle to behave...or to Dad that he should get out.

Oh and to those who said this story is fake (one person asking how we were able to smoke bacon, for your info, we have a pellet grill/smoker and we constantly are curing and smoking bacon because it's so good)....don't you guys have anything better to do?I am an RN. A few years ago, I was working at a walk in clinic in the middle of downtown in a large Canadian city. 

Now, as a walk in clinic nurse, I am used to a lot of entitlement from patients - those who believe that they can jump the line of other people who have been waiting 5+ hours to see the doctor simply because *their* symptoms are more important, those that don't understand that when we say that we have closed registration early in order to be able to close at our official time of 9:30 pm it means that they can't be seen even if it is only 8 pm when they come in, those that have become verbally, physically, and sexually abusive towards me if they don't get their way.

A lot of the doctors that worked with me seemed to have a lot when faced with patients' ire. So if I told the patients that they couldn't be seen due to the clinic policy of wanting its employees to actually get sleep before having to come back in the next morning, they would attempt to go around me and appeal to the doctor who would inevitably cave.

This angered me on a lot of levels. Firstly, these doctors were simply rewarding this disgustingly selfish behaviour by capitulating. Secondly, they were lending credence to the belief that a lot of patients had - I was a mere subordinate to the doctor and not my own autonomous practitioner. Thirdly, I was nurse manager of this clinic. The doctors were on call at the behest of the clinic and as such, did not technically have authority upon our hours as nursing staff and receptionists. Fourthly, we are supposed to act as a united team.

So one particularly trying night, a lady came in with her toddler child. She came in at around 8:45, and we still had another two hours of people waiting to be seen. We had closed registration at 6 pm and we're not accepting any new patients. I am in the back of the clinic performing a wound cleaning when the receptionist calls me and asks me to come up front as there is an agressive patient demanding their child to be seen.

So I head out to the front. The lady is standing at the desk, arms folded, snapping at her child to sit still. I glance at the child, who is sitting on a chair, swinging their legs and babbling away happily to anyone who will listen. Eyes bright, smiling, laughing. *Doesn't look unwell*, I think to myself as a cursory assessment.

As soon as the lady sees me with my stethoscope, she launches her tirade.

"Doctor, my child is extremely unwell. She has asthma and can barely breathe. She needs to be seen immediately."

I glance deadpan back at the child who is singing loudly to herself. I look back to the lady.

"She doesn't seem to be in distress, ma'am."

The lady tenses up and stares at me as though I am a complete fucking moron.

"Well where the hell did you go to medical school?" She inquires with the auditory level of banshee. "Kids present very differently than adults when they can't breathe. What are you, 12?"

I walk over to the child and place my hand gently on her back. I count her respirations as she falls quiet under my touch and I observe her scapulae as they expand and contract, indicating full chest expansion. I listen to the smooth sounds of her inspiration and expiration audible even without a stethoscope. I observe the moistness of her conjunctivae as she rubs her eyes, and I see the glistening wetness of her tongue as she licks her lips. She's well hydrated.

"I'm not a doctor, I am a nurse," I say, as I plug my stethoscope into my ears and begin to listen to the child's lung fields.

"Of course you don't know what you're doing!!" She yells. "I didn't bring my ill child to see some stupid nurse, I DEMAND TO SEE A DOCTOR! NOW!!! SHE NEEDS TO GO TO THE HOSPITAL AND IF SHE GETS WORSE, I'LL HAVE YOUR LICENCE."

Child's lung sounds are perfect. I lean down and smile at the child. "How are you feeling?" I ask her. She wants my stethoscope. I hand it to her. "I'm bored," she says, understandably.

I look to the lady. "Registration closed some time ago because as you can see, we have many patients to see and will end up being here past closing. I am afraid that we cannot see your child today. Based on my physical assessment, I cannot triage her up the line as she does not seem to be in respiratory distress. There are several hospitals close by that I can direct you to, if you wish."

A slow purple flush begins to crawl over her features. I smile blandly at her as I await the inevitable shit storm about to erupt. She walks up to me and leans into my face. I stand my ground, staring noncommitally back. The rest of the waiting room is staring intently.

"GET. THE. FUCKING. DOCTOR."

"The doctor is seeing patients, ma'am. I cannot interrupt him."

"MY CHILD IS GOING TO DIE BECAUSE OF YOU, YOU DISGUSTING, LOW EDUCATED, PEICE OF FILTH. GETTHEFUCKINGDOCTOR!!!"

I am about to repeat my previous statement when I suddenly hear a slight cough behind me. It's the doctor. Internally, I sag. Great. He's going to usher them in, and I get to look like an idiot in front of everyone again.

"What seems to be the problem?" He asks, staring quizzically at the lady.

She rushes over to him and clings to his arm. "Oh, thank God, doctor. My child. She has asthma. She has run out of her puffers and is in an attack. This.... nurse...refused to let her see you."

The doctor stands there, resolute, and disentangles his arm from her vice grip. He takes a cursory glance at the child who has begun delightedly listening to her own stomach with my stethoscope. He then walks over to me. Now this is a doctor whom I have not met before tonight. I prepare for the worst.

"Nurse. I assumed you performed triage?"

I nod. "Yes," I say. "I do not see any evidence of respiratory distress."

"Lung sounds?"

"Non-adventitious." I say. (Fancy way of saying clear as fuck)

"Mucous membranes?" (Fancy way of asking about hydration status)

"Pink, moist."

"Capillary refill?" (Fancy way of asking about blood flow)

"Immediate."

The doctor turns towards the lady. And this is when I realize that he has been watching this entire exchange from the beginning.

"I am calling you an ambulance."

The lady blinks. "What? Why?"

"You said that she needed to go to the hospital. If that is what you think, you know your child better than I do. I'd rather be safe than sorry."

The lady looks nonplussed. "But...but...the nurse said that she isn't in distress...."

The doctor smiles humourlessly. "What, this nurse right here? The one you were accusing of negligence and lack of knowledge? I trust this nurse's assessments. She has been very perceptive and professional for the long night that I have had the fortune to work with her. However, she, like myself, cannot know the intricacies of your child's history. It would be negligence indeed if we were to dismiss your concerns as a parent. Nurse, please call the ambulance."

Unable to keep the shit eating grin off of my face, I walk to the phone. The lady is trying to argue with the doctor who is walking away. "Best of luck to you, ma'am. I am sorry that you have had to wait so long, but it's best that we leave this to the professionals, hmm? And a shame it is, too, as this is flu season and all of the emergency departments are full to bursting with people waiting to be seen. Prepare for a very long wait."

And with that, he returned to the examination rooms. I hung up after exiting the call with EMS. The lady was visibly shaking. A few smiles littered the faces of those watching.

"EMS should be here shortly. If your child's status worsens, please have my receptionist call me back out. Have a good night, ma'am."

Vindication has never felt so sweet.So around July of last year I am coming up on the end of my contract for a big national gym chain that, lets just say, you can visit anytime. So, I try and call and get directions to cancel, and get a voicemail box that is full. I call their 800 number and am told only the local office can cancel me. I call my bank and ask if I can block auto-debit, but because it is a check debit they can only block a specific amount and there is a fee.

I scan my contract and it says I have to cancel in writing with 30 days notice regardless of my contract end date. I am pretty furious at this point because the gym was closed completely due to covid and I was wasting money. I hadn't been too concerned while my contract was going but now I just wanted to end my association with them. I write the letter with my membership number, email, and phone number, and send the letter certified with my fob.

Two months later, I notice I am still being charged, and they have billed me an additional $60 for my "annual access fee." Now I am livid.

I find the customer service email and explain the situation with specific dates of calls, letters, and attempted visits to the office. I ask that my membership be cancelled and a refund for the past several months and the annual renewal. I receive a rather curt response saying they will start my cancelation, but I will have one more monthly charge because there is a 30 day notice. I respond asking them to read my message and see that is what I did already by mail.

Apparently the local manager has been letting mail pile up as they don't even have someone at the office part time. No one has seen my letter. I say this to the email rep. He/she asks me to read my contract and states that even if I can demonstrate the letter was sent I would still be on the hook for the 30 days and the annual fee. She says I need to read my contract if I have any questions. And I do.

Turns out, near the end of this very long document, is section 20.1, which states the following:

"Unexpected events
We are not responsible if Members cannot use our Club because of an event caused by a natural force (such as a fire or a flood) or a road or building closure or something similar beyond our reasonable control. If this continues for more than 30 days, then either you or we may cancel this 
Agreement immediately by written notice. No Fee will apply."

So, I respond with this new knowledge I have and point out the gym had been closed 90 days prior to my original letter, and even greater than my email cancellation request. I also threaten the following if they don't refund me back to my original contract end date:

1. I will pay people I know to picket their gym.
2. I will hand out flyers telling people about this provision of the contract so others in the middle of contracts will be able to cancel without a fee.
3. I will publish an article in our local online newspaper about the trouble I have had offering advice to others.

And I make it clear that I have all the documentation including phone statements to prove it is all true.

Three days later I was called by a regional director with an apology and a full refund of over $240 that had been inappropriately taken and a little extra.

For those wondering, I am sharing this now because I understand many people in California where the lockdown was more strict have gone through this and they deserve to know how not to be abused. And remember, if someone tells you to read your contract, do it!I'm a part time home baker. I took it up while I'm studying from home during the pandemic, and it's basically a fundraiser for my charity since I can't do my monthly fundraiser bake sales on campus anymore. I'm also the only person selling baked goods in my entire area, so my items are very popular. Specifically this one particular type of cake I make that people absolutely love. 

The other day, a lady called me and wanted to place an order for 1lb of this particular cake. She said she had tried it at a friend's house and loved it and wanted it for her niece's birthday. I told her that I used the metric measurements, so my cakes are actually 500 gms or 1 kg (1lb = 454 gms). She said she wanted a 1lb cake, I dropped it because it was more or less the same thing. 

Important for later: when I had made the cake for her friend, I had run out of my 1lb cake bases so I had used 2lb cake base. IMO, this made the cake look smaller, but it's possible that someone else might think that the cake was bigger. (Edit: to clear up some confusion - cake base is the cardboard on top of which you put the cake. I use two sizes, 9" diameter base for my small cakes (500gms) and 12" diameter base for the big cakes (1kg). When the lady's friend ordered, I had run out of the smaller base so I used the 12" Base for the 500 gms cake.) 

After I took the order and quoted the price to her, she started giving me more instructions - the birthday girl is 16, so decorate it according to a 16 year old girl (I know, super vague), add XYZ stuff to it, write 4 different things on the cake. I explained to her that all this is not included in the base price and the kind of toppings she wanted would make it a lot heavier and pricier. She said, make it a 1lb cake for the 1lb cake price. 

Okay. I get the hint. You want a 1lb cake with those specific customisations. So I made it just that - removed some of the ganache, made thinner layers so I could incorporate her additions and still keep it at exactly 454 gms, no more, no less. 

The lady came to pick it up and she went ballistic because I was trying to rob her in the name of charity, and the cake I made was in no way 1 lb because her friend's cake was 'bigger'. I tried explaining to her why her friend's cake might have looked bigger, and that this cake was exactly 1 lb as she wanted. She refused to listen and was starting to create a huge scene, said she wanted a refund. 

So I brought my weighing scale out and weighed the cake out in front of her. 454 gms exactly. The lady saw and went, "Aha! I was right. You are trying to cheat me. It's 50 gms less." 

I said no, it's exactly 1 lb, like you wanted. I opened up google converter and showed her that 1 lb is in fact 454 gms, not 500. I opened whatsApp and showed her the message where I told her I make 500 gms standard cakes and she said she doesn't care, she wants 1lb. 

She was a bit gobsmacked and said I should have had some professional courtesy and made it 500 gms and I am trying to cheat her. I had it with her. I told her, "Ma'am, you wanted exactly 1lb cake. You said it to me 4 times. So you can take this exactly 1lb cake, or you can take your refund and leave. I can find other people who would want to buy a 1 lb cake."

She took her 1lb cake and left, saying she will never buy anything from me again and make sure to let others know too. Later, her niece followed my page on Instagram and dropped me a message apologising for her aunt, said it was the best cake she had ever had and she will surely tell everyone about my bakery.

Edit: I don't see exactly where the weight confusion is coming from, but basically, I have two standard sizes for my cakes which are 500 gms and 1 kg, because we use the metric system. Because of the American influence though, people have become used to cakes being either 1lb or 2lb in weight but don't often know the difference between the two. They just assume that 1lb = half a kg and 2 lb = 1 kg.

Edit2: TIL America doesn't sell cakes by weight lol. It's the standard practice over here that the rates are fixed by weight. Also, the cake in question here was not a traditional cake, so there was no way she wanted a pound cake.

Last edit: I'm a bit overwhelmed by the comments and I can barely keep track of them. The cake was a tart cake - it's layers of shortbread cookie and chocolate ganache. I've uploaded a picture of it as a post on r/baking

Actual final edit: the amount of positive feedback I've received through this post is crazy. I've had a very difficult few days and some of you were so nice to me, a complete stranger on the internet, and it made me a little emotional. If I received this much attention on my Instagram, I could probably become a full fledged food blogger lol. One thing I want to address because so many people started messaging me about it - I use gms for grams because it was drilled into us in school to not use g but gms. 'g' was apparently the symbol for something else (I don't even remember what) but we've had marks deducted from exams for not using gms, so I stick with that.TLDR: Brother makes Grandmother feel awful after I fell and break arm. 

My grandmother (and my mother) were both extremely strict about them “not being interrupted while on the phone”. 

One year while visiting grandmother, I decided to climb a large tree in her yard. I don’t remember how high it was, but I was almost to the top. Now being 11, I of course climb onto a dead branch and it snaps. 

I fall, plummeting to the ground. As soon as I realize I’m alive, I notice I can’t quite move my left arm. I tell brother to go inside and tell our grandmother. 

Now, my brother has Asperger’s and was so 2 years younger than me. He goes into the house, sits down and waits. I’m sure it was only a few minutes, but for me it seemed like eternity. 

Finally she hangs up the phone and asks him what was the matter?  That’s when he told her I fell out of the tree. 

At the hospital, somebody (the nurse or doctor? I don’t remember) asked me about the details. I told them I lay there on the ground for a while. When I was asked why, my brother (who was in the office with us) said that he had to wait until Grandmother got off her phone call to tell her. 

My grandmother had to explain to them what was going on. I do remember a social worker ushering them out of the room and asking some questions. After that, both grandmother and mother explained to us that if it’s an emergency, we need to tell them right away.McDonald's in the UK has always used plastic straws in their restaurants. In the UK these straws are 100% recyclable. After increasing and unbearable pressure from anti-plastic activists they gave in and replaced the plastic straws with paper straws. These paper straws are not recyclable in the UK. They do biodegrade but there is not enough landfill in the UK to hold all of the waste from McDonald's (hundreds of millions of these straws are used every year). Solution? Burn them all in power plants.

Net result: Go from a 100% recyclable material with negligible carbon footprint to a non-recyclable material that is burned to produce hundreds of millions of tonnes of CO2 every year, speeding up global heating and intensifying the climate crisis.

*"It's better for the environment."*

Source: [BBC article - McDonald's paper straws cannot be recycled](https://www.bbc.com/news/business-49234054)Obligatory this happened to me ~8 years back. It was the summer before my senior year in high school, and my best friend at the time invited me to come stay with her and her dad’s family in Florida for two weeks. 

Much to my chagrin (on a beach vacation no less) I got my period. I had brought supplies with me just in case, and disposed of them wrapped up in toilet paper in the lidded garbage can in the shared bathroom we were using as one does. 

On the third day of the trip, her dad approached me to say that my friend’s step-brother, who lived with them, had “seen” my period products in the bathroom garbage can (like, were you digging around in there ya weirdo?) and was disgusted by it. He asked me not to throw them out there so his son wouldn’t have to “see that” (again, a lot harder to see than to avoid, imo, but I digress). I asked him where he suggested I dispose of my “disgusting” products then, to avoid upsetting his son. I thought it was a kind of ridiculous request since this is a natural body process I can’t control, but I wanted to do what I could since I was a guest there. 

But this man goes “just hold it in until we go out to dinner or something and throw it out in a public restroom.” Sir, you have a daughter. How can you not know that’s not how things work? When I asked him what I should do if that wasn’t an option, he said “just flush it then, so he doesn’t have to see it.”

Cue malicious compliance. Yes sir, instead of wrapping up my used tampon in some toilet paper and tucking it into the trash can (that has a god damn LID), I will flush it down the toilet instead. 

The first one went down just fine. The second time it went down with a gurgle. But the third one made the toilet back up and overflow. I’ll always remember the sight of my friend’s dad pumping that toilet only for a partially dissolved bloody tampon to float to the surface of the bowl. I went back to putting them in the trash, and he didn’t say another word about it.



Not sure if this is Malicious Compliance or Petty Revenge...

I graduated uni a few years back and immediately started looking for a job in my chosen field - marketing.

Marketing entry level roles were thin on the ground, so when I found a role which was hybrid of marketing with sales support, I took it. 

The company was a medium sized business which specialised in recruitment, contractor hiring and head hunting. They also subcontracted work for a recruitment technology provider, which matched up perfectly with one of my other passions - technology.  

I absolutely loved the role. I got to do all parts of the marketing and sales lifecycle, I got to work with suppliers, event organisers, clients, staff all across the company, meet new people and do really exciting things. 

I had two managers - the one who managed the sales team and the one who managed marketing. 

The marketing manager was a kindred spirit; the sales manager was oldschool sales. An arrogant and headstrong late-forties man who lived for making deals and boasting about them. Shiny shoed, silver-tongued. I’ll call him Dapper Dan. We were not friends. 

For about 18 months, things went swimmingly. I’d do marketing half the time then divide the rest of the time between sales support and billable work. Billable was building custom careers / job sites to host the recruitment system front end. A steep learning curve but with the help of some web dev friends I got pretty familiar with simple site builds. 

Being tech-aligned meant I was always looking digital first, bringing the company into the age of social media, SEO / SEM, website optimisation and multi channel marketing. 

Dapper Dan sneered at such things. He saw digital as a waste of money. However, we were always able to justify the spend on digital by offsetting the billable website work. 

The marketing manager eventually moved on to bigger and better things. Rather than promote me or hire in a replacement, the company moved the marketing responsibilities to Dapper Dan. 

Dapper Dan’s changes were immediate and far-reaching. He removed the digital budget. He required that 50% of my time would be sales support, to ‘better enable the sales team’. He incorporated the billable work with his own team’s revenue. He rewrote my annual objectives to align purely with sales targets, rather than marketing. When I voiced my objections, he took me aside for a ‘friendly chat’ and told me if I didn’t like it, I could always leave. 

Naturally I went and complained extensively to the departed marketing manager over drinks. After listening sympathetically for 45 minutes, she held up a hand, said ‘Stop’, and shared some life advice. ‘Each job pays you twice. You get your money now, that’s your wage. You also get experience now, that’s how you get paid in the future. So. Are you still getting paid? Yes? Are you still learning? No? Figure out how to keep learning, or leave.’ 

Taking the advice to heart, I busted my ass for the next year. I worked on digital outside of office hours. I made friends with the tech provider’s support and dev teams. I went to developer group meetups, attended conferences, studied for and acquired industry qualifications. I joined the national marketers and digital marketers group. I dug through blogs, articles, emailed people, took every opportunity to cross skill, upskill, to learn. 

And I sat with a smile on my face in the sales meetings as Dapper Dan delegated dumb do-work to me so his team of sycophants could make the company’s growth figures look spectacular. Spectacular they were, to the point that the company was acquired, and Dapper Dan betrayed me. 

You see, managers have the discretion to assign a pool of shares to high performing staff. The shares have no real value and can’t be traded, but in the event of a management buy out, they would suddenly have value - and quite a lot of value. 

Dapper Dan felt it appropriate to reward every SALESperson in his team with a generous parcel of shares. As a SUPPORTperson, I would not be the beneficiary of such kindness. I’d had a verbal agreement with the previous marketing manager that the pool would be shared across the entire team so was pretty shocked to discover I’d been excluded from the pool. 

I queried him on it, per the previous agreement, and he said (verbatim) ‘Well, an verbal agreement is only worth the paper it’s written on. You don’t make any sales, you haven’t built the business, you don’t get a cut’. 

'If you didn’t like it,' he reiterated, 'you're welcome to leave.'

That is EXACTLY what I decided to do. Except I didn’t tell him. 

The way the contract handover works in this instance is that all staff cease employment with company X on one day. The following day, they commence employment with company Y. Annual leave is paid out and begins to re-accrue at the new employer. Other arrangements - salaries, long service leave and length of service - may be transferred to the new employer. 

About six weeks before the handover, Dapper Dan passed me my new contract. I waited a week, came back with some enthusiastic queries on the new benefits, which took him two weeks to follow up. I quietly registered a domain name and parked it, then spun up a Wordpress instance and started building a personal blog. 

Three weeks away from drop date, everyone’s frantically running around getting all the deals as close as possible to closing and employment contracts are the last thing on his mind. I go back to him, I tell him I have a couple more things I need to check out and I’ll email them through to him before I sign it. I spend a few more nights throwing together a bunch of blog articles relating to Recruitment Technology. How to articles, that kinda stuff, many of my own installation notes. 

A week passes, I fire off a couple of really complex questions around the transfer of benefits. He obviously forgets about them, then in the week of the handover, catches heat from the HR team about the outstanding contract and pulls me into a meeting room to berate me about not having signed the new contract.

I explain I’m waiting on his feedback on those specific points before I’ll commit, that I don’t want to be disadvantaged moving into the new role, call out the lack of a share option as an example. Clearly frustrated, he drops the words I’ve been waiting for. ‘If the signed contract is not on my desk on Friday, don’t bother coming into the office Monday.’ He paused for dramatic effect, and reiterated ‘I mean it. You won’t have a job.’ I replied that I completely understand and that I’ll have everything he needs on his desk by close of business Friday.

On Friday afternoon, Dapper Dan leaves the office early to attend his normal ‘client networking’ visits which typically involve long lunches and alcohol. 

At 4.45pm I save the final set of forecasting and reporting to the share drive, send an email to the IT team passing over access to the Marketing lastpass account which contains the global database of usernames and passwords for all digital assets (including client sites), an Excel workbook containing my reporting macros and the location of all my documentation. I redirect my phone to Dapper Dan’s desk number, lock my laptop and leave it on his desk along with my ID card.

Over the weekend I push my personal website live and add my contact details to my LinkedIn profile, switching it to 'Actively Searching' mode. I figure my holiday pay will cover me for a couple of weeks of downtime before I have to go diving back into the workforce. 

On Monday, I’m enjoying a long walk in the spring sunshine with my dog, who’s incredibly happy that his human has not disappeared down the driveway at 0720 per normal. We stop for coffee at a local cafe and my phone begins to ring. It’s one of the sales drones at old company; I ignore it and thoroughly enjoy the freedom of being able to amble through a park without anywhere to be. The phone buzzes another eight or ten times by the time I get home. The poop has well and truly hit the windmill.

I check my voicemails, ignoring those I know from my previous employer and returning the phone calls of two ex-clients to let them know that my contract has ended and to check in with Dapper Dan for work in progress - or contact the technology provider for support requests. 

Shortly afterwards I got a call from a bemused contact who works at the technology provider who’s been fielding support calls that I’d normally handle. He listens with increasing interest as I explained the situation, then tells me he’d call back shortly. 

Ten minutes later he’s back with the Head of Product on the line, asking about my lunch preferences. She arranges to meet me at a nearby Thai place. Over a delicious red duck curry, she cheerfully describes the wonders of a career as a contractor. She also mentions the day rates for highly qualified, industry-certified staff, mentioned that Tech Provider were really struggling to find such staff and gives me the number of a recruiter who may or may not have been on Tech Supplier’s preferred supplier list. I call the recruiter on the way home. 

Meanwhile, my collection of voicemails from Dapper Dan was growing by the hour as he came to grips with the breadth of the problem that he’d generated. At some point in the late afternoon, HR must’ve clicked to what had happened and I received a polite SMS from the personal number of the regional HR Directory asking if I was available for a quick chat. 

I call through and discussed the options presented to me by Dapper Dan on Friday, and that I felt I had no option but to follow his instructions. They probed for more information and it became apparent they were unaware that Dapper Dan had pulled an ultimatum without first engaging HR. They then informed me that to benefit from the sale of my shares, I would need to transfer to the new company and remain in their employment for a full year. 

When I explained that I had no such share options, there was a full four second silence. It transpires that this, too, was not adequately communicated to HR. I mentioned that I’d appreciate it if Dapper Dan could discontinue his voicemails to me as I found them unprofessional and had no intent of recommencing employment under his management. We ended the call politely, I wished them all the best and regretted the conversation had to happen under such circumstances. 

My contract for Tech Provider came through via the PSL agency at 11pm that evening and was signed and returned the following day. 

I was deployed to client site that Wednesday. 

*Post Departure*
I met up with one of the old IT team at a conference three months after it all went down. He was ecstatic to fill me in on what had happened. 

The first notice anyone got of it was the service desk asking who they should route my LastPass account to and why I’d be passing it around. One of the techs came up to my floor to find me, then found an empty desk. Asked around for where I’d moved to and noone knew. That was the first call, from one of the Sales drones trying to locate me. 

The tech went to Dapper Dan’s desk and found my laptop with my ID and post-it note taped to it. He put two and two together, went back downstairs and checked the access logs and realised the last time I’d logged in was Friday. He then locked my account for security purposes and went to HR to check if there was a leaver form. 

HR checks, no leaver form AND a great big red cross next to 'employment contract received'. HR calls Dapper Dan, who’s not in the office. Dapper Dan says ‘No, contract should be on my desk, it was on there on Friday, I’m out on the road at the moment, give me till lunch time and I’ll sort it out’. Obviously thinking that I’m grandstanding. Starts to call me and leave messages then gets progressively agitated as he realises I’m not coming back. 

When he gets into the office, he can’t find the contract either so he goes to HR and ‘explains’ what has happened, says I have been stonewalling them and it’s cool, he’ll get it sorted, it’s between me and him. HR says erm, no, this is our thing now, and the HRD sends me the SMS. 

Shortly after my phone conversation the HRD walks into a sales meeting and very abruptly pulls Dapper Dan out. They disappear into a meeting room where it may only be assumed that Dapper Dan was required to spell out exactly what had occurred and address the comments that I had made. I suspect he came completely clean at that stage.

Dapper Dan was subsequently reamed as only HR and senior management can ream a manager who’s f*cked up. He was demoted, decoupled from Marketing, his budget reduced by half and a new, separate Marketing function created. 

His team were collectively put under review and forced to carry out their own reporting, tracking and metrics, which lacked the coherence and consistency that I’d been able to deliver. This reduced the capacity of the team. A couple of them left and they missed out on some key deals. 

In the fallout they completely dropped the ball on the client website builds. They went to market to try and find a resource who could fulfil these builds, and Dapper Dan was reportedly astounded to discover that experienced technical marketing staff are both hard to find and expensive to recruit. 

They were unable to fill the role and the builds were taken back inhouse by the tech provider, who now had an experienced resource to deploy (me). I ended up working on three of these at full utilisation rate, which was paid by the new company. I’m pretty sure Dapper Dan would’ve seen the funding arrangements for these and would know my day rate - which is substantially higher than his. 

*Much later*
As the sales lead, Dapper Dan had to bear the displeasure of his superiors for the full twelve months before he could claim his share payout. It would’ve been a really, really shitty twelve months for him. He resigned within two weeks of the anniversary of the purchase, and the company enforced a six month notice period and another 12 month no-compete clause. Any benefit he would have received from the share payout would have been consumed over that 12 months unless he switched industries or moved cities. Last time I saw he was on the job market. 

As for me? Happily living the life of the contractor. I get paid for the hours I work and I work the hours I want. 

My old marketing manager is now VP of something at a large multinational. I’ve used her speech several times when giving young, frustrated staff career advice. 

TL;DR

Old school sales manager attempts to call my bluff. Hilarity ensues. So this happened a number of years ago when I was in college  studying preschool education.

A new daycare had recently opened in our town and it already had a bit of an unsavoury reputation. For some reason they had gotten my name from one of my professors as a potential supply teacher (whatever but ok! )

Cue a call from them at 6.30 am on the hottest day of summer. I kid you not it had to be 30c at 7 am and the temp was still rising!  The director was in a twist needing a supply for a few days and promised to pay me 10$ an hour if I came in to pinch hit.  What college student doesn't need money haha so I agreed and headed on over.

I got there about 8 am and the place was disgusting!  Dirty floors, filthy walls, broken toys. It looked like the school from the movie Matilda! I barely had time to take in the nastyness around me when I heard a woman SCREAMING in the kitchen - EAT Damn you! - and the sound of a very young baby wailing.

I scooted to the kitchen as was met with absolute..filth. dirty dishes piled on the counter. Crusted pots filled with ...something.....in the sink....and flies. Oh the flies!  Sadly that wasn't the worst of it because sitting in a battered highchair was a crying baby with an enraged adult (teacher i assume) trying to force a spoonful of oatmeal into his tiny mouth.

Me - what are you doing!

Teacher - little brat wont eat!  EAT DAMN YOU!

I shoved her aside , got him calmed down, and gave him his cereal .

Cue ticked off teacher who was apparently offended that a stupid SUPPLY knew how to get a baby to eat! (gasp!)

As I was finishing up with Jr, the director came into the kitchen and announced my \*koff\* class for the day would be the school age kids. Upstairs.

I made my way up the stairs and the heat met me about halfway to the top. It. was. a . sauna! Easily 45c up there!

Director- Oh ya the AC broke 3 weeks ago we haven't gotten it fixed yet.

I looked around at the 3 almost bare rooms on the upper floor. In one was a tv with a video game console and 2 controllers.  In another was some old board games and the third had a shelf with some battered books on it. With this, I was expected to entertain 15 children for the next 8 hours.

Fast forward to early afternoon. I have opened every window and the door to the fire escape hoping to get some cross breeze going. The kids are hot and bored. Thank goodness they each brought their own lunch because no way was I going to feed them whatever came crawling out of that kitchen!

I had asked the director if the kids and I might go down to the back yard where there was shade and was told firmly NO, we had to stay upstairs in the inferno the entire day! (cue malicious compliance . DUN DUN DUN!)

I was sitting out on the fire escape with several of the kids, playing a game when a very smartly dressed woman walked out and introduced herself as Mrs (blah) from Social Services! Did I have a few moments to talk to her?

Ohh did I have a few moments? Come! Pull up a milk crate! Lets chat shall we!  I told. her . everything! The dirt, the flies, the teacher screaming at the baby, the broken AC and refusal of letting the kids go downstairs to try to prevent heat stroke! And the cream on the cake... I HAD NOT YET GOTTEN MY DEGREE in preschool teaching! I was an unlicensed, unsupervised college student in charge of 15 kids!

Apparently the staff had refused to talk to her at all so she and I had a lovely conversation for the next half hour and it didn't take the kids long to realize this was their chance for their own bit of revenge as they pipped up with their own stories and complaints!

The daycare was shut down the next day.

I was never paid but honestly just getting them closed down was payment enough for me!

Edit - THANK YOU for the gold and silver awards and OH MY GOSH and Platinums! THANK YOU!This is a story from my father, who was an American grunt in the Vietnam War.

This was during one of his assignments in/near a Vietnamese village. Because they were trying to avoid killing the local civilians they had orders expressly prohibiting them from shooting back (maybe just at night?), and the guerrillas knew about it. So every single night the guerrillas would climb up on rooftops in the village and take pot shots at my father's group.

Now, because the guerrillas were effectively using the civilians as a shield, the men weren't allowed to shoot back. They were, however, allowed to launch a flare, which would light things up enough that the guerrillas didn't feel safe continuing to shoot at them. But the shooting would start back up again the next night.

One night my father had had enough, and he had a devious idea. When a sniper started taking pot shots that night, he immediately launched a flare. Horizontally. Right at the sniper.

His commanding officer reamed him for it, but after that the night-time pot shots stopped.

(Edit: for clarity)So, about 10 years ago my husband and I were renting a house while we tried to buy a place. The landlord seemed so nice, and it was a great situation. When we found a place to buy, we gave him our forwarding  information along with the keys. It took about two months to get our deposit back, and we were shocked to say the least. He had taken $400 out. 

He had an enclosed porch that had screens with no glass. It had outdoor carpeting that was gross, and we bought a remnant to cover the carpet since we had little kids and it was questionable (no doubt due to the year round screens - including  rain storms, etc). It wasn’t ideal, but it was a rental. When we left, we rolled up the carpet and threw it out. Anyway, the landlord stated in his letter that he was taking out the $400 because we had broken the lease by having a dog - and his proof was the condition of that carpet. We did not have a dog, and that carpet was gross when we got there. We tried to explain that, but he was having none of it and would ignore our attempts to reach out (plus, how do you prove the absence of something?). 

Cue malicious compliance: you want to follow the lease so carefully as to make up animals? Well, perhaps you should read the laws a little better. According to our state, landlords have exactly one month to send the deposit back. He took two. According to the law, you can be held liable for three times the amount (1800, in our case). So we sued. We no longer wanted the  $400 back; we wanted $5400. 

While it was somewhat painful (he dodged attempts to serve him, he had out of state attorney friends try to intimidate us) he eventually had to hire an attorney, and we settled on $2000 (in addition to the $1400 we got back). We filed with the help of a friend so we didn't owe an attorney - just filing fees. 
He ended up paying $2000 plus attorney fees instead of our $400 for a phantom dog.  

Know your rights as tenants!This is a story my father-in-law (F) told me about his mother-in-law (MIL) who had money but was notoriously cheap with it. Dinner at her place could be a bit of an ordeal. Food was the cheapest available, the portions were so tiny you'd be hungrier when you finished than before you started and she would do things like buy a super value no-frills supermarket own brand pack of mini bite size pies or chicken Kiev intended for parties and serve one per person as a main dish. She also watered down sauces, soups and drinks mercilessly. 

One year the extended family were getting together as usual for Christmas dinner at MIL's house. This comprised several nuclear family groups, each of which traditionally provided one course and this year it was MIL's turn to provide the wine. 

When MIL sent F to the kitchen to fetch the wine, all he could see was a single bottle of the cheapest substance you could possibly call wine. It had a plain white label with no text other than "value sweet dessert wine" and the supermarket's logo. F said he wouldn't even have risked cooking with the stuff. Even if it were higher quality, sweet dessert wine would probably not have been a pleasant accompaniment for the main course.

Fortunately, F had a trick up his sleeve.

Returning to the dining room, he asked MIL as discreetly as he could if she didn't have anything a bit nicer for Christmas dinner. Her response was, "No. I prefer this. It's my favourite, you'll like it just fine."

So F went back and opened MIL's crappy cheap dessert wine and also a bottle of really nice wine he'd brought with him, which he hid behind his back as he poured MIL's glass of plonk. When she saw the other bottle she started yelling about having some respect for his mother-in-law. All he said in response was, "You said you preferred this one, so I made sure you got your favourite. What's the problem here?"

Everyone else really enjoyed the nice wine.




Edit: I may have inadvertently made my father-in-law come across as a wine snob. He definitely isn't a wine snob, but by all accounts this stuff was so poor quality it was pretty much undrinkable (it was also too sweet to go with the food). The stuff he brought wouldn't have been show-off expensive, just nice. He doesn't drink wine often.Years ago I worked for an awesome company that understood workplace culture and fun was a huge part in keeping employees happy and productive. 

In our office, people would often cycle to work and therefore needed to shower and get ready at work. That meant that sometimes they didn’t get to their desk until after 9am, however nearly everyone worked back without being asked to deliver on deadlines. 

Management didn’t care because they knew the work was being done and everyone always went over and above. 

Enter new HR manager, we had never really had one before but were growing so needed one. Within her first few weeks she sent out an email saying that everyone needed to be seated and ready to go at 9am and that we needed to stop having social chats and getting ready at work, or if we did, do it earlier. She never acknowledged the fact that everyone put in unpaid overtime. 

Cue mass malicious compliance. Everyone would start at 9am as per email and then leave at 5pm. Projects started running behind and clients started getting pissed off because their product was not being delivered on time. 

New HR manager was confused as to why work was not being delivered on time anymore, people were starting on time! She made sure of it! 

Needless to say, upper management removed the rule and she quit shortly after. 

We all went back to our normal ways and would you know it! Projects were back on track. 

Don’t walk into a new company and try to change something that isn’t broken. The people will revolt.

Edit: this was my first post and I didn’t think anyone would see it! 
I want to clarify that OT was never expected or forced upon us but due to awesome management, cool projects and great perks we didn’t mind when we did do it.

Edit: I see a lot of people confused about why HR would be involved with such matters. In smaller companies in Australia, HR oversees a lot more than the usual. It depends on the company really, and this company was approx 50 people.A few years ago I was looking for a place to live and I came across an interesting advertisement looking for "Property guardians". The idea behind property guardians is that disused buildings are far more secure if they are occupied, so owners of empty properties will allow people to live there temporarily for incredibly cheap price. So the guardian gets to live in a (usually quite interesting) disused building incredibly cheaply, the owner makes a small additional bit of income and has someone keeping their eye on the place. This arrangement is usually done through a 3rd party Guardian company, who act as the intermediary.

This particular advert was for a pub that had recently closed, my interest piqued so I went along to a viewing. The space was huge, and they were only asking for a few hundred pounds, all bills included, so I went for it, along with a group of other people. We all picked our rooms, I got the bar area - a huge room with en suite ladies and gents toilets, a big fireplace and cosy pub decor. We also had full use of the sizeable pub kitchen, beer cellar, dish washing room, double garage, car park and a massive garden with a BBQ area.

For the most part, it was a great gig. I got to live in a pub, have all the space I wanted, and as the building was due to be destroyed, we could pretty much do what we liked with the internals. I put up curtains and temporary walls and made it my cosy home for the next couple of years. Other guardians moved in and out over the months, but myself and a couple of others were there for the long term. Aside from the odd dodgy person coming and going (I had two of my tyres slashed at one point, but that's another story), all was pretty cushy.

The owner of the Guardian company, and thus the person I paid my rent to, was a large red faced man who was quite full of himself. He tended to be quite bossy and sometimes aggressive, but I stayed out of his way. As long as I paid my rent and didn't cause him trouble, he left me alone. All until the end of the "tenancy". I had moved out, returned my keys and I was awaiting the return of my security deposit.

At some point, a car had been dumped on the property. I hadn't noticed, because one of the previous guardians, who I will call Rob, had pushed it round to the back of the property and had been working on it. I just assumed it was his car. The first of the emails from The Guardian Company read:

>The Volvo dumped in the car park was not reported to us and must be removed from the site. Rob has declined to take responsibility of the vehicle and has alleged it was reported to the police and yet none of you have reported to us on such a serious issue. I would suggest that it be placed on the public highway and then the police will deal with whomever owns the vehicle.

Wait... did you just incite us to commit fly tipping?

I emailed back and said the car wasn't my responsibility, and thus I won't be moving it. Things went back and forth like this for a while, withe the owner insisting that we were all responsible. (Emphasis here means it's important later.)

>Stop arguing as I don't care and if it's not gone then you will all be accountable to the issue. Rob was contacted and has said its not his and now **the burden falls on all of you** that knew about the car and failed to report it.

At this point, I mentioned small claims court as an idle threat to see what would happen...

>You have failed to report an incident that is something that is detrimental to the property. You are in breach of the license for failing to do so. Happy to see you in court and explaining that **you were put into the building to act as security by occupation** and while there you failed to report a dumped car.

Right. It's on. I pulled out the contract and went back over it with a fine tooth comb. At this point, another email came through...

>Dear All,  
>  
>Please be aware that you were all under license at the property and not tenants and had no tenancy rights as is clearly stated in the license that you all agreed to and signed. Under the license **you act as security for the property** and were responsible for reporting any incidents and also were responsible for keeping the property safe, secure and as stated any items left will be charged for removal. The items left were dumped outside and certainly were not there throughout your time on site and must have been placed there by one or more of you.

This was accompanied by photographs of even more stuff that other guardians had left in the property, furniture etc. But I wasn't going to be responsible for any of their stuff. This guy thought he could bully us out of our money because we didn't have a legal tenancy and were therefore not covered by UK laws protecting tenants. I wasn't going down without a fight.

We may not be covered by tenants rights, so everything would fall back to basic contract law. I found the interesting parts of the occupation licence agreement that I had with the Guardian company:

>"Damage Security Payment' means the amount payable by the guardian \[...\] to cover the cost of any damages caused by the guardian.

But not anybody else... and since this contract is between myself and The Guardian Company with no "jointly and severally liable" clause, I can't be held responsible for anyone else's mess. Great. But there's more... this one is interesting:

>"3.1 The Guardian Company provide services to property owners to, among other benefits, secure premises against trespassers and protect such premises from damage. The Guardian Company has agreed to provide such services to the owner in respect of the property."

So WE don't provide security, that's the responsibility of The Guardian Company, which we're not a part of. But wait, there's more:

>The Guardian will:  
>  
>10.1.10 Not remove anything from the property, other than things that s/he brought there

BOOM. Gotcha.

I fired back an email:

>Please see Section 3.1 of the Licence Agreement signed by myself and The Guardian Company owner. It stipulates that You, The Guardian Company, provide security. Not us, the guardians.  
>  
>Please also see Section 10.1.10. Given that I did not bring either the car or the furniture onto the property, it would in fact be a breach of your own licence agreement for me to remove it. In this case, I will be complying with your contract and thus will not remove the items that I did not bring on to the property.  
>  
>Please return my security deposit within 3 working days, or I will be forced to take legal action.

Their response:

>At this point we are happy to see you in court and please do not contact us unless via your solicitor as we will be charging for our time to deal with such matters. If you can demonstrate who is responsible for leaving the items for us to deal with we will look at this. But as stated previously these items were not there previously and have dumped them outside. All of you failed to report the car.

Sounds like he was shaken up a little and probably hoped I was bluffing. Unfortunately for him, I wasn't. I filed the court papers after three working days.

He caved as soon as he received the court papers, and realised that I wasn't bluffing. He repaid our deposits, along with my court fees the very next day.

Victory.  


*Edit: Formatting, and re-worded the ending because people were getting confused.*The entry level position at my old company is a revolving door. The pay is low, the work is unrewarding, and the expectations are unattainably high for the vast majority of the staff. The average time in that position is 6 months. 

This is by design. It's a position that requires minimal training and there are plenty of applicants willing to work for minimum wage. It's actually a really great entry into the field and uses all of the industry standard practices and tools. Most people use it as a launching point for a successful career and move on to a higher paying job after half a year. 

One of the cool things about the position is that they offer a great perk for paid time off. You get 1 hour of PTO for every 30 hours worked. There are no caps on accrual or limits on usage. 

It's a great way to attract recent college grads to the position. They feel like they're getting a great benefit, and the company knows that they'll be gone in 6 months anyway, so they don't end up paying for a lot of time off. 

I took the job fully expecting to be gone within a year, but I ended up thriving in the position. My bosses were impressed, and they offered me raises if I would stay with the company and increase my scope of responsibility. Every time I started to think that my career was stagnating, they would make staying in that position worth it. 

After a couple of years, I had learned enough that I felt confident in my ability to take on a mid-level role, so I asked for consideration. The mid-level role comes with benefits and a salary, along with a title that would look great on my resume. The drawback was that this position has a cap of 4 days of PTO usage per year. Still, it would be a great stepping stone in my career, so I was eager to move up.

The only problem is that the mid-level position hires from a pool of candidates with an MBA, which I don't have. My boss told me that they would love to have me work on that team, and would give me a good raise, but I wouldn't get the title, salary, or benefits without an MBA. 

Works for me. I know how to write a resume and present myself in an interview, so the title is meaningless as long as I'm doing the work of that role. The pay increase would be great leverage while I search for a new job. 

And I don't need the benefits. I don't need to be on the company's health care plan because I get free healthcare from the VA. I don't need their 401k plan because my wife's company has a better one. I don't need their student loan repayment benefits because the GI bill paid for my degree.

So I took the promotion, but I kept my original title. I don't think they realized that this means I also kept my original PTO structure, and at my new pay rate, giving me that much PTO would be kind of expensive. 

After about a year in that position, I was ready to move on. I told my boss I wanted to use all of my available PTO and he said, "No problem! Enjoy your 4 days!"

"No, you don't understand. I'm still a [entry level job title]. I'm off for the next 6 weeks."

I actually did take a month off and had a great time. Then I started job hunting full-time and quickly got offers. When my PTO was over, I came back to the company with my two-weeks notice. 

The timing was bad for the company because they didn't plan on spending that much on PTO that quarter. I hope they've revisited their decision to tell me that I was capable of doing a job but not qualified for the benefits of that job.My nephew is really into online gaming.  He knows I am as well so thought I would appreciate this story.  Sorry if some of the details are fuzzy, it is a retelling from something told to me by a hyperactive 16 year old.

Companies that do online gaming are starting to push back against toxic players that make the game less fun for everyone by issuing bans for racist comments, threats, etc.  Depending on the game it might start with a warning, then a 24 hour ban, then a 7 day ban, then a permanent ban.  A lot of these games are free so a perma banned player could create a new account, but all progress and benefits they earned are lost, so it's still a big deal.  This one game in particular has a forum where players can discuss and appeal bans.  

So, one day a person posts complaining they received a 24 hour ban for what they considered minor offenses, like saying butts or boobs, and could they check the chat logs to reconsider the temp ban?

Their response: We checked the chat logs and over the course of that single gaming session you made several racist, homophobic and sexist remarks as well as threatened to go to another player's home and punch them in the face.  We're not sure how we missed that.  The 24 hour ban is overturned.  Your account is now permanently suspended.  Thanks for bringing this to our attention!

Edit: thank you for those who educated me on what being "a little" means.  Please excuse the terrible writing. 

This is a story from 4th grade. We were given a major project in english where we had to write and "publish" our own children's books, including drawing pictures and binding them. 

I went all out on this thing working on it during class, lunch, and at home. I finished it at home two days before it was due and put it in my bag to take to school the next day.

(Now a little bit of a backstory, my mom and brother (3 years younger) were extremely abusive to me with my brother constantly tormenting me and destroying my stuff with no consequences.)

So my brother went through my room (again,) destroying anything he could get his hands on, snapping my pencils, my CDs, and tearing up my project into little pieces.

I went in the next day and told my teacher that my brother destroyed my project and could I please have a week to turn in a replacement. She told me that she doesn't care about my excuses and that if I don't get it in the next day I would get a fail on the project. 

The next day I delivered a ziplock containing the pieces of my project and dropped it on her desk, she gave me a B+ out of pity I think.I was reminiscing after I made the poor nurse shudder after cracking my knuckles at my doctor's appointment. It reminded me of a funny story with my mom. 

My mom absolutely *loathed* whenever I cracked my knuckles around her. I can't help myself, it's a bad habit and once I start I have to do all of them. She would constantly yell for me to stop. She would tell me it's bad for me and that I'm gonna get arthritis from doing that. 

 One day at home I started making my fingers into rice crispy treats; snap, crackle, pop. Mom had enough and snapped herself.

"I want you to write a 2 page essay about cracking your fingers including about arthritis.  No more than double space, 12 point font and all of that. I don't want you trying anything funny."

... Well of course I'm going to try something funny. We wouldn't be here if I didn't... so cue that malicious compliance. 

I sat at the computer and pulled open google and typed in "how cracking your fingers does not cause arthritis". Turned out that was correct. I had plenty of sources including one guy who cracked his knuckles regularly on one hand and not at all on the other. The other hand got arthritis and the cracking hand did not. I included that, a few other truthful things like it does cause loss of grip but ultimately it was about how it helped prevent arthritis in the long term. 

She took the essay without a word, skimmed it and called it good to my surprise. Couldn't believe I got away with it. 

But

I also remember that it got brought up in a conversation in my adult years before cancer claimed her.

Mom: what did I tell you about cracking your knuckles? I had you write an essay on that and everything!

Me: you.... didn't read that did you? 

Mom: what makes you think that? 

Me smiling like a fox in a hen house: cause I wrote it on how it prevents arthritis

Mom with surprise Pikachu face: no you didn't! 

Me: Cited sources and everything!

Mom: you brat!

Me: Apple doesn't fall far from the tree!

I loved my mom.When I was in high school I had a part time job working at a local restaurant. One day I came in and was scheduled to wash dishes, no big deal. I walked into the back and came to find out that the morning shift did not have a dish washer therefore there was a mountain of dishes. No bueno. On top of all of that, we got slammed that night. 

As a minor, I was required to take a 30 minute break in order to work my full shift (4-10pm I believe). As I clocked out for my break I asked my manager if she could have someone cover my position while I was on break to prevent an even worse situation than was already at hand. She responded ‘Won’t be able to. You’ll just have to stay late and finish it’.

An important thing to keep in mind is that this manager was notoriously lazy and unhelpful. She never lended a helping had to get things done faster. She would rather stay 3 hours past close sitting in the office waiting for us to finish our closing duties instead of coming out and helping and getting everything done in a timely manner. She also was not very familiar with child labor laws in Ohio.

Since I was a minor, not only did I have to take a 30 minute break, I also could not work past 11pm on school nights. So after clocking back in from my break, I resumed washing the mountain of dishes that had accumulated. I took my time and didn’t rush to get everything cleaned, but also wasn’t going extremely slow on purpose. 

10:59 rolls around and I walk into the office to tell her that I am leaving. She asked ‘got everything done?’
‘Nope!’ I said. ‘It’s a Wednesday night. Can’t work past 11pm. Labor laws. I left the water turned on for you. There’s still a lot left!’

The look on her face was priceless. I clocked out with the biggest smile on my face knowing that she was going to have to leave the office and do something for once.  Asked another manager the next day to see what time she clocked out. 1:15am!The software company I worked for got acquired.  Some people were let go, some were added, and some teams and functions were restructured.  Prior to acquisition, we had a "multiple hats" situation where you basically did whatever was in your capacity, teams played to each other's strengths, and one person would generally take a client from the first demo right through the configuration, implementing, and training phases of the software.  Some of us had strengths in technical areas, others had a decade+ in the clients' subject matter.  Clients would give us some feedback or wish lists.  We'd talk amongst the team about how the functionality could be added or changed, make a functional mock-up, and then bring that to the Development team for polish and integration into the production code.  It worked wonderfully.  Like, 100% positive feedback and nothing broken when it went to production.  We had a good rapport with the Dev guys and some of us were able to write queries or code portions that would save them from having to ask a billion subject matter questions.  When we weren't dedicated to a task, we'd handle support calls.  Clients would call up, receptionist learned who to pass things to based on clients and the nature of issues, and resolution was typically instantaneous unless the problem required research.  Clients loved that and had the understanding that if we couldn't resolve their problem right away, it was because we needed to look into it.

After the acquisition, the parent company reorganized things into a much more rigid "you have one job" type of scenario.  The trouble was, with the people they let go, I was the singular remaining source of a lot of the capacities we provided.  It left me working with the Sales, Product Improvement/Concept, Product Evangelism, Implementation, Development, Data Conversion, and Support teams.  Initially, I didn't mind.  Wasn't any different than my previous role.  Things started nicely enough with the company CEO genuinely asking, "Would you mind helping X team with Y project?", and he'd pick up my travel bar tabs and toss me a day off here and there.  It was a fair exchange and he treated it as though I was doing him a favor.  But at some point all these other departments expected then demanded my time.  Instead of people asking when I could help them on a project, I would just find time blocks added to my schedule for various things.  A couple of times I was supposed to be chairing these meetings and having things prepared and no one even bothered to tell me.  Around this same time, I noticed a lot of recommendations I made when asked for input were being overturned by people in new roles who had no idea what they were talking about.  As in literally had no exposure to the subject matter and had never even seen the software, plus no programming/logic or database experience.  So my input is demanded but also ignored.  And this was causing more demands on my time when things were broken or didn't meet client expectation.  Plus, the new Dev team I was working with made every excuse not to act unless someone went and confirmed and fetched everything they needed.  The external demands on my time had increased and I had coincidentally hit a few walls with my actual job in that clients were unresponsive and couldn't get me the data or access I needed to complete tasks.  But that didn't stop my boss from demanding documentation and results and documentation about the results.  There was no such thing as "waiting", it's your duty to call and harass the powerless client until whatever third party involved enables whatever we need.

I was really unhappy in a job I had previously loved.  Every day was worse than the last.  And then I got my employee review.  It was top notch and yet I got the same "cost of living" raise as everyone else.  It particularly burned my ass that the Sales guys were getting commission on sales that I FUCKING MADE and I was just shafted.  At the original company, effort above and beyond was WELL-rewarded.  I doubled my starting salary in a few years' time for hard work.  Now, I was miserable, overdrawn, AND got nothing for it.  I was having daily arguments with my boss who was completely indifferent to all my commitments and refused to understand  that I couldn't compel third party companies to do my timely bidding to get client data or access.

Out of nowhere I get a call from the head of the Data Conversions department.  He says a few of his people have noticed some high-level solutions to Dev or data problems in the Teams chats "come out of some random guy from Implementations in no-time."  Then he was talking to a preexisting client about converting a set of financial data from a legacy system I had converted some Building, Code, Fire, Planning, and Police data from and they asked if they could have me do it specifically because my conversion of their other data was "flawless" and I granted them some change requests on the way through to make their lives easier(simple changes to record type names for easier identification, clip leading spaces or extra zeroes so they could put reports in Excel...stuff like that). He said the client, "wouldn't stop fucking gushing" about me and he was floored to hear that I had done the whole thing myself where his team typically breaks the responsibilities between 5 or more people.  He offered me a position on the spot and I told him I was interested and I'd think about it. He told me I could start doing some part time stuff with him a few hours a week if I wanted it that way.  Then he told me he "saw the bullshit I was dealing with" and said he'd "get the other departments off my fucking plate."  I liked him right away.  My current boss then interrupted our call seeing me talking to that guy on our in-house phone app and demanded to know what I was wasting my time on.  Then she proceeded to berate me about open orders and my lack of documentation about their lack of progress.  "You got time to bullshit with him but you can't call a client." I tried to tell her for the millionth time about all the expectations from the other departments, the obligations they leave beyond their allotted timeframes, the inability I have to force other companies do things for us no matter how many times I tell the client...  She told me, "I'm done with your excuses.  Just do your job and shut up."  I called the Conversions head right back and asked how soon I could transfer to his Department full time.  He said, "Fuckin....YESTERDAY, man, this is such good news!  I was just talking to [Assistant Department Manager] and he 'bout shit his pants when I said I think I got you part time!  Take the rest of the day off, have a beer to celebrate, I'll handle the transfer and we'll see you in the morning."  And that was that.

I did as my new boss commanded and had a beer to celebrate.  A wave of relief came over me after months of tension.  The following day I told the vampire departments and my previous boss in no uncertain terms that I was done helping them.  It went unacknowledged and they continued adding things to my calendar.  So I deleted them, did MY job, and shut up.  THINGS. GOT. UGLY.  I'm not super-talented or anything but I was literally the only person they had for a lot of things and things went to shit.  Most of it requires institutional knowledge I had spent years acquiring so they couldn't even hire someone to do the things.  And rather than come ask me for help, people made demands and attacks!  And I got flat out beligerant about it.  In an email with the CEO cced, the Support manager asked why I "couldn't be bothered" to help them anymore.  I said, "for the same reason you can't 'be bothered' to clean the toilets or recable the building.  Not my job.  [Previous Boss] told me to 'just do my job and shut up.'  Take it up with her."  The Sales/Evangelist guys tried to go over my head and asked my new boss if I could do some of their demos.  He said, "sure, if you come over here and do some of his conversions."  Numbers tanked for the departments I was previously involved with.  Support in particular.  They went from a 2 hour avg resolution time to EIGHT DAYS.  Sales for my product line went down from 85% success to less than 25%(CEO reported that sales dropped over 60 percent from 85, don't know the exact).  Dev and product went from 100% customer satisfaction to 60%.  Implementations has been completely unable to install certain components which led to at least one contract cancellation and demand for a refund.

And in true storybook fashion, my previous boss's boss, the one who gave me my previous employee review and who is a childhood friend of the CEO, told me privately that the CEO noticed, "all the departments UnFocusMyChi stopped working for suddenly saw their worst numbers in company history...weird.", and asked, "anything in particular that pushed the guy over the edge?"  Previous boss's boss explained that I was pissed about the review/raise having nothing to do with merit or effort, the demand from other departments, unrealistic and impossible expectations, and the idiotic requirement for documentation.  So, this year and going forward there are two criteria for yearly raises.  Individual output, and department output.  No raises for people with negative performance numbers.  Upon that announcement, some department heads up and quit and others changed positions internally.  Meanwhile, I have written a few utilities for my team that have saved THOUSANDS of hours of manual work.  Our numbers are SOARING where they were previously up and down and my new boss is "driving the whole bus full of our laughing asses all the way to the bank."So I wasn't sure if this was malicious compliance and I posted it in Entitledpeople but someone said this would be great here. So here it is. Also Thank you to RSlash on youtube for making me realize I have so many stories to share.

Here's my story

When I was 15 I got my first paid job working for the fair. It was a pretty big fair that travelled across Canada and along the east coast of the US ending in Florida for Christmas. If you've ever been to the PNE(Pacific National Exhibition), CNE (Canadian National Exhibition), Red River Ex, Calgary Stampede and whatever they call it in Edmonton and Regina, that's the one. I loved this summer job because it was short (only a week as I did not travel) and gave me enough cash to get through the summer. I worked for the privately owned donut vender which tasted better and paid better than the show donut venders.

Fast forward 4 years when I decided to travel with the show. I was 19 and it was easier to travel at this point cause I could sign my own forms, and being 19 I needed more money for school and the like. We start in my home city and make our way across the country visiting city after city. We were in Edmonton when our story really begins.

Now the travel crew is pretty small and we hire our bagging/cashier locally. I, along with senior crew members, are in charge of training the baggers, re-oiling the machines, switching out the dough canisters and making sure they are running and putting out donuts in a consistent manner. As I am checking dough levels and teaching a bagger how to efficiently fill bags for the evening rush I hear a commotion behind me.

Que Entitled Woman

Karen: "No! I want the *fresh* ones!”

Bagger: “Ma’am these are fresh, I just made them.”

Karen: “No, I want them to be fresh. Make me new ones, I didn't see you make those, they could be old.” It was 9 in the morning. At this point in the day, most donuts are made to order so those donuts wouldn't have been older than 5 minutes.

The Bagger calls me to turn on his machine to start the donuts. These machines are so temperamental and really old because the owner built them himself many moons ago. But I love them cause they make perfect donuts that travel in a circular conveyor belt in 400-degree oil. They're a lot of fun to watch. I start the machine and scoop out the first few rejects and make 15 donuts.

The donuts fall off the belt into the glass case and the bagger slots them into the sugar and into a bag.

He hands them to her and she dramatically sighs

Karen: “uuuugh, No. I want the fresh ones and those have touched the old ones. How do I know you didn't mix them up. I don't believe they're fresh. I want *FRESH* DONUTS!”

Bagger: “Ma’am those are fresh. I made sure to pick only the new ones out.”

Again she huffs and puffs, so I fire up the machine again, scoop out the rejects and make 15 donuts. This time I grab the new bag and place the bag right under the shoot so the donuts have no choice but to fall into the bag. They do I hand it to the bagger and walk away just to have to turn around again.

Karen: “No I want the one’s directly out of the oil, that way I know they're fresh. Those ones have cooled down and are not fresh anymore."

Me: “Sorry ma’am but that is against the policy, the oil is 400 degrees, and besides, they’re not done cooking”

Karen: “I want the fresh ones! Get me your supervisor.”

My “supervisor” is off doing supervisor things, and I don’t feel like calling her. She’s also a lifer and doesn’t take flack from anyone and I know if I call her, and she’s busy, this woman will leave crying. So to avoid this and say

“I am the supervisor on duty right now and the policy states we can’t give you donuts from the oil.” There is no policy but its common fucking sense.

Karen: “I have been a patron of this company for so many plus years. I have never been denied a fresh donut. this is so unprofessional! I want to talk to the owner right now!”

At this point, I’m on day 5 of this show and we work an hour before open to an hour after the close (depending on the show and after some new laws, roughly 16 hours daily).

I’m tired of her and in general. That's when I get a brilliant idea. I smile,

Me: “there is no need for that, I will get you your *FRESH* donuts.”

I start up the machine again and discard the rejects. I then grab a bag and let the donuts plop into the oil for half a second and scoop them out immediately. Not long enough to get hot, but also not long enough to hold a shape. I then take the bag of dough and sprinkle in some cinnamon sugar and say as sugary as I can muster “here you go, sorry for the inconvenience, enjoy the rest of your day.”

She smiles smugly having thought she got her way. About 10 paces later she stuck her hand into the bag and I hear a squeal, a snarl and then swearing.

That’s when Gregg (not his real name), one of the senior machine guys, returned from his break. Gregg was a FUCKING LEGEND when it comes to dealing with Karen's. He makes it a hobby to seek them out for fun on his breaks so he can tear into them. He once told a heavy customer in a scooter he would not sell her 50 bags of donuts because he didn’t want to be responsible for her coronary and could not have that on his heart and that she should take her business to the other donut stall. He can be quite savage. I don't condone his behaviour and sometimes he scares me but this is also why I like working under him because it means Karen's never get away with their shit.

The women came storming back and demanded a refund and demanded I be fired. He asked why and she screamed, “THAT BITCH SOLD ME A BAG OF DOUGH!”

Gregg asked me if that was true. I smile sheepishly and said yes and explained she did not want the fresh donuts off the belt she wanted the fresh donuts from the oil and would not leave till I gave them to her.

Gregg turned to her and said “sorry for that but we don’t issue refunds to dumbasses so take your fresh donuts and leave before I start pelting you with these donuts. You have 5 seconds. 5, 4, 3..." She tried to huff and puff at which point he took the bag of donuts she did not want and began pelting her with them.

After she left he told me he was proud of me and would let the Boss know. I got an extra hundred bucks in my per diem for that week.I'm a nurse. I work in nursing homes (rehabs, old folks home etcetera). I do the paperwork that is sent to Medicare. That paperwork has to be submitted in a timely manner or the facility goes from $700/day to $200/day (just tossing numbers out. Don't remember the amount) This is important in a second.

I worked for a facility that I loved. The people were wonderful. It was like a huge family. The staff ate their meals with patients, the independent people visited often, and our bosses were easy to approach. Then the bosses retired. At the same time.

Our board then decided that maybe we would make more money if we hired a management company. All of these changes happened within weeks of each other.

They hired a traveling nurse to head up the skilled nursing unit for a year. We didn't react well to her. She never smiled, she would just look  at you if you asked a question, and she decided that new rules (that didn't apply to her) were needed.

Shortly after her hiring she began firing everybody. It was like a war zone had erupted on the floor! Nobody smiled, no laughter, no visitors, no family meals and loads of stress.

I was the last one fired. Oh I had been written up (zero write ups when she walked in) for things like cell phone in the floor (my pocket), drink on my desk in my office (water) and filling a certification form late (doctor signed it the day it was due but they photocopied it before I had left for the doctor's office). So they had their three write ups.

At 1500 on Friday the administrator calls me into his office. I'm informed that I've been terminated. I'm floored. I work my ass off. I am actually great at my job! I've been there seven years. I'm escorted to my office to gather my stuff. They have turned off my computer, asked for my passwords and escorted me from the building. 

Here's where the malicious compliance comes in. 

They called me in to fire me just as I was creating the packet to send to Medicare. I was never able to send it. They never asked if things were situated since it was Friday. I volunteered no information. 

Remember that timely manner? Well that Friday was the very last day to submit about 30 different forms. Most were 14 day assessments that literally covered 14 days! Billing (friend) called and let me know that the default cost over $100,000 by the time they figured everything out.


Edit: the passwords they needed were system admin. I ran two different systems for the campus. They couldn't access either without the password. As for my other passwords? Hell no. Which includes the filing one which created a longer delay! 

TL:DR job fires me at the wrong time and costs them over $100,000.This happened to me a few years ago and I just remembered it recently.


I was working at a restaurant waiting tables in a very affluent area on the Jersey Shore.  We had our fair share of entitled people who were under the impression that if you throw enough money around you can do whatever you want and treat people however you want.  And when your income depends on their tips, you kind of just have to deal with it.


The restaurant had an outdoor dining and bar area that overlooked the ocean with an amazing view.  During the summer this was pretty much where everyone wanted to sit rather than our indoor dining area.  And for anyone who works someplace with outdoor dining, you know the one monkey wrench that can ruin a very profitable dinner shift: the weather.  No matter how accurate the forecast says it’s going to be, you can never know for sure.  For the most part we never had an issue, because if it started to abruptly rain there would usually be more than enough room inside for all the people who were sitting outside to move it.  It’s usually a clusterfuck to keep track of which table moved where, but we always handled it without any issue.  Until that one day.


We had a large party booked one day in our indoor area that took up more than half our tables.  (a 50th birthday I believe)  So our indoor capacity was limited.  And even on top of the party, there were customers who were weary about the weather so they decided to sit inside also.  And then more and more people started sitting outside.  My manager did a quick assessment and realized that if it started raining, we would barely have enough room inside to accommodate everyone who was sitting outside.  He told us we had to stop seating our outdoor area and to start recommending to our outdoor tables to move inside because of the impending weather to be on the safe side.  (Everyone's weather app was saying there was a downpour coming up the coast).  Everyone was okay with it, except…..


I had a table of nine people who seemed fairly middle-aged and very wealthy.  (Margarita’s with top-top shelf tequila, gaudy looking jewelry etc etc.)  Each end of the table seemed to be in their own conversation not paying attention to the other.  Upon hearing about the incoming rain, I go to the woman whom I thought was in charge (she had the fakest tan of them all), and I tell her (Lets call her Karen) “Ma’am I’m really sorry, but because of the weather coming in and our limited seating inside, I’m going to have to move you folks inside so you don’t get caught in the rain.”  This Karen is so entrenched in her conversation she doesn’t even register that I, a lowly waiter, was talking to her.  So I try again, “Ma’am I’m sorry for interrupting, but-.”  She cuts me off exasperated, “What? What are you saying?”  I begin again.  “Ma’am I’m sorry because of the weather coming and our inside filling up, we need to move you inside.  We have a table ready for you, I can move all your drinks and everything for you”  She snaps back with “The only reason we came here was to sit outside. We’ll deal with the weather”.  I realize she doesn’t grasp what I’m saying so I try again.  “Ma’am just in case the-” And then she goes from zero to a hundred and yells “We’ll fucking deal with it!”  She yelled so loudly that the people on the other half of her table heard.  They didn’t hear our prior exchange but only heard her outburst and went back to their conversation, assuming this must be normal behavior for her.  She wants to deal with it on her own?  You got it.

    So I began to take their order.  Filet Mignons.  A few lobster tails.  Expensive shit.  I put the order in and I look back and all the other tables had moved inside (because they all were rational human beings) and my table of nine entitled jerks were the only ones out there.  I heard the leathery-looking Karen say to the rest of the table “Wow we have the entire patio to ourselves, what luxury”.  After a while I looked inside and saw that the table I had held for them was taken by another party that had just walked in (the last available table).  And just as the last butt hit the seat, I felt the best feeling I possibly could have felt at that moment.  A glorious rain drop tapped on the top of my head.  Oh sweet glory.  Within seconds it went from beautiful blue skies to torrential downpour.  Everyone at the table grabbed their drinks (a little watered down at this point) and ran inside.  After they shook themselves dry, they looked around and realized there was nowhere for them to sit.  Most of them looked dumbfounded, like a lost child in a supermarket.  Karen makes a b-line to me and screams “We need a table!”.  I reply, “I’m sorry ma’am, we’re fully seated and on a wait for our indoor seating.”  (Maybe one table on the waiting list, but a list is a list)  “Well what are we supposed to do now?”  she hawked back at me which led to me so eloquently saying “Ma’am as you said you would, you ‘fucking deal with it’”.  I airquoted the ‘fucking dealing it’ to really emphasize that that was her response and as I said that everyone else at the table realized that was our interaction earlier and Karen had dug their graves.  I felt bad for most of them because if they had all known the circumstances they probably would have convinced Karen to move in.  But after she raised her voice and cursed at me, all bets were off.  And as serendipity would have it, at that moment their food came out and we handed it to them.  There they were.  Nine people in damp clothes holding a cosmo in one hand and Filet Mignon in another with nowhere to sit to eat.  The rest of her party convinced her just to get some boxes for their food and pay their check and leave.   As I hand Karen the check, she smugly says “Well this will be reflected in your tip” to which I replied “Ma’am we implement a 20% tip on parties of eight or more.  It’s our policy, and it’s clearly stated in our menu”  She paid and then they left with their boxed up food leaving behind their half-full drinks.  Best $60 I ever made.

EDIT:  I definitely got the numbers wrong with how much they tipped and what not. It was a while ago. All I remember was the satisfaction.Arkansas has well known laws that lean heavily on the side of the property owner which leaves the renter pretty vulnerable to owners who want to be difficult to say the least. Or at least they did when I lived there, I doubt much has changed since.

So I move into town and find a 2/2 apartment, intending for it to be a short period of time while I scout the town and look for a more permanent place. As for paying rent, they wouldn’t/couldn’t take an automatic monthly check from my bank or charge my debit card monthly, it had to be a paper check from me, with a 4 day late fee window. I hate writing checks and I had the cash so I paid out the 12 month lease all at once. 

I find a great place about 6 months later, thinking I’ll just break my lease and pay the extra one month penalty and walk away from my apartment. I call and let them know I’ll be moving out, long conversation short, the way the lease is written makes you think that’s how it works when in reality, at a second or third read, I’m still liable for the entire 12 month lease, and to break the lease essentially adds a 13th month worth of rent money. Knowing that upfront, why anybody would break a lease is beyond me. 

So at this point I’ve already made the deposits on my new place when all this comes to light so I’m stuck with two places. I tell the apartment complex I won’t be moving out, figure I’ll just go ahead and let the lease run out, set the AC to 80, and open the breakers to keep costs low. I slowly move my stuff to my new place since I have plenty of time now and in the end I leave behind my ironing board and iron just to leave something and I never really use them anyways.

About 2 months later I get a call from the power company asking if it’s okay to transfer power into somebody else’s name. Shocked, I reply, “Absolutely not”, while laughing a little on the inside. I decide to give it a day before I call the apartment complex. First thing the next morning I get a call from the apartment complex and with a super snarky entitled tone I hear “We need you to drop the power from your name so the new tenant can take over and move in.” I explain that I still have an active lease on the place and can’t fathom why they’d rent it out. She accuses me of abandonment and therefore she is allowed to rent the apartment. My reply went along the lines of, “I rent that apartment with the sole intent of having somewhere to iron my clothes. Did you not see my iron and ironing board there?” She said she did and she took it to the office to get it out of the apartment.

We go back and forth on the semantics for a little. I let her know that I’m open to receiving a refund to the date on the new tenants lease and at that time I’d be happy to drop my name from the power. She refused and the call ended with getting her boss’s number from corporate. After mentioning to her boss that I can recognize a breach of contract when I see it, and that nowhere in the lease does it say I actually have to live there, not to mention her employee admitted to entering my apartment and stealing items of mine from inside. She quickly assured me they are putting a check in the mail that day refunding my money to the first of that month and told me I could go to the office to pick up my iron and board anytime. 

Yes I know they could have run up the power bill but they’d only be able to do so much really and a few days isn’t that huge, and they didn’t do it anyways. Even if they had it would still be worth the expense considering the refund.Before the pandemic, my significant other & I were doing some shopping and decided to eat at a Harvester (a large chain here in the UK). It's 'reasonable' food at the cheaper end of the scale, and ok when you're not looking for a posh dining experience or anything.

There was a daytime 'soft drink, salad bar buffet, main course & dessert' offer on which came to £30 for two people. A bargain, which we ordered.

The food turned out to be pretty good; we made more than one trip to the buffet and suffice to say by the time we'd finished our main courses we didn't feel we needed the dessert, so I instead asked the server for the bill.

The bill arrives and we have been charged an additional £9 for £39 in total. I query this with the server;


**Server:** "that offers only valid with desserts, and you said you didn't want desserts anymore".


**Me:** "We intended to have the desserts but we're too full for them now so we don't want them, but I didn't expect we would be charged more?"


**Server:** "Well you've not ordered the offer anymore so there's nothing we can do".


*(Que the malicious compliance you can see coming by now);*


**Me:** "Well then I'd like to order two desserts please. You can bring them over, we won't eat them, and you can get the £9 knocked off the bill for us?"


At this point the server looks at me with a bewildered look and says she'll get the manager. My other half who is more of a shrinking violet in these situations is looking a little uncomfortable. A few moments later the manager comes over and asks why we don't want to pay! I explain that I do, but I don't expect to pay *more* for saving waste but by all means to bring over the desserts and we will leave them there on the table when we leave. Comprehending this she agrees to just charge us for the meal deal.

*Edit*
Jesus Christ Reddit, I get it!; "You would have requested the desserts to be boxed up and taken them home for later". The only dessert with the meal deal was ice cream. And regardless, we wouldnt have wanted to carry boxed up food around with us for the rest of the day.Former car insurance agent, 

Had someone screaming at me that if we didn't do what he wanted,  then he wanted to cancel his policy.  What he wanted was illegal so it wasn't happening no matter who he bitched to.  After he was repeatedly denied he kept saying to cancel his policy.   I told him he should really get new insurance first as my state has mandatory insurance requirements on active registration; but he said to cancel it anyway, right NOW!! so I did.  Well a couple days later he calls back VERY pissed because he couldn't find new insurance and now his driver's license is suspended, he has a court appearance, and is suspended from his job.  He was caught driving without valid insurance so on top of the normal issues of no insurance on active registration, so he now has a very expensive ticket too. His job also required a valid license so he couldn't work until everything was resolved.  I warned him but he didn't listen; so sucks to be you dude.  

I'm not commissioned, when I tell you something try listening; I'm just trying to help you and advise you about the law.Kind of a long background info, tldr at the bottom.

I work at an elementary school with a child who requires a 1-on-1 assistant. (That's me!) The kid has a few things going on, both a physical and mental disability as well as a general miasma of social anxieties. All in all, a pretty good kid, but has some extra difficulties at school.

His mom, on the other hand, is kind of a piece of work. She has reamed out the school and the special education department because we try to hold him to (reasonable) standards such as doing homework, learning independence, and interacting with peers. Now, anyone in SpecEd will tell you that no, kids that require the extra help are not going to always be on grade level with their peers, but if you help support them and expect reasonable outcomes, they generally rise to meet those. She apparently thinks that we're a glorified daycare and he shouldn't be required to do any work at all.

The kid picks up on this, and knows how to read a room. Any time his mom walks in (which she does often and unannounced) his entire demeanor changes; he throws tantrums, he complains that the activities he's been doing and succeeding in are too difficult, it's a real treat. 

So recently the kid has been doing things to get out of work. He'll lie about what work he has, he'll complain about it, he'll "forget" or "run out of time" at home. We brought this up to his mom, and (as should have been expected) we were shut down.

!Mom: "My son doesn't lie. My son can't lie! He doesn't know how."

Me and everyone in the SpecEd department: *are you fuggin kidding me lady?* -_-

So today, the kid was doing an independence exercise, where he's given instructions to go to one of his specials (music, p.e., art, etc) without adult supervision, and his goal is to get there without stopping and getting distracted. I had to have a quick meeting with his homeroom teacher, so he had about 10 minutes to get 30 feet.

When I catch up with him, he's about halfway there.

!me: hey man, what's up?

!kid: Ensign53, you're not mad at me, are you?

!me: naw, just curious. Why aren't you where you need to be?

!kid: *trying to avoid being in trouble* ...........my leg hurts! *He grabs it and does a quick intake of breath* I had to stop.

!me: uh-huh...

Now, I know he's lying. I also know that he has work that he has to make up because he "ran out of time" to do it the night before. I *also* know that directly after music is P.E., his favorite special.

!me *super serious and* ***definitely***  *believing him and worried*: oh man, that's really unfortunate! Well, I don't want you to get hurt, so here's what we can do. Let's sit down right here, and we can work on your homework that's due today.

!kid *realizing the crap he just dug*: no, Ensign53, it's ok n...

!me *interrupting and laying it on thick*: no, buddy...I know you're telling me the truth, because we just had this discussion that words matter. I really don't want you to get hurt, so if you tell me your leg is hurting, we can just skip PE today and work on your worksheet here.

!kid *realizing what he's done*:oh no....

!me: it's ok bud. I'm not angry or upset. I'm just worried, if you tell me your leg hurts, I have to look out for you. We wouldn't want you to hurt yourself, especially in PE. So it looks like we've got about an hour to work on this worksheet. So, problem 1...

TL;DR: student has mom who tells school he can't lie. He lies, and misses P.E. because I "believe" him.The guys over at r/talesfromthefrontdesk sent me here. 

I just remembered this one from a few years back. 

I work nights at a hotel. Back then, the manager would place ads with coupons advertising rooms at a discount. In general, these coupons were a real PITA. They clearly said not valid on weekends or holidays and had expiration dates. I would regularly have to argue with guests because they were trying to use them in violation of the terms. 

Anyway, one day. This guy comes in and slaps a magazine with one of our coupons down on the desk and stares me down. I sigh internally and look at the coupon. It’s a couple of months out of date. 

Me: Our rate for the night is...

Him: I know the rate. It says it right here 

He jabs his finger into the magazine just about punching a hole in our marble counter. 

Him: Now you’re going to honor this coupon or I’m going to call my friend who owns the company. 

I really want to tell him to go ahead because if he really knew the owner, he’d know that the company is a franchise and each hotel is privately owned. Instead, what I say is...

Me: Absolutely Sir. 

You see, what I was going to tell him before he cut me off was that his coupon was out of date and from the height of tourist season. Since the season was over and we’d already gotten snow, our regular nightly rate was almost half of what his coupon said. Since he was insistent that I honor it, I saw no reason not to charge him almost double what everyone else was paying.

This happened in year 2015, this is the long story short of the already long story.  My grandmother on my father's side died in 2007 bless her soul.  She owned a house and lot a bungalow type near the sea, this house wasn't paid in full and there's still remaining balance about 5,200 in US dollars (this is already a big money for us). Because my father is the only son his older sisters agreed he should get the house (there was no will) but he should pay the remaining balance. We live there and renovated the house my father did almost 75% of the work he added 2 bedrooms, ceiling,  furnitures, add another bathroom, tiled the floors, kitchen sink, and septic tank (no drainage system on that location) .  Basically we recieved the house in bare shape. We paid fully in 2015 but we didn't recieved the title there was so many excuses.  

2016 comes his nephew a retired commander visited my parents and told my father that he wants to add a second floor so he and his wife could live there also.  My father didn't agree and he called his older sister if they want that to happen. They just said that they don't want to get involved. His nephew showed him that he already had the title of the house (don't know how he did that maybe he used his political background?  I'm not sure) my father was furious he called me and told me what happened. That time I already bought a small patch of land for them when they want to retire, but I'm still saving enough money to build a house suitable for their needs. 
There were court battles that I will not include but in the end his nephew won. But there was an agreement that he has to pay my father 7,400. He mailed us the contract that we should vacate the house after 6 months.  And there was a specific item that our lawyer pointed out. a.  We should repaint the house (no specific color) b.  Leave the house in original state. 

Guess what we hired a construction team to demolish the bedroom, the bathroom,  removed the ceiling, kitchen sink l,  tiled floor also the septic tank. Leaving it in original state. We spend about 2800 including the labor. The cherry on top we painted the house with black inside and red outside with violet dots it was a huge eyesore. I was bombarded with lots of calls and messages from my aunts and cousin which I didn't replied. We went no contact after that. 

My parents now live in a beautiful farmhouse tending their small garden. They enjoy morning walks by the lake, just living a stress free environment. They are planning to adopt a puppy next month.

My grammar sucks I know sorry 'bout that

Edit: maybe your wondering 5000 is a small amount for monet I didn't include that the title was pawned to someone. Not a family member.

Edit2: we got our money back because we have receipts proving we paid the remaining balance

Edit3: I think this is late but, I think I had made  errors in computing our currency into dollar. The judge ruled that besides the remaining balance that we had paid we should also get paid with the renovation expense.I am not sure this is malicious compliance or not, but it was one of my finer moments and I feel the need to share it! Some five or six years ago...

My wife’s grandmother passed and left us her home in her will. The house was rather large, but had been built some time in the 1960s and needed updating. We decided to basically gut the home and do a full remodel. 

First thing was to talk to my insurance guy and see what I needed to do with the insurance. He comes out and explains that I need to do a fire policy, which basically will replace the structure in the event of a major catastrophe. Cool, insurance in place I start remodeling. 

Fast forward seven or eight months and I am done, and so bone tired and mad at the world that my reflection in the mirror tried to avoid me. I was working a rotating shift (days, evenings, midnights) and spending every waking moment working on this house. Five hours a day/night was the most sleep I was getting. I would snap at the wind for blowing I was so strung out. Que the insurance guy and his antics...

While I was sleeping after working midnight shift, my wife has IG (insurance guy) come to look at the house and change the policy back to full coverage. When I wake up for my next shift, she informs me that we have to put a new roof on before he can change the policy. I almost came unglued. I had ripped the ceilings out of this house, so if there had been a roof leak, I am pretty sure I would have found it. Luckily this was Friday evening, so I had the entire weekend to calm down and plot my next move. 

I called first thing  Monday morning and set up an appointment for 8 a.m. Tuesday at the house, and explained to him I was on midnights and to please make sure he was there by 8 a.m. No particular reason, I just hoped it would discomfort him having to be somewhere else that early in the morning (a dick move mostly). Tuesday morning rolls around, and he shows up with his boss. At first this threw me off, but I figure what the hell, two birds, one rock and stuff. 

Me: IG, hows it going?

IG: Pretty good, how are you?

Me: Tired. How bout you show me exactly what is wrong with this roof so we can get going?

IG: Sure thing, step right over here. You see that shingle?

Me: Ya.

IG: See how bad a shape it’s in?

Me: Sure do! (thinking to myself, “hell no, what the fuck are you looking at?”)

IG: And over there see that place?

Me: Yup, gotta bad spot or two there also!

IG: This roof has taken some serious storm damage, it is in rough shape!

We proceed all the way around the house with him pointing at random spots, as far as I could tell, and saying things like “That shingle is shot. Those too. Ya, and right here.” The whole time I just did like a chicken pecking and affirmed him with “Yup! You’re right” All the while his boss is saying nothing. 

After he is finished pointing out all of these bad places,

IG: So see, you will have to replace that roof before we can cover it. 

Me: Your right, I had been so busy on the inside I hadn’t paid much attention. So, can you file the claim for me, or do I need to go talk to one of the ladies down at the office?

IG: CLAIM??!! What do you mean a claim!!???

Me: Well, best I can figure it was those bad storms back in April that did all this damage, and y’all were covering it through my GMIL’s policy, so I reckon y’all would be who I s’posed to talk to right? 
 
(I like turning the backwoods country accent up to 11 when dealing with people who think they are smarter than me, adds flavor to the humble pie for them)

IG: Well now, hold on. 

Me: Naw, you’re a hunnerd percent right. It’s took some serious storm damage, and we ain’t had none since that bout back in April. Now, I put the fire policy on in July, so any damage done woulda fell back on the old policy. 

IG: ......(standing there sucking air like it’s gonna run out)

IG’s boss: He’s right. And since they have a year to file that claim, we will have to do it. Get the paperwork started and let me know if you need help.



I am no roof expert, the roof could have been shot all to hell for all I know. It looked good, and didn’t leak. After I explained to the adjuster what the whole deal was about, he found enough other stuff wrong so that I wasn’t out one nickel on an entire new roof!

TLDR: Insurance guy decided to be a jack wagon for some reason, and I got a free roof out of the deal!


Edit: A few points to help clear things up some. 

My wife was executor of the estate, and had a POA for the deceased. 

I referenced the storms in April because that year there were multiple bad hail storms that came through. Car dealerships lost entire inventories from these storms. It was an insurance nightmare all year long, which was why nothing was really questioned. The rest of that year was fairly calm weather wise, so it was most likely the event that “destroyed” the roof. 

The roof was about 5 years old give or take. Wear and tear wasn’t a concern, and the insurance company had held the policy on the house since forever and were familiar with it. 

IG was wanting me to pay for the roof out of my pocket. If this had been pointed out in July when I had the policy changed originally it would not have irritated me as much. After spending the entire summer and fall working on the house and him popping up with “Oh yeah by the way”, yes it rubbed me the wrong way. 

I am a hick, bumpkin, and some of the other names mentioned. I love that people automatically shave 30 points off of my IQ for talking the way I do (insert jokes about my now negative IQ here please). It gives me a distinct advantage when someone does this. Yes I play it up for my own amusement/benefit. It is no different than a woman using her looks, a policeman using his badge, or any of the other advantages people use daily. 

I do not type in my southern accent all the time because it isn’t easy. It’s almost like making a language up as you go, and if it is that hard for me to type, I can only imagine what someone who is unfamiliar with the vernacular would go through reading it. I would imagine there would be migraines and brain scans involved before they got to the end of the post. 

Update: I’ve read every single comment. I thought this post was going to go unnoticed and I was blown away. I’m sorry for concerning anyone. A few common questions to clear up due to my poor writing:
- I’m 26 now he’s 30, we’ve been dating since I was 19. 
- the basement was set up as a lounge area so it’s not like dirt floor. I never got a reason why, just that he wanted his own space in his room, especially after I go to bed and he wants to stay up. 
-it’s his parents’ house but I’m not sure if they knew or not? I used the pool table as a bit of a privacy screen so whenever they came down I don’t think they saw me. If they knew they didn’t have an issue with it. 
- I’m still in therapy, and I’ve got a lot of issues. Since I’ve moved out we’re focusing on more pressing issues. I have trouble knowing what I did or didn’t deserve and all that.

Thank you everyone. I see it’s super frustrating. I’m trying to be stronger. I wish I knew some of you in real life. The second I put my phone down I start questioning myself. I hope maybe my experience can shed some life on people you know that also won’t just leave a toxic partner, though. None of us want to be a statistic. I can’t watch romance in movies without wanting to cry at how kind some partners are portrayed. Thank you all for being kind. He doesn’t have a key, my roommate knows not to let him in. I just can’t break up now, like I’m begging for more disappointment lol. Maybe to prove to myself that I really did try and to convince myself that he chose to be the way he is now. 
Sorry it’s not satisfying but I’m still out and I can breathe again.
————

Background (tldr left one abusive situation for another stressful one): 
I was homeless after leaving my abusive parents’ home at 23. My boyfriend (27 at the time) invited me to stay with him and his family, and I was grateful to not have to sleep in my car and not have to shower in the gym. For whatever reason, my first year was spent sleeping on a wrestling mat next to the basement pool table, but it was comfortable minus the occasional basement bug that I woke up to on me (don’t look up house centipedes if you’ve never seen them). 
My boyfriend started taking a lot of his anger out on me by starting inane arguments, breaking objects, threatening to kick me out, etc. 
This year I got therapy, got meds, and started building my inner strength. The more help I got, the more the outbursts escalated. 

The malicious compliance (tldr he told me to move out, so I found a place immediately): 
for the entire time I lived with my boyfriend, he would threaten to kick me out as the last straw. If I cried too loud he would say stuff like “I’m done with this, quiet down or we’re really done and you can get out of this house.“ It stopped making me apologize and beg this year.  On my last day of my intensive therapy program he blew up at me. This time, though, I had everything I was taught in therapy. When he saw the insults weren’t working, he said I should move out, that living with me is a nightmare, how I’m this and that, and so on. It was so hard to hear but I just kept quiet and let him rant it out until he stalked off. 
I immediately texted a friend about a place and luckily she knew someone that needed a roommate. I was able to check out the place the next day, which I did. I was still numb and in shock, but excited. I could move in right away. For once in my life I could have my own safe place. At this point I would’ve actually lived in my car to just not be screamed at all the time. 

The fallout: 
He was bluffing, and boy did the gaslighting turn all the way up when he found out I committed to moving out. “I never told you to move out”, “you chose to do this”, “wow, that’s how little you care about me?”
If anything opened my eyes, it was his backpedal. At first he tried gaslighting, then criticizing every little thing, then being clingy and guilting me, then lovebombing to show he’s “actually changing” and so on.
Y’all. I can own candles. He never let me light candles and now I have nice ones I can light whenever I want. 

I’m so happy I’m on my own. We’re still together cause he agreed to therapy, since it’s hard to just end a 7 year relationship. If you’re considering leaving an unsafe place, this is your sign to go. Keep your self worth close to you. You’re worth it.Edit: Title should read."Wasting her time" not "wearing her tone". Sorry. Super tired from work when I wrote this and I missed the autocorrect.

So I work as a mover for a very small moving company. My boss, let's call him Mike, is a really nice guy. It's really just a two-man operation, with me working as a subcontractor under him with a few regular guys we call in for bigger moves.
 It's really physically demanding work sometimes, but typically our customers are super nice and the pay is pretty good. Most people are just happy to have someone else to lift their heavy stuff and get it into a truck. And we're always super careful to not cause ANY DAMAGE to the buildings we're moving in and out of or the items we're moving, which most people appreciate. 

Not this lady. Let's call her Darcy.

So Darcy booked a move with Mike, and told him she had a small storage unit she wanted us to load up into a 20 foot truck. We said "no problem!". As the date of her move approached, though, so did a huge snow storm. 

Days before her move the news started reporting that the weather was expected to take a severe turn for the worst. Not uncommon for the time of year in our state, but also something not to be trifled with. 

We called Darcy a couple days before the move to see about rescheduling to avoid the storm and she said she absolutely HAD to move that day, no other days would work. A lot of (probably much smarter) movers would have cancelled, but after talking, Mike and I thought it was no big deal. We move in the snow all the time. Just meant we would have to dress appropriately and be extra careful not to injure ourselves or damage any property. 

Cut to the day of the move. We get to Darcy's storage unit, expecting a 10x10x15 standard storage unit full of your usual stuff based on what she'd indicated on the phone, and load it into a 20 foot truck. That's a pretty easy job to get done in the 2 hours that she'd already prepaid for.

As we pulled up the snow was already coming down pretty heavily, and the first thing that made us nervous was the truck. Instead of a 20 foot truck, there was a HUGE 26 foot truck. Darcy greeted us by the truck and showed us the storage unit.

*Darcy*: Okay! So, this is our unit. We shut down our businesses and I'm moving it out of town to pursue other opportunities, and I need all of this loaded up in 2 hours. The last movers I had got it unloaded in about that long. 

Mike said something about the truck being bigger than she told us. 

*Darcy*: Yeah, it's the biggest one Uhaul had. Last time we used a another company and it was much bigger. I'm worried about getting it all, but you guys will have to figure it out. I *need* all of it.

This was a **HUGE** storage unit. Like the kind you'd store a few cars or some farm equipment in. When we opened it up it was filled with what appeared to be the contents of a couple of pretty decently sized businesses. A dozen of those huge floor-to ceiling filling cabinets, several desks, office chairs, some really huge glass tables. And all of it was *incredibly heavy*.

Now, our company safety guidelines for weight limits are 100lbs per person lifting an item, but there's no real practical way to enforce that in the field, so we usually wind up using our best judgement, even if the item is over that limit. Nearly everything there was over limit, but we had our equipment and we were pretty confident we could handle everything, weight-wise. Mike and I are both pretty strong. But in my estimation, this was definitely going to take a bit longer than 2 hours.

Mike told her that we would do our absolute best. To be fair, he should have leveled with her then and there that it would take a bit more time, but he probably wanted to see if we could just get it busted out as quick as possible and see where we were at before getting the customer needlessly worried. 

Darcy sat in her truck nearly the whole time we were working, so she could stay warm. Perfectly understandable since it was -2°F outside and the snow was coming down pretty hard. Though she'd occasionally roll down her window to offer up critiques. Mostly about how much time we were taking going up and down the metal ramp of the truck, which was now COVERED in ice and snow.

About an hour and some change into the move, Darcy gets out of her truck and starts chatting with Mike about her previous movers, and how they did cause some damage to her stuff, but they were SO fast. It was weird. She went back and forth between complaining about them and praising them for their speed. And she kept referring to them as "the *professional* moving service I hired", which really bugged me, because the way she said it seemed to be implying that because we aren't a big national company like Mayflower, then somehow Mike and I weren't professional movers. Despite the fact that this is literally our full-time jobs.

Now we're far enough into this move that we could tell this was going to run long. Mike decides it's a good idea to let her know that it's probably going to take a half hour or so longer than expected (which was still a feat, considering how much there was to move and how well-packed this truck was. I pride myself on playing a mean game of Truck Tetris). 

Darcy was NOT having this. She started to get upset and started saying how we were just trying to get more money out of her, and we were "Dilly Dallying" (yes, those words actually left the mouth of a grown woman). Then she starts in on how "the *professional* movers got this same stuff unloaded in 2 hours, it should take the same time to load it!"

Mike explains to her that unloading always takes less time than loading, because you're moving it into a bigger space and you don't have to pack and pad the stuff to fit into a truck. 

I also mention that there's literally a blizzard coming down, and we're only going to go a little over. 

She gets quiet and seething. Mike can tell how angry she is and let's her know we won't charge her for any extra time since it's not her fault the weather is crappy. He also brings up that they damaged her stuff, and we've done a pretty good job.

*Darcy*:I don't CARE! YOU SAID TWO HOURS, I EXPECT IT DONE! JUST GET IT DONE! I'm going to leave you guys a TERRIBLE review!

She stomps back to her truck without saying a word.

I'm usually pretty chill, but I was already getting increasingly mad at this woman. Her yelling at my boss and calling us lazy when we were risking our health and safety to move her stuff in a blizzard was just too much for me. 

Mike thinks about this for a moment. I know customer reviews are super important to us as a small business. The booking site we use highlights the last handful of reviews, so a bad one takes FOREVER to stop showing up as basically the first thing people see when they click on your page. So I'm expecting Mike to try and keep her happy, but instead he just grins and turns to me

*Mike*: Fuck it. You heard her!

Cue malicious compliance.

She wanted it all loaded in 2 hours? That's exactly what we'd do.

The front half of her truck was loaded up neatly, with everything padded and stacked tightly floor-to ceiling to keep it from moving on the road. I pride myself on my ability to load a truck properly and safely without wasting any space. The second half of her truck was the worst, jankiest truck I've ever loaded in my life. We're talking huge heavy office furniture haphazardly stacked on top of each other at the weirdest angles. Heavy stuff on top of light stuff, anything to just get the storage unit empty and the truck door closed. We even stacked REALLY heavy office chairs on top of glass table tops.By the end of it, the truck looked like you'd asked Escher or Giger to draw you a picture of an office.

I just wanna be clear, we've never intentionally damaged a customer's property, and we never would. We pride ourselves on our professionalism, courtesy, and specifically our ability to get your stuff where it's going safely. But the particular combination of unsafe conditions and this lady's outright disregard for our safety and feelings was just too much. And technically we didn't damage anything. Nothing was broken when we closed the truck doors. But literally the first bump in the road or decently tight turn was definitely going to cause hundreds, maybe even thousands of dollars in damage. 

 We closed the truck door and walked over to Darcy's truck and let her know. 

Mike went to her truck. He told her that we were done and that he wasn't going to charge her at all for the move. She insisted that "She's not poor, and doesn't need charity" and Mike just said that it was clear that she wasn't happy, and that he didn't need her $150 (that's right, we charge $75/hr, so the extra half hour we needed to do it right would have cost her a whopping $37). 

He cancelled the job and refunded her what she'd already prepaid. 

As we drove away in Mike's car, I looked at him. 

*Me*: You realize that by the time she gets where she's going, she's looking at a LOT of damaged furniture, right? She's going to hit us with a bad review and maybe even try to sue.

*Mike*: She was worried about paying an extra $37. I doubt she'll risk more money on hiring a lawyer. And besides, you can't leave a review on the site if the job gets cancelled. We just gave her exactly what she wanted. And besides, it's worth losing out on the money I would have made just to see her face when I said I didn't need her $150. 

When he dropped me off he still paid me for my time because "Fuck that lady". My boss, Mike, is a really nice guy.I work at a well know huge grocery store in the bakery/deli. I've been in the general area now for 3 years, been in management and recently stepped down this year to focus on college. In early July I turned in my letter of resignation letting them know that August 13th would be my last day. 

It's now about mid July now and we've got an audit going on. Basically everything has to be perfect, they ask you questions about your job, everything has to be on code etc.

Up till this point we've been having an issue with staffing because instead of hiring employees full-time they hire everyone part time, I am the only full time employee in my department. Because of this, there's never enough people to work and they'll schedule 4 people working 3 or 4 hour shifts one night and then the next one person will be closing alone the entire night, usually me. 

I'm fine with that, I enjoy working alone but this night was extra stressful with all the extra work I had to do because of the audit. 

I was all alone the night in question, and working a shorter shift than usual. We tend to close the deli around 8 p.m and have 2 hours to clean up. I was scheduled till 8:30 p.m and spoke to my managers about it and got permission to close at 5 so I could take a lunch break and have 2 hours to close up. My managers also said that I would be sent someone around 7:30 p.m to help me close on time. 

Around 7 p.m a woman comes up to the meat slicers asking for some sliced meet, I tell her I'm sorry but we are closed for the night. She bitches me out for a moment, complains that she comes here every other night and we are always open and I explain to her that we are low on staffing and I've already cleaned the slicers for the night and she leaves. 

About 5 to 10 minutes later my assistant manager walks up and asked me what the problem was. She had gone to management and demanded we slice her the meat. I explained the situation and his response was to berate me for closing the deli down early and tell me to help her and just clean it again. "Just stop being difficult." Is what he said. 

After slicing her some meat we ended up being out of a different kind and she walked out of the store leaving everything behind and meaning I had created more cleaning for nothing. I was pissed. 

I took a walk to cool down and went to find my buddy who was supposed to come over at 7:30 p.m and ask when he was coming over. When I found him he told me he wouldn't be able to come over because the assistant manager had come over and given him a long list of stuff to do for the rest of the night. 

That pissed me off even more. 

I found the assistant manager and was like dude wtf and reiterated that I was leaving at 8:30 p.m and needed assistance and he told me to once again stop being difficult and just to get it all done. I told him there was no way I was getting it done in time and said that my schedule says I leave at 8:30 so I'm leaving at 8:30, regardless of how much is left to do.

I guess he hadn't gotten the memo that I was quitting soon and so, in response, he tells me that if I can't do my job well enough that maybe I should start looking for another job. That was my breaking point.

After 3 years of working with shitty management and their backward ways I decided I didn't need to do it anymore. 

I told him ok, found some of my favorite coworkers and told them goodbye and it was nice working with them and walked out. Haven't gone back since.

They failed their audit, 6 other employees in my general area quit shortly after time due to most of them traveling out for college. The rest are planning on leaving as well. As far as I know the entire area is fucked up. Hope the manager got his ass chewed out but I doubt it. I've reported some of the managers there for serious issues (telling me they were too busy to help women whos lives were being threatened in store, retaliation, threatening to fire people if they didn't work overtime causing someone to lose Medicare and ration their insulin and be hospitalized for a few weeks) and they never went anywhere.

Fuck that place.

Edit: Grammar, also for those asking is was the world of wally.
I’ve been floating on this subreddit for awhile and finally decided to share an recent experience that has become my favorite so far.

For context: I’m a PSA/UM (Passenger Services/ Unaccompanied Minor Assisted) in a airport. To put it simply I help both minors, elder and the disabled to their next flight. This didn’t happen to me directly, but I was somewhat involved and it was funny.

This happened just yesterday. I was assisting a disabled women in one of the airport wheelchairs with possibly finding a seat on the flight as she was on standby. As I’m explaining the situation to my passenger, a heated discussion breaks out between the gate agents and a high quality Karen. The agents are trying to explain to her that per the airlines policy, masks must fully cover your face from your nose down and the bandanna over her face was not good enough and they could give her a proper one.
Karen argues that she “has had this mask on for the past 3 flights and it was never a problem”. The gate agents severely doubts her claim.

The arguing continues for a minute more before Karen uses the signature line, “Can you go get your manager? I wanna speak to someone who knows how to do there job!” The gate agent says you got it and almost skips away to find her manager. They both come back over and the manager addresses Karen one more time, as the agent had already given him a quick run down of the situation. Manager: “Mam’m, per whatever airlines policy your mask must cover your nose and mouth fully. Hanging facials clothes, gas masks and masks with valves are not permitted. We have extras to give you if you need one”
Karen: “So basically you don’t know how to do your job either”

The manager breathe a quick sigh, says ok and take over the computer for about 5 minutes before waving me and my passenger on to board the flight. It wasn’t until I walked out of the jet lane and seen Karen still standing in the waiting area that it dawned on me. The manager had taken Karen’s seat and given it to my passenger who was on standby. Judging from the screaming and cursing after that door closed, Karen didn’t realize it right away either.

Edit: omg wow thanks so much for the awards! You guys are awesome! :)I'm a custodian at a local school board, our cleaning section is broke down into square footage and how long it takes to clean it. 

Kinder rooms are 25.8 minutes, regular classrooms are 12.3, portables 19.8, set of washrooms 25.6, so on.. 

This kindergarten classroom had glitter everywhere and the kids absolutely destroyed the room on a regular basis, i put up with it for the whole month of September and part of this month. I finally mentioned to the principal that it's taking me longer than normal to clean the room - as glitter takes months to get rid of and I'm short on other rooms.. She said ' your a custodian, just do your damn job '. 

Oh, ok, my apologies, no problem! 

I put my phone by the door recording me cleaning the room, at the 25.8 minute mark (that would be 25 mins, 50 seconds) my alarm went off. I dropped everything, grabbed my phone, turned the light off and locked the door.

I didn't have time for the kinder washroom, vac the carpets or take the garbage out. Oh well.

I got called in for answers the next morning, I stated my case, my supervisor was called, and I called my union. I am in the right, however i should of consulted the union before... Oh well ! They are looking at increasing supervision now..


edit: just want to personally thank those of you who appreciate us custodians, i know im not the only one out there, we get shit on a lot, and its nice to know you treat us as actual people :)

Edit2: for those who asked, here's one of our schools (not the school in question - trying to stay anonymous): https://imgur.com/a/MNNZhrc

Misc time includes dealing with rentals, additional cleanup (extra spills) troubleshooting stuff like our buffers, attending to setups for events (movie night/parent interviews) + tear downs, etc.Mobile format blah blah

This past Christmas my Mom just told me her malicious story. She was looking for stocking stuffers for the whole family and found a Lindor chocolate coupon online. 150 pieces for like 40 bucks - which is a pretty good deal. She did not read the coupon but screenshot it and brought it to her local outlet store to pick out the treats in person.  

It was a tad busy in the store so she waited in line, when it was her turn she showed the coupon. The conversation went as such.

Mom: “hi I have this coupon, I’d like to pick out my chocolates.”

Clerk: *inspects coupon* “sorry that is for online orders or if you call it in we can package it for you.”

Mom: “Ok so I can’t pick out the chocolates, I will need to call it in? I’m here now”

Clerk: “sorry that’s what the coupon says, next in line.” *again it’s pretty busy inside*

Mom: *side steps out of line and pulls out phone*

Clerk: *turns around answers the phone.*

Mom: *Audibly so she would hear her twice through the phone and in person* “Hi, I’d like to place an order for 150 pieces of chocolate, can you please provide me with your full menu one by one”

Clerk: *Turns around mortified and quietly says* “please just pick out the chocolates you want we will honor the coupon.”I worked as a bank teller. The other tellers were all female. Our Sales & Service Manager expected us to greet customers warmly the second they entered... from across the bank.

"Helloooo thereeee!" "Hiiii!! Welcome to US Bank!"

It was even turned into a competition- when he heard/noticed tellers greeting customers he gave them a 'point' on his tally

My greeting strategy was to wait for initial eye contact after they entered the building and began approaching my window, then say "hello!" in a friendly way, and give a polite little head nod and smile.

This was apparently unsatisfactory. I was talked to because I wasn't bubbly enough. It was pointed out to me how well the other tellers were greeting people walking in, how many 'points' they all had accumulated, and I was told I needed to be more like my female co-workers.

This sounded great in theory, but I am a 6'4" 290lb male and I knew it would be easy to show them the error of their ways.

The next person entering the bank received a bellowing sing-songy "HIIII THEREEEE!!! WELCOME TO US BANKKK" from 60ft away, with a dozen people in between.

To say it startled the shit out of everyone in the bank would be an understatement.

I was informed my polite "hello!" & nod would be fine going forward.I think it's still malicious compliance if you goad people into demanding the thing you maliciously comply with, right?

Setting: Elementary school

Me: 4th grade or so

Our class had been complaining about our projects in art.  The art teacher was going over painting and drawing and we were getting bored and begging to do something else.  OK, he says, we'll do some other stuff.  We had two months of pottery, carving sculptures out of bars of soap, all sorts of fun stuff.

While we'd work on our projects, the teacher always told us stories.  Some true, some not, but his favorite kind were ghost stories.  Eventually he figured the stories about ghosts in the school were the scariest.  Pretty soon he started telling (made-up) stories about the ghost that lived in the school. Over the course of the weeks, while we shaped our pottery and did our carving, the stories grew to include sightings of the ghost in the school's basement.

This basement was really a cellar.  Perfectly safe but the floor was usually a bit damp, it was dusty and dingy, etc.  We only ever went there for tornado drills.

Eventually he started telling us how HE saw the ghost down there.  Then how the ghost was even there DURING THE DAY.  All in a way designed to intrigue, and perhaps scare, 4th graders.  Pretty soon my classmates were DEMANDING to go down to the basement and see the ghost.  He'd say, "no, it's too scary".  That made people more demanding.  Finally he said, "Do you want to see a ghost in the basement?"  "YEAH!"  "Are you SURE?"  "YES!"  "It's pretty scary."  "LET US SEE!"  "You'll scream."  "NO WE WONT!" "OK, OK, have it your way.  But don't say I didn't warn you".

The boys in class were all bragging about how they weren't scared.  The girls were all huddled with their friends.  Finally the day arrived.

"Now, this is going to be scary.  It's OK to scream, but don't try to run -- I don't want anyone to fall down there, OK?"  Nervous laughs and nods from the class.  "Does anybody want to stay in the classroom instead of going down?"  No raised hands, but some apprehensive looks.

We all went down to the basement.  All was normal.  Then the teacher suddenly switched off the lights.

And that was when we saw a ghost, shimmering in the distance, with its eerily human-like face peering at us.

There were screams, from both boys and girls.  It was loud.

Then he switched the light back on and we heard the teacher laughing.  Loudly.

After some badgering, he pointed to the large white towel hanging from a pipe at the far end of the basement, gently waving in the breeze.  "Is there where you saw the ghost?"  "Y-y-yes..."  "Was it glowing?"  "Y-y-yes..."   "Did you know that you can buy paint that glows in the dark?"

Cue the predictable responses from the 4th graders, and demands for him to show us how he did it and let us try.  It didn't dawn on me until yesterday, when I told this story to my kids a couple of decades after it happened, that this whole thing was a 2-month windup on the teacher's part.  Because after we saw the ghost, of course we demanded to know how he did it.  We demanded to try the glow-in-the-dark paint ourselves, and did.  We got a lesson on using paint you can't see very well (similar to glaze).  We learned about unusual mediums (including cotton towels).  We then went back to other painting-type items in art with excitement and demands to the teacher to try all sorts of kinds of paint and painting.  Which was probably his plan all along.  I'm sure he covered everything in his lesson plan that year, just slightly out of order, and with much more enthusiastic kids.

We were had, and good.As a teen, I used to work for an import store named after a pier.  We sold a lot of wicker furniture.

Wicker furniture is not durable. It's the nature of the material.  We had white furniture that we sold, and it was so prone to scuffs and damage that it came with a little spray can of touch-up paint.  We (the staff) always made sure to point out how easily damaged it is.  Most people buying wicker furniture understood that, or would change their minds when they realized the upkeep needed.

So this guy comes in, and he wants a wicker chair.  Great.  They sold for $90.  Well he starts nitpicking every little scuff and mark on the chair, doesn't care that's just how it is, he wants a discount!

So I go ask my manager, she says, "Fine, give him ten dollars off"

I go back and say, "OK, I can give you ten bucks off"

He says, "Ten DOLLARS?  That's not good enough!!  I want ten PERCENT off!"

So I say "OK you got it!", quickly ring him up, take the 10% discount (which is $9.00) and hand him his receipt with a big smille and a "Thanks so much for coming in today!"

He walks out (dragging the chair, lol) and is halfway to the door when he reads his receipt and realizes he's played himself.  He turns back and I just gave him a big cheshire smile.  He left without a word.

Oh, and I "forgot" to give him his touch-up paint too.  Dang.This was over 15 years ago, when digital SLRs were first becoming somewhat affordable to anyone who wasn't either wealthy or a professional photographer.  I was in high school, had been a budding photographer for years already, and working in a small retail photo supply shop.

I had a customer who appeared to be in his early 60s come in one Saturday and spend over an hour demoing just about every camera we sold.  I honestly looked forward to those customers because it made the time go faster and I generally enjoyed talking shop with people.  Eventually, he settled on one that we both thought would suit his needs and I rang him up.

A few nights later, he comes back.  I've already been given a heads-up by the store's owner that this guy has called ahead, and he is *pissed*.  When the customer arrives, he immediately accuses me of selling him a camera that's either broken or simply not good enough for what he wants to use it for (taking pictures of his grandkids, who - like most tiny children - are not always sitting perfectly still).  It's too slow, it takes the picture after the kid's already done something, every photo is blurry, etc.  

I take him at his word (I have no reason not to) and examine the camera, changing some settings and snapping a few pictures as I go.  I genuinely cannot find anything wrong with it at all.  As gently as I can, I try to tell him that it may be a combination of using the wrong settings on the camera for what he's trying to photograph (while teaching him the right ones), and maybe a bit of slow reflexes that will develop with practice.  Keep in mind that I'm young and terrified of losing my job, so believe me when I say I'm as delicate as I can be with the whole situation.  

But that was the wrong answer, apparently.  His solution: "okay hotshot, let's see you make it work.  I'm going to wave my arms back and forth over my head, and I want you to take pictures when they're straight up."  He insists this will prove that the *camera* is too slow and can't take a sharp picture.  He hands me the camera, and starts doing his best "wave your hands in the air like you just don't care" right in the store.

Snap, snap, snap.

I hand the camera back and let him review the photos, each one showing the exact moment he wanted me to photograph, perfectly sharp and in focus.

He didn't say another word.  He huffed, hastily shoved everything back into his camera bag, and stormed off.  Sorry, sir.  Just doing what you asked me to.Little background here. I work with a large multi-billion corporation in logistics where we are largely commission based doing sales. Everyone here is in control over their own clients and book of business. We have managers, but they aren't there to run your book or micromanage, they are there to help motivate you and find solutions to things you may have not run into yet. If I don't come in one day or am late it doesn't hurt anyone but myself, so I work as much as I possibly can. Being a little late shouldn't be a big deal, but it got to the point a large chunk of the office was routinely showing up 10-15 minutes after start (I agree being late shouldn't be a habit, but they are only hurting themselves, if they don't hit numbers they will just get fired). Living in a central state and having mainly east coast clients means I am in the office about an hour before most people anyway. Well, my team manager enacted a rule where if you are more than 10 minutes late, you have to bring breakfast for the team (my team is 16 people). So everyone showed up on time last week, then Thursday rolls around and I called him to explain how my dog is puking and I will be 30 minutes to an hour late. He just replies via text I better bring breakfast for everyone. Even though I am historically there well before anyone, I was to become his first subject and example. I called to say no I cannot do that, Christmas is coming up and I have travel plans I need the money for. Well, he pushes back and says to bring it anyway. Now I'm fairly pissed as my team originally thought the rule was a joke and in no way enforceable... So an idea forms in my mind, I was not going to take this. I call up Einstein Bros and order 16 double egg and bacon sandwiches and a 16 large orange juices. When I make it in about an hour late, the team loves the gesture and my manager doesn't say a word as he grabs his oj and sandwich. Now here's where the fun comes in, our expense reports were due the next day in order to receive it by the following paycheck. I expense the full ~180 and submit it without saying a word to him. The branch manager called me in the next morning (we are on extremely good terms, very chill guy) and asks what the expense is for. When I explain team breakfast and the rule, and show him the texts from my manager he gets red in the face and tells me okay no problem it will get paid and to be on my way. Not 5 minutes later my manager gets a call and everyone could immediately see on his face him getting yelled at. He goes into the branch managers office and proceeds to get a long talking to about what he can and cannot enforce on employees. Looking extremely defeated he sat down and didn't say a word the rest of the day. He had to send out an email to the team recalling the rule about breakfast and apologizing if he put undue pressure on us and that he just "wants us to succeed, and being late is not the way to do so." The next week Monday morning, I brought in breakfast for the team again, a dozen and a half donuts for about $14. This took place about 15 years ago and and involved a large corporate banking entity.  I forget the name of it, but for the sake of this story, let’s call it Fells Wargo. 

It may not truly be MC.  It took some creative thinking outside the box prompted by their own phrasing. You be the judge. 

There are some important parts that come into play:

1. My spouse and I were young and dumb financially.  We both had bounced a few checks on our own checking accounts.  They were closed a few years prior.

2. Fells Wargo offered a way to rehab your checking account history.  They offered you the opportunity to pay them an additional $10/month to have the right to have a checking account, they restricted the release of funds and made life difficult to even have a checking account but if you played by their rules you could “graduate” to a traditional checking account after a year. 

3. I participated in the “opportunity checking” and graduated my account.  My spouse had lived without a checking account for a few years and wanted to try again. 

4. I took my spouse to Fells Wargo.  We specifically explained their previous history, and specifically asked for the shitty checking rebuilding account. We knew my spouse needed to start at the bottom.  

5. The manager of the branch enters the basic information and declared there was no need for the rehab checking account.  They qualified for the regular account.  We asked again to be absolutely sure.  Yes. No rehab needed. Here’s some starter checks.  Your ATM card will be in the mail in a week.  Gladly took an initial cash deposit of $500.

Fast forward a week.  We get the ATM card.  Call to activate it.  

“Your account has been closed.”  
Why? 

“We determined you have bad checking history previously.”

We go round and round about how we covered this, disclosed it up front and asked for the checking rehab account. 

“You will have to go back and open that account if you want it. We can’t change the account.”

So, they’re closing the account.  Because we needed to have the rehab checking account.  The one we specifically asked for and they refused. *facepalm*. My spouse didn’t know what to say so we got on speakerphone. I started asking questions.  

So, will you pay the outstanding checks and refund the rest?

“No. We won’t pay any checks.  You’ll be charged for returned checks from your merchants.”  

(My spouse wrote 3 checks totaling less than $100. Very few places accepted starter checks.). They have the funds in the closed account to pay them. Where is the issue?

“We don’t do that.”

At this point they became flustered.  Nobody seems to ever have the funds or the audacity to demand them to pay checks written in good faith. They had no answers on how they refused the checking account we requested and would have been okay to have.  They didn’t think they had a responsibility to notify us the account was closed.  And how dare we challenge their policy. They didn’t like how I kept pointing out how there wasn’t a single thing we did wrong but they think they are not responsible for returned check fees. So they decided to not talk to me any longer.

They hung up.  We call back. Repeat. 

Finally they offer this gem:
“We won’t talk to anyone except the name on the account.” *click*

Their only possible choice to avoid a difficult discussion where they own their mistakes was clinging to not letting someone else ask questions with the account holder’s permission. 

THEY EVEN REFUSED TO LET ME TELL MY SPOUSE WHAT TO ASK AND RESPOND TO MY SPOUSE DIRECTLY!

Can only talk to the name on the account? Okay!

So I called back.  
Miraculously, in sixty seconds, I now identified as a different person. 

“Thanks for calling Fells Wargo. May I have your name?”

(Spouses name)

*Long pause*

“You aren’t (spouses name)”

Sure I am! Ask me anything!

“Name. SSN. Address. Mother’s maiden name. DOB.” (Verified it all as the name on the account)

*Long Pause*

“No. You aren’t (spouse)”

Why do you say that?

“Because you’re a man.”

Wait a minute! That’s why you closed my account? Because I’m a man?  I’m pretty sure that’s against ECOA, maybe Reg B. (Laws stating discrimination on gender is illegal.  Banks can’t reference gender or other protected classes to close accounts)

“Please hold”

A manager finally comes on. We have a little back and forth about who I identify as. But seeing how I’m not doing anything except demanding they pay checks on my spouses account, written by my spouse, with funds in their possession, there isn’t much they can fight. But they finally agree to pay the 3 checks from the funds in the account. They didn’t want to. Even in the end…but the name on the account demanded it. 

Fallout? They had to do the right thing after wasting hours fighting it.During undergrad I worked at a deli in a major supermarket. Most of my coworkers were also in college, and we all got along and generally had a good time. We usually didn't have too much trouble, but for some reason a couple of managers had decided that they didn't like one of my coworkers. Let's call him Corey. They would nitpick his work and give him a hard time for things the rest of us never got in trouble for. One morning, they decided that his 5 o'clock shadow warranted a beard net. Now this was an unusual request considering that 1) no one without a beard had ever been told to do this before, and 2) he had barely any stubble, and 3) they made a big deal about it and seemed to be trying to make him feel bad about it.

Cue the malicious compliance.

Managers aside, I was the only female employee in the department at the time. So I stroll up and ask what's going on. They point out his stubble. I respond that I'm certain that I have eyebrow hairs longer than that, and in mock concern, I ask if I should be wearing my hairnet over them. They sort of look at each other, and hesitantly say no.... you don't need to do that. I ask why not, because it's likely that my eyebrow hairs would be in someone's food if we're worried about chin stubble. They persist that no, I shouldn't worry about it. Then I ask about the fine hairs on a woman's face. What about those? Should I be shaving? They're catching on now. They tell him to put on a beard net and leave. He does... and so do I. Solidarity.

I don't think I've seen so many people double-take and start laughing before. The customers and my indirect managers thought it was hilarious. When they would ask me about it, I would just say that I was protecting the food in the store from any potential hairs, real or imagined. By noon, when the original pair of managers returned, I was having a very good day. They begged me to take the beard net off, and I pointed out that there was nothing in the store policy saying that I couldn’t wear PPE, which included beard nets. I wore it until the end of my shift that day. They never bothered Corey about his stubble after that.First post, on a mobile, English is my native language, yada yada.

Small act of malicious compliance from a few years ago I still enjoy chuckling about today.

My husband and I bought our first home and I got my dream of kitting it out in IKEA furniture (some yearn for bigger things in life, this was my  middle-class dream).  We live far away (2.5 hrs drive) from IKEA and had ordered quite a bit of kit so we splurged on delivery.

Delivery day arrives and the truck rolls up to our house. Now we have a two-story house and had ordered 2 wardrobes, a bed, mattress, armoir for upstairs and six bookcases with doors, a large lounge chair, 12 wall cabinets and a large TV cabinet for downstairs. It was a LOT of flat pack.

Delivery man: where would you like the boxes?

Me: I need some upstairs and some downstairs please. I can tell you which is which when I see the boxes come in. (I know what's what because I'd already seen them at the IKEA when we bought them before delivery)

Delivery man: Can't do that, we only deliver them to one room.

Me: Then I'll have them all upstairs please.

Needless to say delivery man quickly changed his mind.

EDIT (to explain): Where I live delivery is contracted out to a third-party company but the IKEA delivery TandCs specify that unless there is some safety issue, the items should be delivered to "your room of choice" and that they have sufficient access to staircases and lifts.

https://www.ikea.com/ie/en/customer-service/terms-conditions/general-terms-and-conditions-pubf0169731

Further explanatory EDIT: there were three or four delivery guys, so I was not making some poor fella schlepp it all upstairs by himself. I'm not THAT cruel.(On mobile, sorry for formatting, etc.)
I’m a hairstylist. Last Wednesday, between clients, I decided to run to the gas station to get an energy drink and was hit by a car coming out of the parking lot. My own car was totaled, the cops came, both cars were towed from the scene.

I texted my next client, apologizing and telling her that due to a serious accident, I would need to reschedule her appointment. She said she needed her hair done before the 4th of July. I was standing in the street, looking at my car in pieces, on the phone with insurance, fielding questions from the cops, and still texted the salon owner asking if anyone could take my client today.

The owner said she’d figure it out, and would make sure my client could still be seen. I passed this info onto the client, who said she only wanted me to do it, and needed to get in ASAP. So in the melee, I’m still worried about this client (who is a bad client, btw, and constantly complains about her hair, demands free redos, and only pays about 70% of the typical cost of her services because she managed to manipulate me into that price point when I was a newer stylist.) I see in my schedule that I have absolutely no room to fit her in before the 4th, so I walk back to the salon, after my car was towed away, and just take her anyway. 

Once I get in, she doesn’t ask if I’m ok, doesn’t thank me for taking her anyway but instead launches into a 3 hour long brag about all the guys who are super into her and how’s she’s dating a business mogul from Newport. The service goes as usual. I finish her hair 3 hours later, and am about to take her cape off and send her on her way when suddenly, she has a problem with the color. She says it’s too ashy. It’s the exact same formula and color I’ve done on her for years, but today, it’s wrong for some reason.

Trying to remain cheerful and professional, I tell her that I’ll put a new toner on her, no problem. At this point, my grandma is on my way with my daughter to pick me up. I text my grandma saying I’ll be a little later. I tone the client again, and blow dry her for a second time. The client insists that the color is still “too ashy.” 

I explain that the second toner I used is the most golden toner that exists, and there’s nothing less ash that I could put on her, except for an opaque, sort of gold pigment. She’s clearly just being a sadistic bitch. At this point, my grandma comes into the salon and asks if I’m ready to go. My client is looking at her hair and says “you need to do something else. I can’t leave like this.”

So my grandma goes back to wait in the car. I decide to use a very, VERY gold color and tone it again for the third time. She comes back to the chair and her hair is noticeably less ashy... because it’s practically orange.

“I hate this,” says the client. “I’m going to dinner with the guy from Newport tonight. I liked it better the first time. You need to do something else. Just do it like you did the first time.”

“I’ve done your hair three separate times at this point,” I say, packing my stuff up. “As you know, my grandma and daughter have been outside waiting for me. Unfortunately, there’s nothing else I can do, since now there’s layers of toner on there and a fourth layer will only make it worse. I hope up you have a great week!” I took her payment (which she scoffed and forcefully handed to me) and I left. It was maybe not my most professional moment, but I’d been looking for an escape from that client for years, and it was worth it.I teach in Arizona, home of one of the most underrated education systems in America (in my humble opinion, I think we really do great work here). It's the end of the marking period, and my school has a U.S. standard A, B, C, D or F grading system. I teach an Algebra class to 8th graders (a year ahead in our parts) who are either smart enough, or their parents *want* them to be smart enough (parents are allowed an opt-in, it's "the law"). As we come to the end of the year and I'm posting grades I'm reminded of this time last year, when I got to serve up some compliance that was as delicious as it was malicious. 

I had a parent of one young buck actually come up to me in person while I was on after school duty to discuss an issue he had with grading. For all the teachers out there I am feeling the wave of "FERPA Violation" coming over you. Yes, this is true, and I told him I can't discuss grades in a public setting. I didn't get to the word setting entirely before he interrupts and says "Bullsh\*t we're at school this is my kid... I'm the one giving permission here so let me ask you..."

I'm thinking to myself (been doing that a lot lately) *Great, I guess we're doing this while I'm directing traffic*. I then realize the issue of safety so I'm like "Sir I need to direct tr-" and then he continues talking utter nonsense (I could only imagine, I wasn't really listening at this point) while I'm looking down the road for more cars to wave down for pick up. He's just going and going, I hear a word or two like "you said.." and "...he's already turned in that.." and finally as I get to a lull and look at him he says to me "...and there is NO way that you can FAIL my child and put the comment *Pleasure to have in class*!!! You need to change this right now!!!". 

Enter the lightbulb of Malicious Compliance. 

(that's my third lightbulb reference today, btw)

The lull was about to pick back up when I say "You make a good point, I don't know what I was thinking, I'll change it the second I'm done here"... Which is actually possible because I always have my iPad on me pretty much at all times (my wife gets jealous). 

The Karen of a dad walked off back to his parked car with his child visible and looking at me from the passenger side, and I swear he actually said "That's what I *thought*", which, if you're unfamiliar, is the thing said to you when you've lost an argument that could have been a fight because you chickened out. Not responding to this is conceding defeat, usually. 

As the dad finishes his little strut to his car I give the kid a thumbs up, ala Bloodsport (just google "Okay, USA"...definitely a laugh), and the kids slowly gives me a sheepish thumbs up back. Hilarious, the kid seems to somehow know what the dad doesn't...

The second I get to a secure (private) location I go into the gradebooks and change the comment from "Pleasure to have in class" to "Respectful to teachers and staff", which is more than I can say for this kid's dad. 

Needless to say, he still got an F. Deserved. And yes, I made this change on the toilet.I worked minimum wage as a retail EVERYTHING. I mean, I was half manager, half cashier floor worker, half inventory... What I'm trying to say is, I did too many things. But this was a small business, mom and pop style shop. There were only three of us at a time running the whole operation. These were family friends. I felt I had a responsibility to this family. Minimum wage wasn't enough for a stranger, but it was enough for me... For a while.

After three years, I had tripled their business profits. I know this because one of my many tasks involved balancing the books. I knew exactly what our sales numbers were. I knew our profit margins. I knew what our inventory cost. I knew our landlord on a first name basis and I knew what bills we paid. I was good at my job. This store was like my family and I made them proud. My wage had not increased in those three years, but looking at the numbers, I thought now was a good time to bring it up. So I did. It was November, entering December. I asked for a dollar more, and my boss agreed.

That December my boss "forgot" to pay me. I had nothing to cover my Christmas holiday. The next month he didn't mention it at all when I returned to work after the holiday... I had to remind him that he was nearly seven weeks overdue. When he finally paid me, he did not include the raise we had agreed upon, so I brought it up again to ask for clarification. He sat me down in the back room and told me he couldn't believe how demanding I was, that in all his years, he'd never seen someone act so rude and disrespectful to their elders. If we were strangers I'd have left on the spot, but we were family. I was in tears.

But I was also very, very angry.

He wanted to go on his own holiday. He wanted to go for three weeks. But to teach me a lesson in respect, he also wanted to slash my hours. What's a store owner to do? He hired a new employee to cover the hours he was cutting from my schedule. He made me train the new girl for him, to teach me "respect." After this training period, my shifts went from four days a week to one day a week. This way he could give me a decent raise on paper but pay me a quarter of what he did before, and his new employee accepted the lowest minimum wage. I didn't object. As a last ditch effort to save the business, I offered to spread my shift out and come in for one hour at the end of each day to check the new employee's numbers, but he refused. He wanted me to feel bad. I felt terrible... For my boss.

As hard as I tried, the new employee had never understood numbers. I had tried and failed to teach her how to calculate her sales numbers at the end of each shift. This poor girl was straight out of high school and had too many other subjects to think about. If we'd had more time for training, she probably would have learned it, but my boss cut my hours too short for me to go in depth about it, and who was I to argue with his schedule?

That's why, when he went on holiday and I couldn't be around to check this girl's work during the rest of the week, the business lost money. On the days I wasn't scheduled to work, thousands of dollars in sales went unaccounted for. Hundreds of dollars of cash were miscounted. Numbers were typed incorrectly into our computer system, rendering our inventory counts useless. After three weeks, he returned to an absolute mathematical nightmare. The sales numbers from my three days of work were perfectly accounted for, and three times higher than what our system reported we sold the rest of the week, although who knows what the real numbers were.

I think this made him angry. He really wanted to teach me a lesson in humility. In my last full shift, a customer tried to return something large, and I told them our store policy to the letter: only my boss had the power to return that item. To make sure it would be returned properly, I did write a note on their receipt that they had tried to return it to me but I was following store policy and leaving it for my boss to handle when he returned from his holiday. Apparently, according to the angry reviews left on our social media, he refused to accept the return and told the customer she was "a stupid idiot" for believing me.

In my next scheduled shift, I asked him point blank if the review was true, and he laughed about it. He told me he was just showing us all who's boss. He admitted to the whole thing. He also mentioned he was giving me more hours as a reward for all my hard work. He wanted me to come in every day from now on to review all the numbers. I came clean: he'd given me a lot of time off in the past few weeks, and during that time I'd found a new job. I made it clear, also, that I had never once disobeyed his instructions or broken store policy. Every action I'd taken had left a paper trail. However, he had broken every single agreement he'd made with me: my payday dates, my wages, my scheduled hours. Things that could be proven by my expert paper trail to our Ministry of Labour. And his behaviour and comments around customers were posted on every social media review, which he admitted to, so I knew exactly what he thought of me. I was only there to hand over the keys to the store.

He cried. He couldn't look me in the eyes. Part of me is sad, because for a long time, we were family. Since my departure, reviews of my old family-run shop have absolutely tanked.  Meanwhile, my new job is incredibly wholesome, my hours are solid, my benefits are excellent, and my rates are triple what I made before.

And I wouldn't be here if I hadn't followed instructions to the letter. I've learned so much about respect.As a young teenager I worked at a ice cream shop. A scoop of ice cream was supposed to be a quarter of a pound and they had genius ways for scooping to make sure each scoop was perfect.

I notoriously bitchy regular ordered a scoop.  After receiving his scoop of ice cream began to loudly complain that it was NOT  1/4 of a pound. 

The manager asked the customer “Who scooped your ice cream?” He immediately pointed directly at the scared AF tiny 16-year-old girl… “She did!!!”

The manager marched the young lady up to the front of the store while everyone, employees and customers stood in tense silence. 

She pulled out a digital scale

Took the men’s ice cream out of the cone and placed it on a sheet of waxed paper on the scale… 0.35 lbs…. The manager proceeds to grab a knife and cuts off the over scooped ice cream and scrapes it into the sink.   Now…EXACTLY 0.25 lbs!   Puts what remained of the ice cream back on the stunned customers cone. 

Manager Quite Loudly says, “Susie our customers are paying for 1/4 of a pound of ice cream. If I ever catch you scooping more than a 1/4 of the pound for this customers, we may have to let you go.”   

Manager then says “Mr. customer, I have watched you come into this ice cream store for years. You have regularly received more ice cream then you have paid for while embarrassing and intimidating our workers. I’m sorry this has been happening to you for so long and I will see to it that it never happens again.” 

It never did.
Wichita, Ks. 

EDIT For those who are curious - 
Braum’s on Tyler Rd - circa 1987 (which is likely the last time it was remodeled unfortunately)As always this happened a few years ago. I am a data analyst and have too many STEM degrees to count. I work at a big bank where the only thing that matters is years of experience. It doesn't matter if you have a PHD or a Bachelors, they both mean the same thing. I came in as an entry level 28 year old because I got so many degrees. I was doing so much better than an entry level analyst that once my minimum years experience hit, I told my director that I wanted 80k or i'm going to apply to another team. He told me that there was no way that I was going to get 80k from any team. I asked him if he could just ask HR because I didn't really want to change teams but I was going to get as much money as I thought I deserved. After I asked him he said "I'm not going to ask HR because I know 100% that you are not going to get paid that much no matter what. If you want to waste time applying to other teams just to be told the same thing, then go ahead!". 

I applied to another team in the same department the same day, this was Monday. On Wednesday I got called by the director of that team for an interview and I got an offer on Thursday. The offer was for 92k. I instantly accepted it and told my current director that I got an offer and had accepted it. He got so mad at me and asked me why I would apply and accept a position without telling him. I said "You told me to". 

After 2 weeks I started my new position on my new team and I got a call from my old VP. He asked me why I left without letting him/my old director counter offer. I told him what happened and he was shocked. He told me they would have counter offered me on the spot. It turns out my old director never thought I would leave...jokes on him.

***EDIT: Wow! This blew up more than I ever thought it would. Thank you all for the support and words of encouragement about leaving jobs. I have been asked about or pointed out that I should be able to list my degrees and “too many to count” is not possible. That is very true, I was just exaggerating and being lazy. For those who wanted them, I have a BS in mathematics,BS in education, BS in computer science with a concentration in cyber security, MS in theoretical Mathematics, MS in data analytics and currently finishing up my MS in Data science.Back during the first Gulf War my wife and I were engaged and had a wedding and honeymoon cruise to the Caribbean  set up.  All expenses paid, food, transportation, etc.  On those things they have all you can eat buffets in a  nice dining room.  Both of us were active military.

Well, the military announces they are sending her over to the gulf.  (I stayed stateside but had leave cancelled).  They ship out 3 days before the wedding/cruise.

We were able to reschedule the wedding.  Caterer, flowers, reception, DJ, they were all cool.  So I called the cruise line and asked to reschedule.   They said No, and the tickets were not refundable.

I tried to explain we were active military going to war.   Nope.  No deal.  I speak to a supervisor.  Nope.  Asked the military to help out, no deal.  
We knew nobody in the area and none of our family could take the cruise.  We were fucked.

So we went to nearby San Francisco, went to the worst area, and found the dirtiest, most malnourished homeless 2people we could find.  Lice, bad smell, shopping cart, the whole thing.

Gave them the tickets and told them to eat well.  The only caveat is I wanted them to send me a postcard so I knew they went.  Gave them a stamped addresses envelope.

Got a nice card from Martinique.

I’ll bet the cruise people were bummed!Talking a friend about this story and realised it fits here.

&#x200B;

My Mums youngest brother was born 15 years before me and as such always had this weird thing that I show almost reverence to the fact he is my elder. He doesn't do this to my brother or my cousins just me.  

When I hit 16 I went to a technical college (in the UK) to do my A-Levels and my uncle went back to learn to be an electrician. We would pass now and then when our classes had breaks and normally just nod in acknowledgement. One day after class I went into the town centre bout 200m down the road and ran into my Uncle William shopping. I said Hi Will to him to get his attention we had our usual chat about DJ'ing as the only real thing we share in common then said our goodbyes and left.

&#x200B;

I the 20 minutes it took to get home my dear Uncle William had called my mother and ranted about how I called him Will over and over and how I should call him Uncle William. I will point out neither my brother or I have called any of my Aunts or Uncles Aunt X or Uncle Y since we were about 8 or 9 years old and none of them complained. Mum told him to not make a big deal out of it but would "speak to me about it."

&#x200B;

Later we had a laugh but for the sake of keeping the peace just say it to shut him up from whining. Shame my dear uncle didn't think this one through. He didn't like this class mates to know how old he was and the fact I teased him that he was in class of people I went to school with drove him mad and to complain to Mum that I should never mention his age of fact he didn't have and GCSE's etc.

&#x200B;

Being the caring and loving nephew I did of course shout "Hey Uncle William" any and every chance I got when I saw him at college. After the third time he called Mum who just repeated that "he should show respect" and to "lie in his bed". I admit I probably went out the way to ensure that on breaks from class we would go to where his class was having a coffee to go chat and say Hello to my Uncle William and if he could give Grandma a message when he got home etc.

&#x200B;

I think it lasted no more than three weeks before my Uncle had gone from calling Mum to demand "I always call him Uncle William," to "Only when away from classmates." Then "Not at College" swiftly adding "Not in town either." Each demand met with my Mother replying its either all the time or none of the time you cant pick and choose. (I love my Mum) to eventually asking me to just calling him Will. (This was because I spent a day calling him Uncle Big Willy for the afternoon and playing Will Smith at him cause I was 16 and a dick).

&#x200B;

TL:DR My uncle demanded I call him Uncle William at all times so I did and 'humiliated' (his word not mine) him at college classmates because he was embarrassed about his age. (I still him him Uncle William now and then to annoy him or mainly to shut him up)Another fun story of an obnoxious boss.

As I've mentioned in other posts, I used to travel a lot for business, between 30 and 35 weeks a year.

Our boss was a frequent traveler as well, and taught us the tricks of the trade for accumulating frequently flier miles (and especially status - a really great perk).

Eventually he retired and sold the company to new boss.  New Boss overheard that I had over 500,000 Frequent Flyer Miles with my airline (not credit card points), and said he should implement a new policy that we had to use our personal Frequent Flyer Miles  for our business travel, since the company had paid for our trips.

That weekend my wife and I sat down and booked weekend trips all over the country over the next year.  Boston for Clam Chowder?  Check.  New York City for a Broadway Show?  Check.  Garlic Fest in Gilroy, CA (a real and delicious thing, BTW)?  Check.  By Monday morning, my Airline Frequent Flyer Mile account was down to about 15,000 miles.

Later that week it was time to book a trip and he said I had to use Frequent Flyer Miles.  I brought up my account and showed him I didn't have enough miles.  He asked where they went and when I said I had booked some trips, he demanded I re-deposit the miles.  I pointed out there was a $150 charge per-person and that since it wasn't policy, I wasn't going to pay it.

Pissed, he announced going forward we needed approval for personal use of our personal Frequent Flyer Miles.OK, boss.  You bet.

My next step was to spread my flights over any and every airline I could find to prevent accumulating the 20,000 miles required to redeem for a free ticket.  I was on United, Frontier, American, Delta, Northwest, Continental, US Air, Southwest, etc.  At one point I think I booked a trip on the Mrs. Grace L. Ferguson Airline and Storm Door Company (Google it - it's a Bob Newhart routine - and more true now than when he performed it 60 years ago.)

He eventually figured out what I was up to, and he lost what little patience remained for me.  Then the following (paraphrased) took place.

Boss: "I suppose you think you're a smart guy."

Me: "No, I know I'm a smart guy."

Boss: "Don't get cute."

Me: "No, I'm smart.  Cute is just a bonus.  Look, I see my wife about 10 days a month.  I live out of a suitcase.  I know the aircraft evacuation speech by heart.  Most of my meals are handed to me throuhg a window.  And thanks to my willingness to do this, you make hundreds of thousands of dollars.  Can you please just let me keep the only perk I get from all this?"

Boss thought about it for a bit, grunted, "Fine, keep your miles." and walked away.  


Edited to clarify these were Airline Frequent Flyer miles, not credit card points.  Sorry about the confusion!A few years back now I worked for a smallish locally owned company owned by two friends. The company was going strong when I started, but after 10 years there the place was going down hill fast. One day we discover the bosses had not been making superannuation payments to us (my countries required retirement fund that employees and employers are required to pay into) for over 2 years, owning tens of thousands over all the employees.

This was the final straw for me and I gave them two weeks notice. As I was basically the last manager there most the employees also quit with me and this really pissed off the owners who thought I was somehow overreacting.

I made them ensure they would pay me what was owed or I would get the tax agency involved. A few weeks later I get an email detailing repayments *significantly* less than what was owed. When I emailed back they told me they had taken hours I owed in time in lieu out of what was owed in superannuation, and if I had a problem with that they would have no issue speaking to the authorities about the hours I stole from them. 

This is of course, highly illegal. For one, we had no contract laying out that I would have to replay owed hours. Secondly, they most definitely can not take that money from my superannuation repayments.

I decided not to reply, save the email and move straight onto the tax agency (they look after superannuation affairs) 

This took a very long time as the process is very slow, but after about a year and several different tax representatives, I one day got a call out of the blue from one of the owners. This was a very angry, threatening call asking why I had reported them to the tax agency and why I was determined to ruin their lives. I told him exactly why I did it and that he reaped what he sowed.

A few days later I get an email from the tax agency telling me they will be repaying all that was owed plus interest accrued over the now 3+ years that they didn't pay. They would have also been put on a blacklist of employers had they not sold the business a few months after we left. 

For more background; after I quit I took two weeks off to be alone with my thoughts and relax for a bit before accepting one of the many job offers I received once my departure had been made public in our industry. I walked away with a higher pay, a more secure job and the position every company in the industry was fighting for at the time, as the company I chose won the contract and they gave the position to me.Years ago, I worked in the office of a distribution centre for a builders merchant, full of very petty 'us vs. them' types. Every July, there was a summer stock take over the weekend, which was compulsory, but overtime was paid. This consisted of last orders being picked and sent from the warehouse, outstanding  errors etc being cleared off the system in the office on Thursday, count on Friday and Saturday (office staff would join in after a quick refresher on the warehouse management system) then Sunday would be a catch up order picking/sending day so branches would be running as usual on Monday morning. Office staff were not trained/employed for picking, and we weren't needed on the floor. For several years we got away with not having to work on Sunday but one year, the pettiest of the petty women caught wind of us not working on Sunday and went to management to demand that we work it. If everyone has to work all weekend, that should be *everyone*. 

The DC manager told us that we would have to work it, we asked what we were supposed to do. Our job was to answer calls from branches (closed on Sunday), and sort out issues from the day's deliveries (which didn't happen on Sunday). Manager insisted, so we said that we would come in but we were bringing party food and playing Monopoly since there was no work to do. 'Fine, do what you want, as long as you're here and in the office'.

Sunday comes, we stick to our word and have a lovely day playing Monopoly, eating treats, listening to music, I think I'd even brought a portable DVD player and we watched a movie. The onsite HR manager came in at one point and asked us what we were doing so we explained, I could see her mentally calculating how much double time we were getting paid to play board games and she stalked off to shout at the DC manager whilst we were in the clear. 

The following year we didn't have to go in on Sunday, and petty people who moaned were told to mind their own business!First I just want to say, I've been an avid reader of this sub for a long time and I love the stories people tell here. Finally today I have the opportunity to tell one of mine. Here it goes..

I work as a developer in a company that creates very fast automated systems for moving around money electronically. So obviously we have very strict testing and error checking for any code that goes in a production system. And I'm one of the guys who does this verification. 

So 3 months ago I found a little bug in a patch that was written by this one other guy who had been working at the company for only a year longer than me. He has the title of "Senior developer" while I'm just a Developer. It didn't really make any difference though, that was just something you get with a small pay raise once you do 3 years at the company as a Developer. 

Anyway, I notice this bug, e-mail him and tell him about it so he can fix it and re-submit the patch. But he turns the responsibility on me, tells me his code is correct and that I'm just testing it incorrectly. I try to explain to him but he doesn't budge. Tired of the pointless arguing, I suggest that we should clear it out with our project manager.

At this point he pulls the Seniority card and says I should just do as he says because I'm his junior. Now that just pissed me off. This guy has absolutely no authority over me, who does he think he is. Cue malicious compliance. I knew that the bug would not manifest itself immediately, there were certain conditions that had to be met for it to show itself in a production environment. And it didn't do anything wrong, it would just crash the system unexpectedly. I asked him one final time in the email thread whether he's sure he wants me to go ahead with the patch. He says yes. Alright, yay! Now we have buggy code running on a production machine which moves a million dollars every minute! 

Nothing happened for 3 months, life was as usual. Then last week it finally happened. Our system crashed. Well, we have protections set up for such failures that roll back the binaries automatically. However, the crash still cost the company a few hours of downtime which means potentially hundreds of thousands of dollars lost. The crash was traced back to the patch that Mr. Senior Developer had written. I had the email trail to absolve myself of fault. The resolution was quick, and needless ro say, Mr. Senior Developer no longer works with us now.One day working at a convenience store, I had a line begin to form at the register I was working at. The customer I was trying to help was someone who was so bored, they figured they'd try to piss me off by wasting my time. He started asking basic questions about products behind the counter, then proceeded to draw the conversation out meaninglessly. After it became apparent I had no response or didn't know the answer, he picked a different product and started over. I suppose he wanted me to reflect on my job and show him how miserable he thought I should be to be making minimum wage and dealing with a guy who wasn't trying to hide the fact that he was trying to piss me off. I'd delt with similar people in retail by this point and was pretty good at dealing with them. I continued to politely answer his questions and be as patient and friendly as possible as a line started to form behind him. After some time, he started to realize I wasn't getting pissed off and he started to get annoyed by it. He started being even more annoying in the same fashion. There was now a line of people behind him, watching this happen. I decided not to inform him that people were behind him. Eventually, he asked me something along the lines of "Am I not pissing you off?" except not that direct, but that's still essentially what he was asking me. And that was when I delivered one of my favorite comebacks I had the fortune of handing out during the time I worked in retail.

"Sir, I'm getting paid by the hour. The people behind you aren't, though."He proceeded to glance behind him and was met with multiple pairs of pissed off eyes. A few of them even laughed at my comment. Annoying guy immediately left in embarrassment.My new wife and I recently took a trip to Denver on a United flight. I fly often, but not as often as some other people. When I booked the flight the plane was fairly empty so I booked the window and isle seats in premium economy section right behind first class seats leaving the middle seat empty. By the time we actually flew the flight was nearly full so I checked the seat chart and noticed someone took the seat between us. No biggie, when we get on the flight we will just offer the window or aisle seat to whoever booked the middle seat. Boarding time came and we were in group 2, so the pre-boards and group 1 got to go before us. When it was our turn to board and we got to our seats, there was an older man seating in the window seat. I thought that was kind of a dick move to just take someone else’s seat without asking. Obviously this guy has flown before since he had pre-boarding status without having young kids, was not disabled and definitely wasn’t in the military.   I let it go since we were going to switch seats anyway. Soon after the flight took off the attendant came up to me with a gift bag and congratulated me for achieving 1K status. The gift bag wasn’t for me it was for the guy that took the window seat without asking. He obviously knew what he was doing and has probably done this before. The guy was looking out the window all through boarding and never turned his head to acknowledge us until the flight attendant came over with the gift bag. I accepted his gift bag and the flight attendant ask if I’d like a complimentary drink as well. Of course I said yes and even got a free glass of wine for my wife too. I glanced at the guy and could see the anger in his eyes. But he didn’t say a thing. Petty win for me over this guy that took my seat that I would have given him,  but instead he took it without asking.I used to work as a manager at a small business. I was the only employee on site during the day, so I was expected to answer the phone, check in deliveries, help walk-in customers, etc. any time they came in. Because I constantly needed to be available, I didn’t have a real lunch break, I would just eat my lunch at my desk when I had time. 


One afternoon one my boss called me on the office phone and very casually asked  “Hey, what’s going on? What are you working on?” I told him the project I was in the middle of, and he said “Really? Because I’ve been watching the cameras and you’ve been messing around on your cell phone for the last five minutes!” I explained to him that my fiancé had texted because there was an emergency that had come up and I was trying to help him handle it, giving him the account information, logins and passwords, etc. since I was working and couldn’t handle it. His response was “I don’t care! I don’t ever want to catch you on your phone again!” I tried to explain that I didn’t get any breaks or anything during the day, so I didn’t have any of my own time to handle things that may come up, but he didn’t care. 


So, knowing full well that the owners, the other managers, and staff members constantly texted me throughout the day whenever they needed something, I complied. 


The next day I came in and I left my phone in my purse. I had a smart watch, so I could see when I got a text, but I didn’t answer, because I wasn’t allowed to be on my phone. After two days of me ignoring their requests during the day and only answering their texts after leaving (saying “Sorry, I didn’t see your text because I’m not allowed to be on my phone at work. I’ve already left for the day.”), my boss came in and told me we needed to have a discussion. 

He called me out on my malicious compliance, but also acknowledged that I was essentially locked in the office for 8 hours a day. So, going forward I could take a half hour lunch break where I didn’t have to do anything else, and I was allowed to use my phone during the day, as long as I didn’t abuse the privilege.


Edit: for everyone commenting that it was illegal for them not to give me a lunch break, that’s not the case in my state (breaks are not federally mandated in the US).When I was a poorly paid and overworked adjunct professor, I once had a student  ask me to take another look at his B- paper, something I would do anytime a student felt strongly they deserved a better grade. 

This particular paper was messy—good argument, decent research, but clunky writing and plenty of grammatical errors. Still, I agreed to take another look. 

On my second pass, a sentence caught my attention. Assuming the student had failed to cite a quote, I searched for the quote online. What I found was the original version of the student’s essay—published in a Yale journal. 

He’d plagiarized the argument and research but rewritten the paper in his own words. Amazingly almost as much work as just writing an original paper. 

I called him into my office, put both papers  side by side, and asked if he had anything to say. He tried to pretend to be confused—but I cut that off. 

I let him off easy with an F in the class as long as he finished all the assignments and tests so he could still learn as much as possible, which he did—no report of plagiarism on a long-term record. 

But poor kid could have just gotten away with a B-, if he hadn’t been so confident of his great ripoff!Our junior high dress code was a pain. Most teachers didn’t care so long as kids weren’t distracting. The principal of the junior high, however, insisted on enforcing every single rule.

A friend of mine wore a long sleeve shirt under a tank top. The principal insisted she couldn’t wear the tank top because tank tops were against the dress code. But she couldn’t take off the tank top because her shirt was slightly see through, another violation. Instead of allowing her to simply wear the tank over her long sleeve shirt, she sent her home.

I decided this wouldn’t stand.

I studied every rule in the dress code to prove how stupid it was. I started off small and worked my way up.

No open toed sandals. - This one was easy. I wore open toed high heels. Nothing in the rules against high heels, and the open toed rule only applied to sandals the way it was written.

Shirts must be tucked in to pants. Belts must be worn through belt loops. - Knocked out two here by wearing a skirt. Skirts, or at least the one I wore, had no belt loops and wasn’t considered pants so I was not required to tuck in anything or wear a stupid belt.

Backpacks must be plain colored with no pins/excessive accessories. - I picked up a briefcase from a resale shop and slapped it with every sticker I could find. Any random logo or inspirational sticker I had laying around got slapped on it. Technically, a briefcase isn’t a backpack.

No costumes allowed. (I verified this, my school considered a costume to be anything only worn for a certain period of time or for a certain reason. If you wore it all day, it was an outfit, not a costume.) - I abused this one so badly. Once a week I dressed up as a lawyer, a clown, a hippie, a Shakespearean actor, a superhero, a camera man, etc. complete of course with as many accessories as I could handle. So long as I never took them off (this made gym class interesting), they weren’t considered part of a costume. I ended up letting kids pick out what I would dress as each week.

No crazy hairstyles. - Kept my hair natural colors, and kept the styles as something that was at least popular at one point. Beehive took forever but was the most satisfying. Bonus points if I could find pictures of adults who were still wearing their hair like that currently.

Shirts are not allowed to have logos or print, only patterns and consistent designs. - Consistent designs was my loophole here. No print, fine, but consistent print made specifically to look like a design? At this point, the principal was going mad and she didn’t let this one slide. She insisted I change, which I expected.

Gym shorts must teach students knees or as long as their fingertips. - Guess who’s finger tips reach about three below her butt? Me! I went from wearing a shirt that said bite me all over it, to an outfit that included short shorts. But my shorts were still longer than my fingers. I even offered to change back into my other clothes.

At this point in the year, we were almost done with school. Other kids were following my lead, and we were driving the principal mad. I decided to kick it up a bit further. I attacked what should have been the most basic rules.

No sunglasses. - Rose colored glasses aren’t considered sunglasses because you can easily see through them. Still, the principal jerked them off my face and insisted I wouldn’t get them back until the end of the day.

No tank tops. - I wore a dress with spaghetti straps. It wasn’t a shirt, so I wasn’t breaking a rule.

Belts must be plain with no dangerous materials. - Plain it must be, so plain I went. I wore a shoe string as a belt. I wore a braided yarn string as a belt. I even wore a spandex band sewn to my pants as a belt.

No crocs. - Crocs are not the only rubber shoe my friends. I found every off brand croc I could get a hold of.

Finally, at the end of the year, I wore one of my most outrageous outfits. I wore a see-through dress (think bathing suit cover up) over leggings and a shirt that barely classified as a t shirt. I wore shoes with a four inch cork heel. I had on fake glasses (no lenses) and a four inch wide headband. I wore bangles up to my elbows and anklets on each foot. I had a box to carry my books in that was decorated with blinking battery powered fairy lights. I walked right up to the principal and gave her a smile.

Kids paused to see what would happen. I waited to see what she would say. We’d had this conversation all year. She would point out the rule I ‘broke’ and I would prove how I didn’t. She sighed.

Principal- Fine,  but if even one teacher says you’re distracting to the class, you change clothes.

We shook on it. Only thing I had to ditch was most of the bangles. They kept clanging while I wrote. 

In the end, I ended up getting the dress code rewritten and amended and the principal implemented a new procedure where dress code violations were not sent home, they were noted and students had to wear a piece of duct tape indicating the specific violation. (If you forgot a belt, you put a piece of tape on a belt loop.) Kids only started to get in trouble after three dress code violations in the same week. Since she lightened up on the dress code and how harshly it was punished, she stopped having trouble with kids breaking it all the time. It worked out for everyone.



Edit because everyone keeps asking for photos. I am going to look, but this was several years ago (I’m done with college now) and besides the fact we didn’t take a lot of photos because this wasn’t exactly an odd thing for me to do, we’ve also had several hurricanes and floods that ruined most of my childhood ‘evidence’. (If photos proved my life, I was born at 18.)Phone user and Australian. Fear my autocorrected euphemisms. Tl:Dr at the end.

Prior to being a bartender I worked at a retail chain called Big W. I'm a nerd, I tend to switch to autopilot when tired (almost always at the end of shifts) and can be a dick when annoyed. Me in a nutshell.

It's a slow Wednesday afternoon, the A/C is broken again and it's about 5 degrees C hotter inside than it is outside (29c). I'm in autopilot, rigor mortis smile on my face and retail greetings  are droning out of my throat. A guy walks into my register, demanding a refund for something trivial. Probably his panties were the wrong colour, I don't remember.

I inform him in a monotone voice that refunds are issued by my supervisor, not me. There's a surprisingly substantial line at the supervisors desk, people wanting cigarettes, refunds or information. He informs me that he's not waiting that long for something trivial.

He demands I do it, because "Even someone as dumb as you can do this". Well that snapped me out of autopilot and the smile fades. I repeat, in a much more direct tone that "Only the supervisor can do refunds." The customer is having none of it. "Refund my item." He demands again, saying it very slowly as if I was the dumbest potato in the strawberry patch. "I am unable to-" He cuts me off.

"I want to speak to your manager, I don't want to talk to you." Now this is where people need to be careful with their words. As a cashier I report directly to my supervisor, one of the two at the desk. They're in charge of me. My Manager sits out back managing the store, and usually never has to interact with customers unless the supervisor calls him.

So I nod, calling through the headset for my manager (let's call him Fred). Fred's a great guy, he tells good jokes, he's always ready to help his friends and he's a caring soul. He's also a mute; and after wrapping his ute around a tree as a teen, he's also deaf. As such he knows Auslan (Australian Sign Language), but can't read lips to save his life. I also can't speak Auslan at all.

This probably took about 5 minutes for someone to alert Fred that he was needed and for him to come down. All this time I'm smiling but not saying a word to the gentleman, as he told me to. He comes up to the registers, sees it's me waving him down and pulls out his pda to communicate with me. 

"What's up?" Fred types. I take the pda and type "Customer has a complaint, wants to speak to 'my manager' not me." Fred raises and eyebrow at me and I just shrug. The guy is turning red with anger, probably thinking we're ignoring him.

Fred turns to the guy who launches into a full on verbal assault that would curdle milk chcocloate. Something about incompetent employees and terrible service. Fred just stands there. Eventually the guy runs out of breath and Fred has a chance to show him the pda with the words "Sir I am a deaf mute, please use this to communicate with me." The guy practically screams and storms out of the store.

Edit: I didn't quite expect this to blow up so much, so thankyou all for reading. Much as I hate working customer service, I do enjoy helping people. If even one person walks away happy it's a job well done and I'm glad I could bring this to Reddit.
 



Tl;dr: Guy gets angry I can't issue a refund and demands to speak to my manager, who can't speak because he's a mute.TL;DR at the bottom.


This is an old story from back when I used to work in the opticians department of a major supermarket chain. I was a part-timer, working 9 hours per week: 3pm-9pm on Saturdays, and 1pm-4pm on Sundays. Part of my job was to close down the department on both days, because none of the managers liked being around at closing time. The department closed at 9pm on Saturdays but it was often about 9:20 that I actually left. Closing down a department takes time, mostly because you can't do it when customers are browsing. Unsurprisingly, I consistently worked more hours than I was supposed to.

All store employees were on the clock, and for some reason the store took readings down to the second. You were paid an hourly rate to within a few seconds of how long you were clocked in for.

My manager (I'll call her Val, because that was her name) called a meeting at 3pm on a Saturday, which coincidentally was the time I was scheduled to start work. Everyone in the department was either starting or finishing their shifts within a couple of hours of then, so it was a logical time, but that was about the only logical thing about it.

The thrust of the meeting was that "some people" - she said, looking directly at me down the length of her not-inconsiderable nose - were claiming more than their allotted hours, and that this must stop. Henceforth, all overtime must be approved in writing. This was entirely her decision. Other departments didn't have this problem as long as you weren't taking the mick.

Fast forward to about 8:45pm. Val and I were the only employees left in the department. She started to gather her things, as is her way. And I started the process of putting our more expensive frames into their night display cases, where they could safely be locked away when the department was closed.


**Val**: What on Earth are you doing, ThereShallBeWings?

**Me**: I'm locking up. I have to make sure I don't go over my hours today.

**Val**: This department has to be open until 9pm. It's in the store handbook. You can't lock up right now, my boss will be furious.

**Me**: You know from experience that it takes a good 10 minutes (I lied, it's actually more like 20) to lock up. I'm not allowed to be on the premises after I clock out. I have to start locking up otherwise I'll be disciplined.


I reached for the tannoy and my voice saying "Good evening. Would Mrs Lock please come to the optical department? Mrs Lock to the optical department. Thank you!" resonated through the store - code for "Security, bring the keys, we're locking up". Val goes white as a sheet. The first cracks in her caked-on makeup began to show, I could see the look on her snooty face as a very large penny began to drop. She yelled "Wait here!" while leaving the department with a purposeful stride.

By the time she'd returned, I'd explained to the security guard, what's happening. He agreed to play along. We start (slowly) locking down the spectacle frames.

Val, with sweat starting to show on her brow, wordlessly handed me a hastily-scribbled note authorising 30 minutes of overtime. I showed it to the security guard, who nodded. Val left without a word, looking really flustered, just as a customer walked in. My friend from security unlocked the frames again and I went to serve.

The following day, Val's usual snooty demeanour had changed. She didn't look contrite, but there were definitely a few cracks in her expression. She took me to one side, and without preamble, handed me a new rota, and launched into what was clearly a well-rehearsed speech.


**Val**: ThereShallBeWings, I have approved your request to extend your hours to 10 hours a week. I now expect you to work from 3pm until 9:30pm on Saturdays, and from 1pm until 4:30pm on Sundays. I trust that this will not be a problem?

**Me**: Oh, that's fine, thank you Val.

**Val**: And henceforth, if you should happen to work slightly over your hours, do not be overly concerned about it.


TL;DR: Stuck-up boss who really likes the word "henceforth" for some reason announces an overtime ban, not realising the overtime was me closing down the department after the close of trading. As a result, I start to close down early as she's leaving. She has a panic attack, increases my hours, and reverses the ban.



Edit Juan: Holy bus, thanks for the gold :)

Edit Too: "Overtime" in this sense means "working over your alloted hours". It's nothing to do with hourly pay.So I was once sent out as an onsite software programmer to join a crew working at a ride construction site. They gave me a laptop with some limited space and an old 1TB external drive with extra data on it, the kind which needed an external power supply to run (factors in later).


Now there are two things which are worth noting about the company

* Exteremly tech unfriendly (not many tech people in the company)
* Very bureaucratic, even in the face of emergency


So as a programmer, I was subject to the same laptop restrictions as say, a sales rep or a business op. Which is really unfair when you have to work closely with an onsite team. And they had blocked transfer on all plain text files. Which is what all source code files happen to be.


I was told I would have to email the admin staff EVERY TIME I wanted to plug in the usb drive, the admin would validate with my department, and they would generate for me a one time password for that usb 'session' which was unique to that device. That really annoyed the hell out of me because I knew I would have a lot of copying/backing up to do every now and then. So I came up with a plan.


I'd use the password to grant usb access to the drive, copy a few files, then I'd cut power to it and reconnect it. New session, new password needed, new email sent. I told them that it being a construction site, power was very unstable, and the drive they gave me kept disconnecting because it needed external power. I did this every 10-15 minutes, maybe about 50-60 times a day, for 3 days. At the end of the third day, the admin head called me himself to grant me admin rights to the laptop so that I could disable the monitoring software for the rest of the trip.


When I went back, they held a meeting to review onsite policies for technical and support visits.

EDIT: I really didnt make this clear I think. Usually admin blocked USB access outright. In my case, after requesting, they allowed USB access, but they applied the policy usually reserved for sales reps (which blocks documents, videos, etc from being transferred to/from anywhere, which included plain text). It was an urgent short term trip to complete this project which was gonna run on an isolated system, so setting up an elaborate delivery was pretty much overkill. And the internet access onsite was pretty terrible anyway.

I don't actually have a problem with putting in security measures to disallow unknown usb devices from being plugged in. I think thats required. But a device they already verified and vetted? Thats a bit much


EDIT 2: This is actually from some time ago, things have been better since then and a couple other incidents. We get encrypted drives with passwords atleast. And no dinosaur external drivesI work in a casual fine dining restaurant in a downtown area. Prices aren't crazy but high enough that we dont get a super young crowd... I would say average age of our dinner crowd is 30 to 60 although it varies more on the weekend. I only include this information so you understand why I didnt initially ask for identification (even though you should always check) 

Thursday night a table of 4 comes in for early dinner. 2 Karens and their daughters. Excellent. I'm ready for them to split entrees and tip me 15%. Not the WORST type of table if we're being honest, but nonetheless. They order a pitcher of sangria and I tell them I'll be right back with that for them to which Momma Karen says to me "you really aren't going to check these girls IDs? Her birthday was just last month. Aren't you supposed to check anyone who looks under 40?" 
She is correct, of course that I should have asked for identification even though they girls were with their mothers and I was being lazy by assuming they were of age since their moms did not stop them from ordering drinks. I agree with her and tell her that I actually am supposed to check ALL IDs regardless of age, and proceed to look at all 4 of the ladies IDs. Unfortunately for Momma Karen, her birthday was a few days previously and her ID had expired. In the state of Michigan it is illegal to serve alcohol to anyone with an expired ID regardless of age so I had to deny Momma Karen a glass for the sangria, while her daughter and friend shared a pitcher. 

I didnt reallllly have malicious intentions, however, it felt good that Karen's antics backfired on her.

EDIT: I didnt include details of Karen throwing a fit when I denied her a glass of sangria. She informed me that she, a business owner, is more aware of the law than I, a mere server, could ever be. I simply couldn't "just do my job" and bring her a glass. My generation doesn't respect elders and blah blah blah. Her daughters were a little embarrassed I believe but I tried to move past it and serve them the rest of their meal normally. Karen kept huffing and puffing but said no when I offered to bring a manager overThis happened some years ago when I had just gotten hired for a part time position in a retail store. 

All was good until the summer got close and he offered me full time for the summer ended which I gladly took. Less than two weeks in to the summer he changed my hours back to part time. I hadn't thought about getting the temporary fulltime thing in writing as he seemed like a trustworthy guy. 

It made no sense as I did a good job and helped out with things my contract didn't mention when I had the time as I get bored quickly. I found out that even though he have years of experience in the field he had massively over spent on the wage bill and had to cut down to avoid getting fired by the head office. 

When I voiced my concern over this his only response "I'm only obliged to give you 20 hour a week, as the contract state". 

I wanted to chew him out verbally but I kept my cool and decided that if he wanted to play that game I would too. When I got home that night I read my entire contract and noted the clauses that I could use. 

One clause stated that my responsibilities was unloading the trucks, take care of the stock room and keep the shelfs stocked. 

Another mentioned that I shouldn't do other tasks as their insurance only covered me for the specific areas I was meant to work . 

Next day he told me to help out the cashiers as the lines were long. 

"Sorry, can't do. As the contract states that isn't part of my job here and I should refrain from doing that. You can find it in my contract as clause 9a and 9b" 

He was fuming, face totally red and he just walked away without saying shit. 

Another thing I had noticed in my contract is that besides my 30 min lunch break I had a 10 minute break I could take when I wanted so I gave him 5 minutes, walked into his office and told him I was taking my 10 minute break. 

"What are you talking about? You only have one break and that's for lunch". 

"My contract says otherwise. It's in clause 10." 

When I got back from the break he asked me to clean something up out in the store. I couldn't believe that he couldn't take a hint. 

"Sorry, can't do. Clause 9a & 9b prevents me from doing it". 

Next day a costumer asked for help with something. "Sorry, can't do. It's not my job. Find someone else". 
My boss heard about this and yelled at me but I managed to stay calm and answered with the clauses that prevented me from helping the costumer. Legally I was in the right and he couldn't do shit but I could see the hatred in his eyes. 

I was still on a trial period which meant he could fire me with only 24 hours notice but I could also resign with only 24 hours notice. 

I knew that once the summer ended and everyone were back from from their vacations he would fire me right away. I had started looking for other jobs and it was going all right so I decided to quit at the worst time possible when it showed itself. 

At the last week of summer he had to fire one with suspend another for stealing from the store. It was the perfect time to quit and leave him badly undermanned for the week. 

24 hours and 1 minutes before my next shift I sent him my resignation before I sent a message to my coworkers about how they should remember to take all their breaks and not violate their contract by doing stuff they aren't allowed to do. 

I heard it gave him a little chaos when people followed my advice.I'm a trans man, and grew up in a very conservative family. As a kid, my parents often forced me to wear dresses and make up in all sorts of occassions, despite me being extremely uncomfortable with it. The official reasoning was "So the neighbours won't talk", but a large portion of it was also "You need to look as attractive as possible for arranging marriage \[you have absolutely no interest in\]".

At first, I used to protest it and try to get away with wearing something as toned-down and unisex as possible, but eventually it became exhausting and distressing. So screw that.

You want me to wear a dress? Fine. I'll wear a dress.

The next time I was required to show up in a somewhat-formal event, I sure did wear a dress: A black, puffy Victorian-esque dress, a red corset, dramatic "gothic" jewellery, heavy black makeup... A full on show.

Oh yeah, the neighbours DID talk.

EDIT: Thank you for the silver~! It's a first.So let me set the scene. I'm a software engineer, I used to work for a pretty big company that specialized in developing software solutions for their client. I was sent on-site to the client which was a big malaysian bank, to play the role of  front end developer( basically make their internet banking website).  They already had backend services setup for a mobile application which we were also to use for the website. There was only one problem you could only install the app in one phone and login to your account, this meant that if the customer logged into their app, they wouldn't be able to login through the website. As anyone can determine this is a big problem. I went to the back architect and tried to tell him as well as the project manager of this problem. They told me I don't know what I'm talking about and stop disturbing them and just do my job and nothing else. (I later found out that they hated the previous front end manager and would never listen to the front team.) So I sent a mail detailing the whole problem to both of them and their bosses as well. As expected nothing happened, but my butt was covered.

Fast forward 2 months, the client reviews the architecture for the website and finds that no changes have been made to the backend to accommodate the different behaviour of the website. They call a meeting and blast the 2 above guys and their boss. They claim they are backend people and don't know the difference in behaviour in a website and it was my job to let then know. So they bring me in to question me why I didn't let them know and because of me the project has been delayed 2 months and the company has incurred losses. I calmy tell them of my meeting with 2 idiots and show them the mail which they ignored. Then it was a glorious explosion.  After that they always consider my suggestions.


Edit:  People have been asking about the glorious explosion. Well basically the architect was called incompetent and his 20 years of experience was called into question and the project manager blamed everything on the architect.

Aftermath: After 2 months the architect was transferred to another project and replaced and the Project manager quit IT  and last I heard he is trying to setup an organic farming business.


Edit2: Thanks for the silver.

Edit 3: thank you for the various awards and thank you for the gold.This happened about a decade ago in my first job. 

It was a IT/Analytics services firm in India (I am from India), while work was interesting, the work hours were insane and folks used to work 12 hours a day usually.

Since we always had conference calls with our counterparts sitting in USA, we ended our workday pretty late, 10 pm was my usual time.

Due to this, folks used to come in to office late in morning as well, usually entire team would only be in by noon.

Management was not happy about this, so they went ahead and decided that everybody had to be in by 10am and if you are not then they will dock half a day pay (we were all salaried employees). Usually managers were supposed to enforce this, but they didn't care since they were in office with teams themselves, but occasionally HR would stand at entrance to office to implement the policy.

On one such day I was 15 mins late and HR at gate stopped me and informed me that I will be docked half day pay.
I stopped for a second, thought about it and turned back. HR stopped me, with a shocked expression, and asked 'where are you going?'. I replied 'back home, see you at lunch :)' and went back home ignoring his feeble protest.

I actually ended up calling my manger and just took a day off.

After this incident, I heard similar such stories from many people and HR stopped enforcing this policy.

---------------------

Edit 1: Corrected a few spelling errors, now that I am on laptop, I could see them!
Also, thanks for such a response folks! My first ever post to get such traction, not that I post a lot! :)

Edit 2: well this blew up, I just got up and have been reading comments for last 30 mins. To summarise I think we are already in orwelllian future.I am a grown-ass man, and I can tell when I am sick.  I know my body a little better than a doctor does in terms of recovery and if it is something I'm not sure of I will see a doctor.  But my place of work has this silly rule that if you are going to be out 3 days you have to have a doctors note.

Anyway, I got food poisoning the other day. It was the middle of the night right before I was going to go in before it started to hit and I knew what was coming.  It was going to be 36 hours of running to the bathroom followed by 24 hours of being super tired from not having eaten for the last 2 days and not having had any sleep for the last 48 hours.  It's a full 3 day recovery for me.  The first 36 really are the worst though.  

So I called in sick on Tuesday, and Wednesday and was going to call in sick on Thursday too to get my much needed rest and be 100% for work on Friday.  I know this is what was going to happen.  But when I called in this morning I was told I have to get a doctor's note to miss this day.  It's stupid because what is a doctor going to tell me that I don't already know.  But my doctor also hates these types of rules so she had my back.  

I went to her this morning and told her what my work said.  She asked if maybe I might have had chills during my time being sick.  So I said yes.  She said, she doesn't feel comfortable saying it was just food poisoning and is going to say it could have been a stomach flu.  She's writing me a note to be out until Monday now. 

So now I have 2 days of just rest and relaxation followed by the weekend.  Thanks for forcing me to go into the doctor!Background: I work as a front office manager in a client facing position. My primary role is to register clients, do paperwork, and solve any issues related to this. My office is right at the front, so when clients walk in, I (used to) go greet them, direct them to their location for the day, and give them the rules, etcetera. 

I have a fellow manager, who also works directly with clients. But he’s a lazy, useless employee, and though technically doing greetings and introductions is his job, I did it for him, because he often couldn’t be bothered to walk a hundred yards to do his job properly. 

So here we are. It’s a busy day. I’m running between welcoming clients, registering them, and sending them off, multiple different parties at a time. There’s lots of people around, one of me, and I’m still working with a ten minute maximum turnaround time, which for my role is very impressive. I’ve got these people in and out as fast as possible, while also doing someone else’s job for them. The other manager is nowhere to be seen until the very end of the day, when he marches into my office. 

“What the fuck are you doing? Why are you greeting clients?” And so on and so forth. For a solid ten minutes. He even goes so far as to imply that because I’m a woman, my only role should be doing the paperwork while he does the real man’s work.

I’m so unbelievably pissed at this. I basically ran our operation the whole day while he fucked off somewhere, god only knows where, and he now has the nerve to scream at me. He finishes with a “don’t ever do that again.” First, he doesn’t have any authority over me. We’re of equal rank, with different roles. There was one other manager in the office with me going over paperwork, and he was so shocked he couldn’t even retaliate. I’m two seconds away from taking this asshole’s head off. 

“Okay, I won’t.” 

I then march out, because things would have gone very poorly if I had stayed.

Cue the next day. Asshole manager comes up to me and tries to apologize, while also one hundred percent not really apologizing, at all. He repeats much of the same shit said the day before, and still seems to not recognize the fatal flaw in his plan of screaming at me for doing his job, which is that now he’s gonna have to actually work. 

I nod, smile, and fuck right off to my office.

Which I proceed to not leave for the next eight hours.

I do exactly what my job is. I register clients. I do paperwork. That is it. I can see clients walking into the building, confused, obviously needing help, or expecting a greeting. 

But hey. That’s not my job.

Asshole manager, after his half assed apology, had disappeared again, so I call him down.

“You’ve got clients waiting,” I tell him.

He gets there, late, and has a horde of angry clients waiting for him to actually do his job. There’s so many of them because he’s late that it’s now his turn to spend the next six hours running around like a chicken with his head cut off, while I have a great time leisurely doing my job exactly to the limits of the description, nothing more. By the end of the day, I’m feeling great, the clients are happy with my work- but the complaints are rolling in for him. He comes in at the end of the day again, obviously ready to yell.

“I had a great day. So much easier to get everything done when I’m not doing someone else’s work for them,” I tell him. “By the way, I had time to process the customer requests for the week since I wasn’t busy greeting. Here’s your complaints.”

And I proceed to hand him a very thick stack of complaints concerning turnaround time, confusing directions, lack of space, and so on. Everything relating to his role. 

“Have a nice night.”

And I leave. Haven’t done his job for him since, and he hasn’t gotten any better at it. It only gets funnier every time. Backround: When I was 16 while working as a bagger in a grocery store we got a new manager. We will call her Elisa. Elisa had a very "I'm right, you're wrong" attitude. She didn't care if she was in the wrong but you better do what she told you until she changed her mind. If you spoke out against her,  you would end up on her shit list and she would do her best to get you fired. 

Story:

Generally the bagger is the lowest position in a store. We collect carts from the lot, put away items, stock, clean, bag and some how we are always at fault.
Cue Elisa. 
I had an early shift. Clocked in, started morning duties and I heard on the loud speaker "OP please come up to aisle 6 (Frozen isle, seafood).

(Edit: . This is an oval shaped, open air freezer at the end of the aisle. 6 compartments, about 20ft long in total. 1 compartment on each end, 2 in between on each side. About 2 ft deep under the aluminum panels with fans facing out from the center. Drainage in the bottom. Freezing air blows out vents onto the merchandise above. Drainage compartments eventually clog with ice overtime.)


I came in and Elisa gives me a smile and asks me to grab a bucket and scrub brush. We (I) was going to pull up the bottom aluminum floor panels at the bottom of the freezer and melt the ice that accumulates around the fans. It should take no longer than 30 minutes she said. Make sure you use cold water since we dont want the temperature sensors to go off(Anything over 42F will set them off and corporate would call).

I say, let me make sure I have this right. You would like me to fill the bucket with cold water and pour it on the ice in the freezer while the freezer is at 19 degrees F? 
(*Stares at me like I'm stupid*)

I inform her it isnt going to work. The water will freeze and just create a mound of ice. I suggest using hot or practically boiling water while watching the temperature . Elisa gives me a firm No and the threat of writing me up if I disobey. 

The start of MC begins. I've already figured that no matter what I do I'm likely to be in trouble. To get the water I had to fill it in the Meat dept sink. The Meat manager asked what I was up to and I told the story with all the details. Meat manager is scratching his head and he heads over to call Elisa. She confirms and I hear a bit of arguing. Meat manager comes back, gives me a smile and says to do as I was told. He'd back me up.

So for the next hour I must have put about 200 gallons of cold water onto the the freezer fan (I switched from a 2glln bucket to a 5 glln). I stopped and moved to the next fan each time the compartment was to the brim with ice. I got 4 compartments done before she came to check on me.

Instant rage. Elisa went from white to red real quick. It was also the first time I've heard a manager cuss. 
What the duck is this? How the duck could you screw up something so simple?"said Elisa.
I said, I did exactly what you told me to. I took buckets of cold water and poured them on the ice around the fans. 
Right as she said she was going to write me up, the meat manager came over after hearing her cussing.

The meat manager saw the ice filled compartments and mentioned that i should have used *HOT* water..
This.. sent.. Elisa.. over the edge. UP TO MY OFFICE NOW! YOU'RE BEING WRITTEN UP!
The meat manager did what he said he'd do. He stuck up for me. Meat manager mentioned that he double checked with her what she wanted me to do and I was was complying with her instructions.   
She went silent for a moment and it was like her head was going to pop off. She just took a deep breath and muttered out, Fix it, and walked away.

The meat manager gave me an extended industrial hose hooked up to the hot water. The water in meat dept can get up to 140 degress F to kill bacteria. The ice was gone in 15 minutes and since apparently the freezer temperature measured as a whole it never went above 34 degrees F. 

Elisa avoided me for over a week afterward. I knew I was on her shit list and for the next 8 months she tried to write me up for the most pitiful reasons.. I eventually was given a written warning for leaving 9 minutes early with approval from the front end manager that was friends with Elisa. At that point I knew I would get fired for crap eventually and I quit without my 2 weeks.This happened a few years ago right after my really good neighbor moved out and the new shitty family moved in. 

It was a Saturday and I saw the new neighbors working on there back yard I hadn't really had the opportunity to introduce myself so I went over and said hello. They were digging a pit to put in a plastic rain water collection thing to water there vegetable garden with. 

Me being nice I offered to help and spend a really nice day digging a pit and laying some cement for the tank to rest on.

Well I noticed two things and tried to bring it up
1. They did not put in any removable mesh through the main collection pipe meaning if it gets clogged it's going to be a bitch to clean out
2. There was no overflow line from the tank 

The thing is it would of been an easy fix Maby 45 extra min I tried to bring it up and I told them you might want to put in some mesh and an overflow 

I was shut down right away like they said it's fine I said but your going to over..

I was cut off right away with just do it my way I want it done my way if you don't like it leave.

So I said ok have a nice day and left.

About a month later after heavy rain guess what it filled up. 

Then the intake pipe filled up ... The water collected and spilled through the basement window flooding the basement and I mean serously flooding atleast a solid foot of water..

So yah Maby listen to the girl that went to university for you know engineering.....

They had to pump the basement dig up the tank and add an overflow pipe....

Since then they have hated me ;)

Edit : for those who are DMing me calling me fucking I iddoit and just terrible things because my spelling and grammar suck I am sorry my poor speaking and grammar bother you much people have there own circumstances  English is my second language I also do have a learning disability.

Your hateful comments have really hurt my feelings. I am sorry I bothered you so much.So I drive an 18 wheeler. Not only that, but I own my truck and my business.   


One day while coming into Laredo Texas, I was in the turning lane for my exit and this car whips out in front of me. Not really having enough room to stop, I tuned onto the shoulder, threw on the air horn (which is extremely loud when you're next to the truck) and stopped right beside the guy.   


He proceeds to get out of his car with his phone and starts taking pictures of my truck and plate. By this time the light had turned green so I gave him a few short horn honks to basically tell him to get going. He then beats on my door, so I roll my window down and he starts screaming about his ears hurting and how I'm damaging his ability to hear. He then demands that I give him my bosses number and my Drivers License Number, so he can call it in and report me and "Have my job for this." And he proceeded to move his car to the shoulder and backs so close to my bumper, I couldn't get around him.  


I kind of smirked at him and told him he didn't want to speak to my boss because he's is a short tempered man and that he wouldn't like what my boss would have to say about this issue, but he insisted that he speak to my boss. I also told him if he wanted to call me in, all he'd need was the numbers on the side of my truck since it's assigned to me (considering I only own one truck, you can imagine what I would assign my truck number to be)   


I gave him my cell phone number and watched as he laughed while speaking each number as he dialed. I see his number pop up on my phone mounted to the windshield (he couldn't see it from his angle) and tried to hold in my laughter. I let it right for a minute and he's getting impatient, the whole time traffic is going around us. I finally picked up the phone and answered it. "\*Insert Company Name Here\* Transport. How can I help you?" His face turns beat red.  


He proceed to yell at me some more and tells me it isn't over because now he has my number (yeah dude, so do about 100,000 other people. So what?)  


A week later I get a phone call from a number I didn't have saved in my phone, I had forgotten about the incident but thought it might be a broker, or a customer. I answer the phone and this lady chirps up. Turns out it was his mother and she wanted monetary compensation for her sons troubles.   


I asked if she knew what had even happened and she tells me some story about how his bumper was damaged by my truck and that he was scared to talk to me because me driving an 18 wheeler was intimidating to him. Being a smart owner, I have a camera in my truck, and I dump all my trucks footage onto my hard drive, so I asked her if she could receive videos over email. She said sure but wasn't sure what I was about to send her. I spend a minute or two looking through the hard drive on my laptop and find the video of the incident and send it to her. While still on the phone, I can hear the audio playing as she watched it. Her tone changed in an instant and I heard her put the phone down, and all hell broke loose in that house. There was Spanish screaming, things being thrown, and lord knows what else going on. It reminded me of that movie "A Christmas Story" when Ralphie's mom calls that lady about the curse word and hears the apocalypse on the phone. Yeah, it was kind of like that, but in Spanish.  
She then comes back to me and very kindly asks for 2 things. 1. She asks that I forget she called and act as if this never happened because she was embarrassed to no end. and 2. If I could delete the video of her sons idiocy. I told her that number 1 was fine, I could do that. But as far as number 2, I would not delete the footage, but the only way anyone other than me or her would see it is if it was needed for a court case. She bid me good day and hung up the phone.   


TL;DR - Don't ask for an owner operators phone number. It could land you in serious trouble with your mother.

Edit: THANK YOU ALL FOR THE GOLD AND SILVER. You all are awsome!Originally posted this over on r/idontworkherelady and they suggested this sub would appreciate it! Hope you guys like it!

Had quite an amusing encounter over this past winter break.

To set the stage, I was working as a holiday helper for a UPS delivery guy. As a holiday helper they had us wear cheap brown vests with a small company logo on them. You’d think that would be enough, but apparently not.

Now although we mainly drop packages off at peoples’ houses, we also went through a shopping plaza to drop off stuff at different stores. We were dropping stuff off at Kroger when this happened. The way it worked was I would take a cart loaded with packages into Kroger along with a [DIAD] (https://www.browncafe.com/community/attachments/diad-v-jpg.5078/), which was basically a scanner we used to log in packages and mark off deliveries. I usually did this delivery alone because it was simple and my driver could use the time to organize other stuff.

So off I go into the store with a decent amount of packages stacked up on the trolley, where I roll them over to customer service. Usually there’s someone behind the desk when I come in, but sometimes the employee is out on the floor helping someone find something like they were today.

Standard practice for me is to unload all the boxes behind the counter and then just wait until an employee comes back to sign off on them. So I unload all the boxes, stack them behind the counter, and then lean up against it to wait for someone to come by. While I’m waiting I casually take out my phone and begin browsing Reddit to pass the time.

Then I heard the “Ahem.”

I looked up to see some fifty-something-year-old lady scowling at me, with a cart packed to the brim with food. She had greying blonde hair done in that [“I want to speak to your manager”] (https://goo.gl/images/8uVAwl) style and was wearing a bright pink Nike top, blue leggings, and about two metric fuck tons of attitude.

We stared at each other and her expression soured with each passing moment like the milk that was undoubtedly curdling in her cart. Finally she broke the awkward silence.

“Well?”

I shrugged. “Well what?”

She shoved her cart forward, almost bumping me with it. “Are you gonna keep ignoring me? Or are you gonna check me out?”

I looked at her then down at my uniform, which consisted of a grey hoodie, black sweatpants, and my trademark brown vest. Kroger employees wear black khakis, blue-collared shirts, and no brown vests. I looked back up at her, trying remain polite, and said, “I don’t work here, lady. I’m just dropping off packages.”

The sour woman scoffed and jabbed a finger at my DIAD. “Bullshit. You’re just too lazy to help me. Start scanning these,” she shoved the cart at me again, this time bumping my thigh, “or I’ll get your manager.” I wasn’t sure why she didn’t go to the standard checkout line either, but I guess if things got really busy, Kroger allowed customers to go through the customer service desk too. (It wasn’t very busy anway.)

Now I could’ve taken the easy way out, told her to politely fuck off, and left, but then she took her phone to make a call and snapped her fingers at me, mouthing, “C’mon. I have to be somewhere.”

So I decided to help her out and began to unload her groceries, one by one, in the most tedious manner possible. I scanned each fruit, can, veggie, and box with the DIAD (which is normally used for recording people’s addresses. Funnily enough, it didn’t know where the kiwi or Rotisserie chicken live, but it does make a satisfying little bleep when it rejects an address which sounded quite similar to a product being scanned.)

I kept doing this for about ten minutes, often “miss-scanning” something or inspecting it much to the woman’s annoyance. From time to time I’d interrupt her phone call to ask her a ridiculous question, such as: “Would you like to add another grape to this bunch? There’s one in here with a brown spot.”

She would usually answer with a huffy “What?”, stare into space as she slowly worked through the question, and then shake her head sharply as she went back to her conversation.

She reached her breaking point when I inquired as to whether or not she wanted her eggs bagged individually or all together. “What? Why the fuck would you-? WHAT?” she demanded shrilly.

I stood there, DIAD in one hand, egg crate in the other, looking completely innocent while trying not to die laughing. I could swear I heard her mind briefly shutting down at the stupidity of my question, before rebooting. Calmly and with a polite smile, I repeated the question.

Her face was almost as purple as the grapes I’d offered to discount as she struggled to form words. “What... kind of a dumbass question is that?” she croaked, her manicured nails digging into trembling palms.

I placed the eggs back in the bag while nodding sympathetically. “The kind I ask someone who’s too stupid to not take the hint that I don’t fucking work here.”

By this point the Kroger employee working the customer service desk returned and the lady turned on them with the fury of God. “HOW CAN YOU LET AN EMPLOYEE TREAT ME THIS WAY? I SHOP HERE ALL THE TIME! HOW DARE YOU TREAT A VALUED CUSTOMER LIKE SHIT!”

To their credit, the customer service worker took the verbal assault pretty well, holding their hands up in a “Holy shit” gesture as they tried to calm the lady down. Then they looked from her to me and back to her and simply reiterated what I said. “Ma’am… he doesn’t work here…”

I was fascinated to see the “doubling down when you’re wrong” mentality in action, but to my surprise all the wrath leached out of this harpy in two seconds flat. It was the look of someone who realized the only way they’d save face in a situation like this was to simply drop it. She pursed her lips at the employee’s words and looked at my brown vest, as if thinking I was somehow still defying her logic.

“Well,” she said coldly, “you just lost a customer.” Then, quick as she’d arrived, the bitch turned on her heel with a flip of her grey attitude-do and stormed off.

I was tempted to say that was more of a win, but figured I’d antagonized her enough. Holding out my DIAD for a signature, I asked if the employee had ever encountered her before. He said he had, but never that angry. She was usually just demanding and arrogant to anyone else when she shopped there.
After getting his signature, I helped him repack everything and asked if he needed me to help him take it back, but he said “no.” It was worth it just getting another tumorous customer out of the store.

Once everything was settled, I returned to the delivery van. (This entire ordeal only lasted about 15 minutes.) My driver, Jeff, wasn’t too angry. He’d arranged the rest of our packages while I was delivering and just told me to be faster next time. Then we continued about our day.

TL;DR - Worked as a holiday helper for a delivery company and was delivering packages to a grocery store, woman decided I worked there so I absolutely must check her groceries out. So I did… with a package scanner, and scanned every one of her items with extra care.Long post, summary at the end! 

—- 

For some context I’m not Muslim but my father is a half Indian from a Muslim family so I’m pretty much up to speed on these things. But I look like a very fair Indian, so often people get confused about my ethnicity thinking I’m full European.

——————————————

Im a salesperson and control the media of a boutique that is part of a restaurant and it’s a small place so sometimes I just wander around when the boutique is empty and get mistaken as a server. We get super busy sometimes so I help out the servers. 

One day, this lady (I’ll call her CL for crazy lady) walks in with her friend and before she sits starts FLICKING her fingers at servers and yelling for someone to serve her. It was a hectic day because it was one of our public holiday (It was actually Prophet Mohammed’s birthday) so I got two menus and greeted them waiting for their drink orders. 

CL just spits her and her friend’s drink order at me (had to wash my face numerous times afterwards), then proceeded to ask about some of the dishes. This was our brunch time so we were still doing full on breakfast meals with bacon and such. 

She asks which dishes have pork and I point them out but also offer to remove any of the ‘bacon’ from the dishes. CL looks at me like Im the stupidest thing on Earth saying, “I asked about pork not bacon, you stupid uneducated white girl.” Now was my turn to look at her like wtf, I then looked at CL’s friend who just had this defeated look on her face. 

I explained to her that bacon is from a pig, and that it’s essentially a form of pork so therefore not allowed for her. I know this because I’ve had my Muslim cousins whine to me about not having bacon. She started getting pretty upset at me and yelled at me, “I know more about my religion than you stupid white girl! Fuck off and get my bacon”. 

At this point I pretty much give up, it’s getting busy and I’m turning heads to our table. I can’t afford to lose this job, so I comply. Especially with CL’s request for EXTRA bacon. I tell the cooks and servers who were watching the whole ordeal and so we’re all trying to stifle our laughter and groans behind the counter. 

I serve CL and her friend’s food, CL ordered our oriental breakfast which has everything and was topped with heaps of bacon scattered across the plate (She looked very happy) and her friend had the same but without any bacon and was looking apologetically to me the whole time. I was ready to leave it be and go serve another table when CL started telling me off saying that I didn’t listen to her on how to do her bacon (she didn’t even tell me at all bloody hell) and that I should really take feedback from customers like her and post it on our Facebook page so people know how we are. 

I was pretty pissed off at CL and didn’t want to yell because I knew I’d get fired so I did the next best thing- (honestly I think I only thought of this after reading so many stories on here) I agreed with her, saying that yes we should take her thoughts into consideration on our FB Page. So since I’m the media person for both the boutique and restaurant, I ask if I could take a photo of her eating lunch and post her feedback as an official post on our page. She looked over the moon at the thought of publicity and readily agreed to it. The friend just excused herself and moved away from the photo, I don’t know if she knew what I was thinking or... 

Anyways, I take CL’s photo, add her comments and get her FB tag so she’s tagged in the photo. However when I was getting ready to post it, I added a caption; “On Prophet Mohammed’s birthday, this lovely customer came in and ordered our oriental breakfast with EXTRA bacon. We pride ourselves on giving the customers exactly what they tell us they want!” 

Needless to say- the comments of shock and horror on the post by her family and friends at the pork were endless and I eventually got a message from her to take it down saying that she didn’t want it up anymore for personal reasons. 

Be nice to your servers and know what you’re allowed to eat before you preach in our faces about us being uneducated about things. 

—— 

Summary; A lady came into the restaurant saying she can’t eat pork because she’s Muslim but orders bacon. I try to explain that it’s pork but I get yelled at for being uneducated. She complains about the food again, saying that we should take our customers feedback more seriously on our social media so I maliciously complied. Upon her agreement, I took her photo and tagged her on our official restaurant page whilst adding about how much bacon she wanted. The backlash she received from the local Muslim community got her to message me to take it down for ‘personal reasons’. 

EDIT: I just want you guys to know that I did apologise to her about the whole ordeal. I said that I was rash and should have been better at controlling my anger at her. I apologised because I was genuinely sorry for putting her out there like that and I’m usually not a malicious person.
Last month, my daughter's middle school English teacher asked her students to write a haiku to review for a vocabulary test. The haiku had to utilize at least one of their vocab words. The teacher also gave them another, specific instruction, remarking that the students were NOT allowed to end their haikus with the word "refrigerator," which is a popular joke in haiku circles as the word contains five syllables.

So my daughter came up with this little gem:

&#x200B;

*Refrigerator*

*I circumvented the rule*

*Haha microwave*

&#x200B;

I eventually stopped laughing long enough to wipe away my prideful tears and give her a hug. (Circumvent was one of their vocabulary words.)

Her teacher just laughed and said "That's very clever" in a slightly annoyed tone. She received full credit on the assignment.My very first job was working fast food, at Wendy's. I was 16, and most of my coworkers were also teenagers. There was always work to be done ("if you have time to lean, you have time to clean"), but working afternoons/ evenings with a bunch of teens, there was also plenty of fucking around. 

Work wasn't the greatest, but it wasn't really that bad either; it was tolerable. Then we got a new manager. This guy was in his 40s, and he was a lifer. He was super strict, and was not about having fun at work at all. Unfortunately, I quickly became his favorite work vessel, because I was easier to control than some of my coworkers. He leaned heavily on me, to pick up the slack that the others left. It got real old, real fast. Why should I work more than everybody else, for the same pay? Why should I be stuck doing more tasks than my coworkers, who get to continue to goof off? 

I voiced my concerns to the manager, but nothing changed. He was usually busy hiding in the office, with the mirrored glass window, just watching everybody. He'd only surface on occasion to tell me to work harder, and give everybody else a free pass. Eventually, I had enough. 

One day, I marched in to his office, and demanded that either I get a raise, or for him to hold everybody else to the same standards. He didn't go for that. I told him to consider that conversation my two weeks notice then. He said he needed that in writing. I ripped a sheet of paper out of a notebook on his desk and wrote some along the lines of: 

This is my two weeks notice. 
- Name

I walked outside his office, spit on the paper, and stuck it to his mirrored glass window. He could look at it all he wanted that way. I felt amazing. 

For the next two weeks, the manager kept letting me know that it wasn't too late to change my mind about quitting. He kept alluding to a raise, but never actually offered it.

Update: 
Wow! I never imagined so many people would enjoy my quick story. It makes me happy reading all the comments from people with similar stories. 
For the doubters, yes, this was my personal experience. I started some time in fall 2006, and quit in summer 2007.
Also, I am aware that two weeks notice is a courtesy, not a necessity. It just seemed wrong to me to not give notice, and two wrongs don't make a right.This happened 12-15 years ago, my ex boss was a bully (I took the official route and he lost his job in the end for breaking pregnancy laws) 
Around this time I kept getting really bad ear infections in my ears. I was told I can still work, important to note that I’m Deaf and wear 2 hearing aids, with out them I hear nothing. 

So he had me on a freezing snowy day stand outside running a stand about the environmental work that was due to be carried out, I had a bad ear and a cold already. By the end of the day I couldn’t feel my feet (steel toe cap boots work made us wear) boss told me it was my fault not drinking hot drinks (I only like cold drinks) 

Next day was Saturday, and I spend the day in the warmth of my flat trying to get better, but my ear was killing me. So I called our out of hours NHS and told me to go to the treatment Centre. Was seen and got told that I had a very nasty ear infection and gave me antibiotics. Woke up Sunday to my ear twice it’s normal side, burning, and half my face numb, I knew I was in a bad way. 

Drove myself to A&E at 1am, all they could do at the time was give me pain meds and make me comfortable until the ear specialist comes in on the Monday morning. Several hours go by and by then I can’t move my jaw, my ear is swollen shut. My ear was so badly infected that I was admitted onto the ward with a drip of antibiotics, a wick in my closed ear (I passed out when they did this) to put antibiotics in the ear and a morphine pump. 

Anyhow after 2 weeks I was back at work in front of my Boss and the HR lady as I had gone over my 10 sick days allowance. Um I was in hospital for over a week, doesn’t matter and you should still come into work if you have a bad ear. 

I said I do, but if both flares up I can’t come in. (I work outside with the public) HR lady said that be fine we give you office work, phone duties. 

I said you want me to come in when I can’t wear my hearing aids and do phone duties. 

Both her and the boss said yes. 

Okay fine then. Signed the paperwork to say that we had this chat etc. 

I was angry as I felt he had caused me to be in hospital and they don’t just keep you in for the sake of it. 

Sure enough the following month both ears flared up and I couldn’t wear both hearing aids, it was scary for me to leave my home not being able to hear but I had to follow their rules. 

Got into the office, told boss my ears gone bad again but I’m here. 

(I was told later I had shouted) Boss said something (I decided not to lip read, I wasn’t making it easy for him) I kept shouting “what you say?” A few times and then he wrote go to the desk over there and deal with any phone queries. 

“Okay!”

So I sat there, staring at the phone waiting for it to ring. After a couple of hours, the phone hasn’t rung, Boss came over and started talking to me, red in the face. 

I looked at him puzzled and said “what did you say?” 

He look so angry and wrote down ‘why aren’t you answering the phone?’ 

I looked back at him and said “well, I haven’t heard it rung yet!”

Swear he had steam coming out of his ears, I got sent back home as I was a ‘health and safety risk!’  Apparently the phone had been ringing off the hook the whole time but of course I couldn’t hear it ringing.


Seriously asking a deaf person who can’t wear their hearing aids to do phone duties!!! 

Thankfully only had one more hospital induced ear infection since and strangely after having my tonsils removed after way too many tonsillitis, I haven’t had one ear infection.I was in my first semester of college working at my first full-time job. I was taking phone calls one day, when I received a phone call that went something like this:

Me: “Hello, thank you for calling-“

Person: “Hello, I am calling to complain. Your office provided dentures for my grandmother and you charged her far too much for them!”

Me: “I’m sorry about that, but this isn't...”

“But nothing! How can you possibly treat an elderly person this way! You clearly took advantage of her and-“

“Excuse me, if I can say something real quick-“

“No! Do. Not. Interrupt. Me. I have something to say to you people! You should be ashamed of yourselves...”

So, I did as they asked. I didn't interrupt. This continued for a solid 45 minutes. They laid into me HARD. Very upset about the way that their grandmother was treated. They were fully justified, I might add. She was treated horribly and was clearly taken advantage of with her procedure.

They come to the end of their rant:

“...I will be reporting your office for your behavior. What do you have to say for yourself?”

“Well, I am terribly sorry for how your grandma was treated. That’s horrible and nobody should take advantage of the elderly that way. But I’m afraid you have the wrong number. That's what I was trying to tell you.”

“...”

“...”

“...This isn’t \[Dental Practice\]?”

“No. This is \[Business\]. We build websites for dental practices. \[Dental Practice\] is our client.”

Big reveal: I was a tech support agent for a dental website company! Somehow, this person got our phone number from the practice’s website and, since they were deafened to rage, they wouldn’t listen when I tried to inform them. They apologized for wasting my time and wished me a good day. I thanked them for the apology, wished them an equally good day and had a very good laugh with my coworkers once they hung up.

Edit: a lot of comments mention something to the effect of: "Why didn't you just hang up?" and to that I say:

1. If I hung up, they were just going to call back again, but angrier
2. It was very entertaining
3. Since I knew they had a wrong number, I didn't really have to pay close attention to what they were saying, so I just kind of took a 45-minute break and browsed the internet
4. At least I didn't have to talk to an actual angry customer for 45 minutes

And for those who insinuate it was bad work ethic or a waste of company time to spend 45 minutes on a wrong number call... well, yeah. You're not wrong. Welcome to customer service. I also used to take smoke breaks just to get away from angry customer phone calls and emails. And I don't smoke.So once upon a time I was living in a (not legal) basement apartment of an old Hungarian woman's house. I was poor, the place was cheaper than what was around, so I took it. 


How bad could it be?


She. Was. Horrific. 


At first she was an okay landlady, but then things started to turn. First I noticed that things were, off when I got home from work. Ever get that feeling someone was in your room? That. 

So I asked her if she'd been in there and she denied it. Then I set up a camera and caught her on camera. Asked her again and she denied it, saying she's never go in my apartment without telling me. Then I showed her the video and she got mad at ME. 

I worked nights. One time she came in during the day time and I was there. In bed, naked under the sheets. I woke up when she came in and asked if I could help her, she said no and left. 

After that she would call me "lazy boy" when she saw me, assuming I didn't work since it was at night. 

Things kept getting worse. She'd sometimes shut off the water when she thought I was using too much or when I refused to share my wifi password with her other tenant. 

Finally, one night I had some friends over for a birthday. There was six of us total, it was around 11pm and trust me when I say, we were not being loud at all. Literally just hanging around the coffee table eating cheesecake talking and laughing. 

She came into my apartment and started yelling that I was having a loud party with too many people in the middle of the night! She actually came and grabbed my shirt telling me everyone had to leave. 


Oh hell no. That was it. 


So I pushed her off of me and the police were called. 

That Monday, she left a really poorly written eviction notice on my door.. seriously, hand written. Telling me to be out by Saturday by midnight. 

Here's the MC.


By 11:59pm that Saturday, I had all my stuff in the U-haul. My friends and I were just working on bagging up the trash and other stuff for the dump, when she came in and yelled at me that it was past midnight. 

No problem. I got up, and left. Leaving a huge pile of junk in the bedroom and storage room. Easily 2 pickup trucks worth of crap I wasn't taking. 

She actually called my father, who was my emergency contact on my application to tell me it cost her $400 to haul it all away and that I owed her money. He blocked the number. 


THE END

Bonus story

She was showing the apartment when I was still living there. She didn't tell me. So when she lead two strangers in the daytime, waking me up again, I stood up. Fully naked, full staffed and said I wouldn't rent from her if it were the last apartment in town. The couple quickly left.Hi all, This is my first submission to the sub and I hope you enjoy it! There’s a tl:dr at the bottom. 

Context: 
This happened a few years ago, I was 18 and working as a receptionist for a  community nursing service. As the youngest in the team by a long shot (the average age of employees being around 55-60), I was usually the one responsible for the “Computer Stuff”, mostly just simple things - nothing a quick google couldn’t solve. The other staff members were wonderful, and I learnt a lot from working with them. 

Except for the Assistant Manager, Karen. This woman was the bane of my existence, she was 75+, recently came out of a 15 year retirement as a receptionist, and was armed with a certificate in Business Management from a 4 hour online course. She refused to use basic computer skills such as Word or email, stating that she didn’t need to learn them again when she had others to do it for her - namely me. In a 5 hour shift, I would spend 3 hours just fielding her tasks. Needless to say, this came along with all the fun personality traits that make a ‘Manager from Hell’. 

Malicious compliance:
At the start of my shift, I receive an email from Karen asking me to print the attached files, one was a pdf and the other an mp4. So, assuming she meant just the pdf, I take the printed copy to her. 

This is roughly how the exchange went:

Karen: Why do you only have one file, I sent two?

Me: ...you want me to print an mp4?

Karen: Isn’t that what I asked? A monkey could do your job, and probably better at that (here, I’m pretty sure she laughed at her own joke). 

Me, desperate: Look, I don’t think you understand - 

Karen: Don’t try and teach me, don’t forget I did your job for 20 years and now, I could have you fired. 

Already over it, and ready for some malicious compliance, me: Okay, well I’ve never printed this type of file before, so it might take a while -

Karen interrupts: I don’t care how long it takes, I’m your boss and I’ve told you to do this. Once it’s done you can move on to the other jobs. 

I’m grinning ear to ear at this point, I get back to my desk and send her an email summarising our conversation and explicitly clarifying she wanted me to print an mp4, to which I got a snarky reply. Perfect. 

I spent the next 4-5 hours, pausing the video every 2-3 frames, screenshotting it, pasting it to a word document and printing. The administrative tasks piled up, not that Karen noticed because she mostly spent her time reading magazines/talking on the phone. I felt bad as this placed an extra load on the other receptionists; however since Karen was universally hated, they gave me their blessings. 

Once complete, I took about 100 pages carefully held with clips to her desk and sweetly told her that I’d printed the other file. She looked smug, until she saw what was in front of her. Page after page of almost the same picture as the man moves through the video, some slightly blurry, all in full colour. She was furious, to say the least, but I was 1 hour overtime on my shift and Karen knew that would already cause her some issues, so she let me leave. Though, I knew it wasn’t over yet. 

As expected, I get called into HR for a meeting the following week, where they accused me of wasting company time and not complying with management. I explained the situation in detail, and showed them the email (including her awful reply). I also showed them a few more emails and texts where Karen used some particularly ‘descriptive’ words to insult our staff members, including the very HR rep taking my interview. 

Turns out, this was the straw that broke the camel’s back as Karen had multiple reports against her from other staff members, and she had been driving HR insane with her own complaints. She lost her job the following week. 

The best part is that this happened on a Sunday, where I got double pay. I took some of that sweet overtime cash and brought in cupcakes to work once Karen was gone. I said it was an end of week treat, but we all knew what we were celebrating. The HR rep seemed to particularly enjoy hers. 


TLDR: Boss made me print a video. Complied, used a whole shift and overtime. Got called into HR which added to the case against my boss. She was fired within a week. Cupcakes to celebrate.


^**Edit:** ^^thank ^^^you ^^^^for ^^^^^the ^^^^^^gold ^^^^^^and ^^^^^^awards!I was working for a child care center while I was in college. We staggered staff in and staggered them out so that we were always fully staffed when all the kids were there and they all had various arrival and leaving times. So staff could be scheduled to arrive anytime between 7:30am and 2pm. 

I worked M-F 8:30-4:30. Even though my schedule was fairly permanent, I would check the schedule that got sent out every Sunday evening (it would always get sent between 6 and 9 pm and it would be for that current week so we had less than 24 hours notice for our weekly schedule, a hot mess express if you ask me but I’m not in charge and my schedule is set so I don’t raise too much hell about it). 


One week I get the schedule and it says that my arrival time is 9am instead of my usual 8:30 for the entire week. I figure they’re just trying to make minor cuts and they really like having everyone under the full time threshold so I just assumed they were barely  cutting my hours so they could get away with it. No big deal, but I knew that most of the kids arrived at 9 so I would need more time to set up. I get there at 8:45 on Monday and set up quickly and go about my day, I do a little prep Monday night so I don’t have as much to prep In the morning. So on Tuesday I get there at 8:55 clock in and begin my day. 


My week goes on like that with me prepping in the evening and getting there at 8:55 until Thursday when my boss calls me into the office and reprimands me for my “tardiness.” I tell her the schedule tells me that my arrival time is 9 so I’m actually arriving early everyday. She says that the schedule says 9 just to indicate that you are the morning shift but if you’re scheduled for classroom time, you need to arrive at 8:30 regardless of what the schedule says so you have time to set up the classroom. I don’t agree with this at all and it’s obviously not true because not everyone arrives at 8:30 anyway, there has to be more distinction than just morning crew versus afternoon crew on the schedule. But she admits that she’s “partially to blame for the mixup” and doesn’t turn it into a formal write up. 


I start arriving at 8:30 every morning (just like I had been before the week in question, I’m not a late person). One week I was going to be scheduled for the 1-6:30 shift because another coworker needed to switch with me and we had both agreed to this. So the schedule comes out and says my arrival time is 1pm. I arrive at exactly 8:30, clock in, and sit my pretty butt in the office chair, and wait. Well eventually my boss notices that I’m just hanging out in the office and asks what I’m doing. I say “well I was told to arrive promptly at 8:30 no matter what the schedule says, so here I am.” She says “we don’t need you here for the morning so you can clock out and come back when your shift begins.” Um nope. I say “you can find a task for me to do until my shift at 1 starts or I can sit here, but I’m staying clocked in. You were the one that said that I have to be here at 8:30 no matter what. I’m just following your instructions.” 

I had to deep clean the entire school until my shift actually started, but it was so worth it because I still got paid for the whole day and my boss had to admit to me that she was full of it. Watching her try to backtrack was the funniest thing that’s ever happened to me!Hey Reddit, this is my first post and its my BF's story.

So, a bit of back story, my BF's boss is a bit of a dick, but unfortunately, he's also his uncle.

My bf works in I.T. He handles a lot of complaints regarding servers and general IT stuff. For the past three years he has worked overtime for free. (It's difficult to say no to family). He answers his personal phone and has to drive long distances to fix problems clients are having, sometimes at 10 at night. 

Recently, we've been trying to save money to make a life together. So my bf decided to ask the boss to finally get paid for all the overtime hours he will be working from now on. The boss is livid. He states that he will not pay my bf overtime money and he shouldn't ask again and that he should be grateful for his job. He concludes by saying that there is NO SUCH THING AS OVERTIME IN THIS BUSINESS!!

&#x200B;

Can you see where the malicious compliance comes in yet? ;)

So my bf now does not answer any calls after 5 or before 8. The boss now has to take all those calls and drive the ridiculous distances himself. BF gets called in and is asked why he isn't picking up his phone because the clients are getting really upset at him.  Bf's answer "I'm sorry, but you said.... there is no such thing as overtime".

&#x200B;

I've never been more proud!! My mother hated my first girlfriend. I had actually been planning to become a Catholic priest (and therefore to be celibate) when I was in high school, so my mother saw my first girlfriend as having ruined my life's plan when we first got together. Now naturally, my girlfriend and I wanted to spend as much time together as possible at that early stage of our relationship, but my mother did everything in her power to try to limit this. As such, one day I asked if it was alright for my girlfriend to come over to our house, but my mother said "no, not today". I was not particularly happy about this, especially because it was so obvious she was just being vindictive and had no good reason as to why. So I pressed her about it and eventually, after much discussion, she agreed that my girlfriend "could come over tomorrow, but not today". Again, this was vindictive because she knew that neither of us had as much free time the next day as we did on the day in question, so it would have meant way less time together for us. Nevertheless, I agreed to my mother's offer. 

So right on the stroke of midnight, my girlfriend arrived at my house and I brought her inside. Immediately my mother called me away into the kitchen and started getting very intensely angry that I hadn't done as I was told because she said that she couldn't come over until tomorrow...to which I replied while gesturing to the clock "but mother, it *is* tomorrow."I run an anime/geek store and we are really lenient with pre-orders. We used to not require a deposit to make an order, and in case you needed more time to pick-up an item, all you had to do was ask. We could also hold the items for as long as needed in our storage if you wanted to gather a lot of items so you could save on trips/shipping.

Back on February, Funko released a special edition [Vinyl POP of Naruto Hokage](https://gameskeysaustralia.com/image/cache/catalog/data/2020/Funko/AA47097-500x500.png). This one in particular had a 1 in 6 CHASE variant that ended reaching up [to a resale value of $130](https://www.hobbydb.com/marketplaces/poppriceguide/catalog_items/naruto-hokage-glow-in-the-dark). But the way I do pre-orders is that, if you order 6 of the same piece, you are guaranteed a chase. But if you only order 1, you still get a 1 in 6 chance of getting the chase, I just mix them up in random boxes and do a public stream raffle on social media, so everyone knows who won the chase, and I get good publicity that way

A client ordered just one and left $5 as deposit, the piece was $15. This particular client won the riffle (Along several other clients), but he wasn't that interested in picking it up or paying for the rest of it. I send him a message letting him know that he had won the special variant and had a week to pay it or he will lose his pre-order. At first he was angry because he wanted the normal version, no this "yellow thing", but we explained we could change it if he wanted but that this one was far more valuable. He said he asked his son and his son wanted it anyway, but asked for more time to pay, so we gave him one more week. Then he asked for another week. And another.

&#x200B;

Then we had to close the store for a time for, you know, 2020 reasons,, and we told him we had to close but we could still schedule an appointment to give him his item or wait until the worst passed. He never answered.

Eventually we were able to re-open the store with regulations in place and send him another message telling him we can save it for as long as needed in this strange times. He still didn't answer the messages, but at this point he arrived at the store and demanded for his money back, citing how we were on the middle of what was going on (Fair) and he couldn't waste money on frivolous plastic (Also fair). I asked him if he was sure, and even showed him the price the figure was selling for (at that point in time the chase figure was selling closer to $150, and he just had to pay retail price, so about $10 more for it).

He said he was sure I had made up the numbers, that he had ordered the figure for his son but he didn't deserve it (harsh) and just wanted, no, demanded his money back.

I just said "Fine, I'll give you your money back. Also, I'll just put this figure out for sale." He just said "whatever, just give me my money" I made a point to grab a post-it note (That I use to put prices to not damage the box), write in big black letters "$90 bucks, last one", and put it on the glass window that leads to the street. I could see him turn his eyes while I did this.

&#x200B;

While my employee was giving him his 5 bucks back and giving him a receipt, a young man knocked the door, I gave him some cleaning goo, checked his temperature and let him in. He immediately asked to buy the Naruto CHASE figure. The angry man eyes went wide open over his mask as I picked the POP and guided the young man to the desk, where he handed me the bills one by one.

&#x200B;

The angry man stood there shocked as the younger man was gushing about how hard to get that figure was and how he was getting it for half the price other places where asking, and in such perfect condition too. I couldn't have had a better reaction even if I paid him for it, lol. The young man completed his purchase and leaved as fast as he came. The angry man looked at me, almost as if accusing me of taking advantage of him.

I just said: "Well, you got your money back, I'm happy you are happy, if you need anything else please let me know, and stay safe out there."

The man just didn't have much else to say and left. Kind of a small and silly thing to feel good about, but 2020 hit us so hard that any unexpected profit was cause for celebration, so we celebrated that good sale with some (instant) ramen, Naruto style.

TL:DR- Man ordered a toy, got lucky and got the rare valuable variant, refuses to buy it even when told of its value, demanded money back, as he is given his money back he gets to see it sell for 6 times what he was going to pay.

Edit: Thanks for all the kind words! My store is in México and I really appreciate everyone asking me how to support it, I didn't mean to self-promote and I'm not 100% if it's against the rules, so I won't, lol, and also I can't ship to the US right now due to the situation (I'm not american so I can't cross the border since I'm not essential, also I'm trying to go out as little as possible). I want to answer all of you directly but I just can't!My dad’s ex girlfriend had a wrist tattoo and recently got a job. She was told to cover up the tattoo because it ‘violates God’s image of a woman’. She tried covering it up with makeup but they said that the different tone of the makeup made it more obvious. They told her that she had to find a way to cover up the tattoo cleanly or she would be fired. Keep in mind she works in a building where she is never seen by the customers. She just answers phone calls and writes messages for people. 

So she tried putting a bandage on it. They said that made the area look like she had tried to slit her wrists and told her to find another way. So finally she comes to me with this problem. 

I’m very petty. And all for taking things literally. 

So I ask her, do you have any bracelets you could wear to cover it up? She brings out this box full of the noisiest metal bracelets I’ve ever seen.

So the next day she goes to work and both of her wrists are COVERED in these bracelets. You can hear her coming from a mile away. 

Her boss told her she could expose the tattoo.

Edit: I should clarify, this is about an ex of my fathers. This happened about 3 years ago.

Edit 2: For those of you wondering, the tattoo in question looked kinda like [this](https://i.pinimg.com/236x/2b/8e/fd/2b8efdea99c751738b853c6b997b8508--rain-tattoo-umbrella-tattoo.jpg) with just some slight differences.

Edit 3: Last one I promise! I’m reading through all the comments and I’m loving all the civil discussion and trading of knowledge and research that this post has generated! Honestly learned so much just by reading the comments 🥰(Cross post from r/talesfromyourserver , someone mentioned it also belonged here, so enjoy!)

(Excuse formatting, mobile post!) 
About a year back, I worked in a family restaurant, it was a Saturday night and we were pretty busy, with all tables reserved, but it was all under control. I was hosting, and we had a family of 8 due in for a birthday. 
As I was making my way back to my station, a group of 8 people walked in, (for the purpose of this story, the big idiot will be referred to as 'BI' and I shall be 'me') the exchange went as follows:

BI  'table for 8'

Me 'No problem, Sir, do you have a reservation?'

BI 'No, I don't think so'

Me 'Ok, well I'm very sorry, but we are fully booked for tonight, but I can take a reservation for another night if you wish?'

BI 'No, if I wanted to eat here another night, I would have come here another night'

My back got RIGHT up

Me 'I understand Sir, I do apologise. I'm afraid all our tables are reserved for tonight, but you're more than welcome to take a seat at the bar if you like, while you choose if you would like to go somewhere else?'

BI 'What about that table over there, (pointing to the birthday table) that's got 8 seats, we'll just sit there!'

Me 'Sorry, that table is reserved for another family, they're due here any minute, if you wait at the bar, we have a 30 min policy, so if the family doesn't turn up, you can take their table'

BI 'Well none of these empty tables have 'reserved' signs on them, so how are we meant to know? Can you not push those two together for us? (Pointing to two tables that weren't even in the same area!)' 

Big Idiot then spots my manager walking past, and grabs her arm to speak to her (which went down about as well as a fart in a lift!)

BI 'EXCUSE ME, there is a table over there that we would like to sit at, but this GIRL here won't let us sit there, we travelled half an hour to get here, and I'm not happy! They don't have any signs on to say they are reserved, so I don't understand!'

My manager, without missing a single beat says 'I'm sorry about that Sir, please wait a second while I sort this out, I won't be long'

Big Idiot is looking pretty pleased with himself at this point, puffs out his chest and gives me the smuggest look he's probably given anyone. Until he spots my manager walking out, with the little reserved signs in her hand (our restaurant used to be self seating), she walks over to my station, checks the diary, and walks over to each empty table, and places a sign on each one, and walks back over to the station.

Manager 'I'm sorry our system confused you Sir, I have now rectified it, I see we have have a free table tomorrow evening, at the same time if you would like to come back then?'

Big Idiot turned the most putrid shade of puce you've ever seen in your life, and stated he will sit at the bar and wait to see if the table cancels, and as they're walking, the birthday table of 8 walks in.

Big Idiot huffs, and beckons his family to leave, at which point, my manager calls over 'If you would like that table for tomorrow, please give us a call, have a nice evening!'

Oh sweet, sweet Karma...

TL;DR Idiot thought he could bully his way to a table, my manager took matters into her own handsBeing Friday the 13th, while waiting for my tattoo, I was reminded of a situation a few years ago with my friend Liz who's my primary artist and an especially Karen type lady and her Kyle esque boyfriend (double k for both) who came in to get cheap ass tattoos.
 
I watched this whole thing go down but wasnt involved per say.
 
So Liz was doing a quick custom job on me and my buddy Chris (yes we got matching tattoos, Star Wars Yin/Yang for those wondering) I went 2nd so liz and I could catch up. Double K bypassed the massive line out the door and down the stairs and walked straight up to the artist area to try to skip the line. This was shut down pretty quick and they were told there's a huge wait in front of them and they'll have to go to the back of the line. 
 
Well Double K didnt like this one bit and started to throw a fit. Like legit tried to pull me out of the chair because "hes getting what he wants and I was here first", she wasnt, i was there at 8 am to help Liz load in OJ and Doughnuts and the 10 people in line before me knew this too. 
 
Well one of the artists just finished and said "I'll take you two". We were all kinda flabbergasted by this but Liz got this big shit eating grin on her face so I knew something was up. I figured the dude would do a terrible job, go too deep, use the wrong needle, something to just royally fuck up their day but he did none of this. He pulled his flash sheet and said "pick one". Karen picked something and he asks where she wants it. Back of her ankle, so dude gets to work free handing it while Double K keep looking at the line like they won something.
 
Well they did win something, the smallest tattoo I've ever seen. This thing was no bigger than a dime, from 10 feet away all I could see was a little black spot on her leg that looked more like a mole than a tattoo. Double K lost it. Screaming about him assaulting her and forcing her to get a tattoo and they're gonna call the cops and all that. Then they tried to skip out without paying. They were rather impolitely informed that theft of service is a felony and that cops are only 10 minutes away. They tried to pay up the $13 but that's where the guys brilliance really shone through. 
 
His sheet said "Custom" at the top. All custom tattoos were $31. Not only did this lady have a very tiny, and very intricately detailed tattoo, she only had a $50 on her and they had a big ass sign at the register that said simply "NO CHANGE". Double K ended up paying the shop minimum anyway, but she got her tattoo ahead of the line.I live in a very quiet suburban neighborhood with lots of active neighbors (joggers, bikers, dog walkers, baby strollers, kids playing ball in the streets, etc). The speed limit is 25mph, but when I see lots of foot traffic on the sidewalks, I bring it down to 15mph or even 10mph if I see a big group of kids playing in the street. 

There’s this sweet group of kids who play basketball in the middle of the street eight doors down from my home. When they see cars approaching, they move to the curb and wait for the cars to pass before resuming their game. One day I was driving home from work and I saw the kids out playing, and their mother was on the front lawn talking with another adult. I slowed down to 10mph and went to the complete opposite side of the street as I crept by.

A little while later she knocked on my door and complained about “how fast” I was driving and that I could have harmed her precious children. I said, “The speed limit is 25mph, and I was going 10mph. How much slower do you want me to go??” She said “I don’t care, just slow down or else I’m going to call the police! I have a doorbell camera so I can see you every time you drive by!” Okay crazy lady, whatever you say!

The next day, the kids were outside playing in the street again. I slowly approached, came to a full stop, and then I took my foot off the brakes and let the car crawl at 1mph. The kids stared at me all confused as it took me an entire minute to pass through their makeshift basketball court.

I continued to do this a few more times until one day the mother came and knocked on my car window as I was crawling by. I lowered my window and asked if there was a problem. She said “Why are you going so slow? Are you stalking my children?!?” I said “No, of course not. You demanded that I slow down, so I am!” And I rolled up my window and went on my way. She comes banging on my door again and says “Don’t get smart with me! Now you’re going TOO slow!” I said “Are you saying that going 10mph is okay now? Because if you don’t like it, you can call the police.” She huffed and crossed her arms and stomped off my porch.Apparently this happened when I was about 3 years old, but my mother has held it over my head for the last 20 years.

My mom was on the phone with my grandmother and I wanted to get her attention for something. I did what any 3 year old would do and tugged on her leg and called "Mommy" out to her. She gave me an annoyed look and kept on with her conversation. Whatever it was I needed it must have been really important and I kept at it. After a few more tries, she eventually shouted at me "Stop calling me mommy!!"

From that moment on, my first little malicious compliance switch went off in my head, and I only called her Mom or Mother from then on. She was always heartbroken for years after this and often brought it up. I was her only kid and it embarrassed her to no end being called mother in front of other people when I was so young. And to rub salt into the wound, I still call my Father "Daddy" to this day.So just a short dose of malicious compliance from my previous job where I was a bartender.


Too frequently for me to count, I'd have customers come up to order shots or a mixer, and say "surprise me". I used to try and give them interesting shots, some more obscure stuff that don't get ordered frequently, and the  the customer would then complain that the drink tasted awful. So I started taking a different approach to these 'surprise' drinks.


Every time a customer came up and said "surprise me" I would give them a nice glass of water. Needless to say, they were surprised. Does this qualify?

This happened a few years ago.
I was a manager/bouncer at a very busy local bar and it was my job to cut people off and/or bounce them if needed.

I was in the process of cutting a woman off and she became very belligerent. Since this was also a karaoke bar she just so happened to be called to the stage while I was in the middle of cutting her off. She marches past me and stumbles onto the stage.
I have the karaoke host cut her music off and continue on to the next singer. 
I go to the stage and escort the lady off. To be clear I did not touch her at this moment. I’m a broad 5’9” woman and my boots add an inch and a half so this very short women complied rather easily UNTIL she continued to argue with me after the fact.
She didn’t want to leave and ended up punching me in the face. 
I put my arms around her -picked her up and headed towards the front door at which time she grabbed the protective glass cover on the host stand and shattered it all over the ground. 

Once she was outside she was yelling and screaming that I had assaulted her and threatened to call the police to have me arrested. I quickly grabbed a business card for her and said “our address is on the card just so you make sure you call the cops to the right place.”

They arrived and asked me who they needed to address. They arrested her. I’m certain they just put her in the drunk tank for the night.TL:DR: You shadow me, better keep up. BTW - I love the stairs.

As a tech of going on 30 years I've seen some stupid management directives. This one is one of my favorites.

Back in 2007 I worked for a large bank that is based in Atlanta and I worked in Richmond in a 28 story office tower. My primary job was desktop support and fixing phones. At that time I was very athletic, I moved fast all the time and hated to use the elevator. If I had to go less than 6 floors - I took the stairs. My boss didn't care for as a team we were the most efficient team in the company as far as # of tickets worked each week per tech. We worked smart, not hard.

So upper management in Atlanta decides one day to do a deep assessment on how ALL the techs in the bank did our job.  My team gets a visit from Atlanta one day in the form of a heavy set guy who says he will be shadowing us to see how we did our job. He was a bit of an condescending jerk too in his attitude. He even had a stop watch to time us. Now we all knew right away what was happening - Management wanted to outsource us so they needed to know what we did, how long it took and what we used so they could put a cost on it before soliciting for bids. Lets just say my team was not thrilled about it.

Now I decided to be a smart ass about this and my team knew what I had planned for this "event". I was told this overweight condescending jerk was to shadow us and time us. OK - he is going to have to keep up. Time for Malicious compliance.

**I ONLY used the stairs.**

Our lab was on the 20th floor. A typical morning for me would be like this: I'd run a desktop monitor ticket to the 6th floor, then go back to 20 to get my phone bag to go to lower level 1 to the IPX to hook up a phone then go to the 14th floor to test the phone then up to 22 to fix a printer then down to 7 to look at a laptop. Today - I'm ONLY doing the stairs so this guy was about to have a heart attack trying to keep up with me while I did my job. I took no pity on him and didn't even pay attention to him.  As far as I was concerned this jerk was assisting others in having my job eliminated. At some point I'd lost him in the stairwell. Later my boss says to me the guy was a bit mad for me taking the stairs but my boss told him - "That is how my tech works and he is one of my best. If you can't keep up - that is your problem." (To this day I have said she was the BEST boss I've ever had)

Later I find out what I did got back to upper management in Atlanta. They were pissed yet they could not punish me for I was doing my job and did it very well. The story also got around to other techs and they thought it was funny as hell what I did. 

In April 2008 we found out we were outsourced. Just like we knew it was going to happen. I no longer work there.

Edit: I'm doing quite well these days being a code developer and SF admin so I look at that experience as my cheese moved so I needed to find new cheese. If it didn't happen I would not be where I am now.This isn't my story, but it happened to some high school classmates of mine in the late 1990s. Unfortunately, I wasn't smart enough to be part of it. 

The AP Calculus class teacher had a tradition that held up for at least a decade, where, if you brought your college acceptance letter, you'd be invited to his Breakfast Club: essentially, instead of taking the math final exam for the year, he'd provide transportation to the local IHOP, buy everyone breakfast, and shoot the breeze together. 

The gesture was a popular and welcome one-- after all, these were the brightest kids in the school, the top 10%, including the valedictorian and the salutatorian, the captain of the debate team, and others. Taking a final exam when they were already assured their places in Ivy-league schools was a pointless formality, after all.

The year this story happened, however, there was a new teacher who made a big deal about how unfair the Breakfast Club was (funnily enough, her name was Karen). The school's vice principal came in and told the class that they would stay in the school with everyone else, and take the final exam, or else they'd face in-school suspension.

The AP Calculus teacher had his hands tied. So, on the day of the test, a Friday, the whole class came in and took their test, which consisted of a single question: What's your name? The students looked up to see a shit-eating grin on the teacher's face, and they quickly caught on: everyone filled in their papers, submitted them, and then they went off to IHOP. Perfect test scores for everyone!

By the time the weekend was over, the whole school knew the story, and Karen must've complained to the vice-principal once more, because he came and gave in-school suspension tickets for the entire class. 

It was truly an odd sight to see the school's geniuses file into the ISS room-- only to find their AP Calc teacher, who had volunteered for monitor duties, or swapped with the normal monitor, or something. And he had brought bags of bagels, cream cheese, whitefish spread, and butter for everyone serving suspension that day.

Mr Buckley, you're a legend!

EDIT : Forgot a detail.

EDIT2: Thanks for the awards, everyone! Hope you all have a great day!Years ago, I was working for a university as a secretary for a rather large department.  I was told by the chair to call everyone by their first name rather than the formal Dr. SoandSo.  I complied  and life went on with me using informal names and them doing the same for me.  However, about a year later, I called to Dr. Soandso in the next room to ask a question.  It was benign enough and still respectful using his first name.  Not long after, I received an email.  He addressed it to Rissilly and stated that I needed to call him Dr. Soandso and not to use his first name.  I knew this was a way to establish his superiority over me but I would not have it.  I may have been the secretary but I was still a human being who deserved respect too.

Here is where the malicious compliance came into play.  I wrote him an email back addressing him as Dr. Soandso.  I agreed to call him by his formal name but I insisted that he do the same to me.  I am no longer Rissilly but Mrs. Doe.  I copied the department chair and executive aide so all were in the loop.  He went to the chair to complain but she sided with me.  And so it began.  From then on out, it was Dr. Soandso on every correspondence and when I spoke to him.  If he addressed me as Rissilly, I would remind him that I wanted to be addressed as Mrs. Doe and would not answer until he addressed me as such.  This really got on his nerve.  He did not want to be the only one to call me by the formal as it messed with his need for superiority over a peon.  

It only took less than a week before he wrote me again.  This time, it was to say to please call him Paul instead of Dr. Soandso.  No apology to me just a resounding white flag surrender.  I took it as a small win for the peons and proceeded to call him Paul. I worked in that department for 8 years and we never had another problem like this.

**On a side note, I always called him Dr. Soandso in front of and to the students, as most wanted to be addressed as such in their classes.

**Edit:  Several are stating that I am being petty and should have addressed him as Dr since he earned that title.  While I totally agree that he earned that title, he did not earn the right to treat me differently than others in the office staff just because I was low man on the office totem pole.  If all the others can address him by first name, I should have had the same courtesy.  If he insisted on the formal, so did I.Happened like 15 years ago at high school.

During breaks at school I'd be hanging around with my mates and there was this girl, nicknamed flea because she was small and annoying. She was quite the annoyance but we largely ignored her. One day it got too much and I poured my water bottle over her. Unfortunately there was a teacher course and she saw what happened. Cue me being sent to the principals office.

Principal was naturally rather unimpressed by my behaviour and told me to write an essay on what I'd done and why it was inappropriate indicating that I'd receive detention at the end of it. 

Now the MC instead of writing the one page essay requested, I wrote 3 pages, detailing the months of annoyance and abuse and how we were constantly trying to avoid her, even moving locations where we hung out. I detailed how she would jump on our backs trying to knock us off balance (causing us to fall several times), pull our hair and the pièce de résistance of the essay the dozens of times she tried to grab and kick our nuts. (I got really good at catching approaching feet with my thighs) 

I handed in my essay and waited for them to tell me how much detention I'd get. The principal came out of his office, said I was free to go and told the teacher to bring the girl in. She ended up getting detention, a call to her parents and she didn't bother us again.

Bonus story.

Similar vein. Another girl I poured drink on, this time red fizzy on white school uniform.

She was constantly stealing our hacky sack, so one day I saw her run for it as it fell. Stepped on it so she couldn't get it. She was trying to wrench it out from under my foot so I poured most of my can of red mirinda *slowly* on her back. Poured half my drink out before she ran away. Nothing came of that one. (although I figured out years later she actually liked me so screwed that one up)This is a story that was recently brought up again by my mom when she was recounting some really shitty racism she encountered when she first came to the United States.  I've heard this story a few times before but didn't think to share it anywhere else.  That is until I was made aware of this subreddit.  Enjoy.

It was the late 1980s in Los Angeles, California.  By this time my mom, a Japanese immigrant, had been living in the United States for ten years.  Although she could speak English well, she wasn’t fluent and preferred to speak Japanese with others from the local Japanese-American community.

One day, she and a friend were waiting to be seated at a restaurant on Beverly Boulevard.  As they chattered away in Japanese, a large shadow cast down upon them.  Looking up, they found Karen’s 1989 counterpart leering down at them.  

Mom couldn’t remember how the woman looked except for the look of pure contempt trying to work its way across facial muscles frozen by Botox.  

“You two,” Karen barked, “this is America!  Speak English.”

Startled, my mom and her friend made eye contact, unsure of what to do.  Encounters like this were, sadly, ones they had run into many times since they came to live in the USA.  They were not ones for confrontation.  Before, they couldn’t do anything while their bullies marched off, unpunished.  But then, as they made eye contact, a brilliant thing happened.

Mom likened the moment to their thought processes coming in sync together.  They had a shared idea that didn’t need any further elaboration or explanation.

“Masami, my dear, I do think the waiter ought to have shown up to escort us to our table by now,” Mom chimed in the poshest British accent she could muster.  “It’s frightfully rude to keep us waiting like this!”

“Yes, darling,” her friend replied, invoking her best impersonation of the Princess of Wales, “it is frightfully rude indeed!”  

As they continued to twitter away in their fake English accents, Karen began to slowly back away.  Her Botox face reddened and twisted itself in a visage as hideous as the Furies.  Realizing that she had just been outsmarted by two young women obsessed with British culture and celebrity, all she could do was storm off down Beverly Boulevard a defeated bully.

While there was no direct punishment, it was a story that my mom would continue to retell thirty years later.  It has always made me chuckle to myself, and I hope you enjoyed it too.

Edit: So there was a massive error on my part.  What I thought was Botox paralyzing Karen 1989's facial muscles would have most likely been a botched face lift.  For some reason, when I first heard my mom's story, I just immediately thought her face was that way due to a bad Botox injection.  

And holy shit this post blew up. I thought this was going to get buried.  Thank you everyone for your comments and awards.  But seriously, if you have money to burn please use your funds for a worthy cause.  This edit is coming in too late, but in the future even a small donation to organisations working to stop Asian hate crimes goes a long way.  Thank you.Reminded by this story: [https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/e7nzpp/watch\_your\_6\_year\_old\_without\_being\_asked/](https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/e7nzpp/watch_your_6_year_old_without_being_asked/)

Edit 2:  Wow, this exploded!  Please no more awards, give the money to a good charity instead.

I'm a big wargames player, and a local store used to buy tickets and rent a bus to bring people to a Games Workshop convention in Baltimore (Games Day).

The cost they charge covers the bus, and a one day ticket.  The only caveat is that kids under 18 (16 with a note and an older buddy) had to have at least one adult with them, who was also paying full entry, on the idea that the parent would stay with their child.  This was made explicit in following years.

Now the convention was located in the prime shopping area of the Baltimore waterfront, so every year there are a few parents who come to go shopping.  Usually though they have a few other parents who agree to watch the younger ones though.

The year this took place, my friend Hal and I ended up going.  Keep in mind that we're both in our mid 20's.

So as we go through our morning at the convention, we noticed that a familiar group of boys were following us.  When asked we were told:

"We should stay with you two because you're responsible"

None of their parents were in sight.  Or on the site as it turns out.  Most of them were cool, at least as cool as a 10 year old can be to someone in their mid twenties.  (Ages were from 8-16).  We ended up grouping them up with an older kid as an 'assistant buddy', and took them with us.  It's not like their parents were around for us to give them back after all, and we knew most of them from the shop.  Made sure they got turns at the different events (nothing at the convention could be called inappropriate), and generally made the best of it.  But hey, we were still a bit angry at having them foisted on us without being asked.

Well, it turns out none of them were given enough money for lunch.  They had their own money, which they spent on swag, but the cash their parents gave them wasn't enough to cover an actual lunch at the convention all.  It averaged about $3 per kid, when that was the price of a soda.

So, Hal and I took all of their lunch cash...and took them to Hooters.

Used that money, and some of our own to make sure the waitresses were extra attentive, and had them at their own table.  (We sat nearby to keep an eye on them)  Had them order whatever they wanted (that a kid could legally get, no booze of course), and between the restaurant being mostly dead, and the fact that Hal and I were tipping well, meant there were buxom scantly clad women around constantly, Almost a 2/1 ratio (kid to waitress).  They must have eaten five platters of wings before they were through, not including the ones they ordered but didn't like (usually because it was too spicy), those got bagged up into a cooler bag.  Told them it wasn't an issue, just order something they did like.

At the end we picked up the tab, but not before calling the trip organizer, Jim, to let him know what happened.  Was told it wouldn't be an issue, get him a receipt.  So we get the group scrubbed up, helped by the 'assistant buddies', and back to the convention, and finished the afternoon.

So we got back to the bus, and gave Jim the receipt for lunch, as well as any other necessary items, mostly beverages (gotta keep hydrated) that we bought them afterwards.   Just for them, not our bills.  (We paid for our lunch separately for example.)

The bus was set to leave at 6PM, and we were told be back for 5PM just in case, because the trip would leave, full or not.  So around 5:30 the parents start coming back in, only to meet Jim at the front.  He refused to let them on until they paid us back for watching their kids.  Told them that if they didn't pay by six, the bus would be leaving *and that they would still owe the tab*.

One parent asked for a delay to hit an ATM, and was granted permission to go.  Jim told the rest that the bus would leave when that dad got back.  A few other parents asked to see the bill, which is where they discovered that we took their 'precious angels' to Hooters...never mind the fact that we were at a convention about a game where people kill aliens with chainswords.  Jim informed them that if they had spoken to Hal and I before the convention started, then maybe they would have learned about our lunch plans, and could have watched their kids themselves.  Didn't shut up the few Karens in the group, but it reduced most of it to grumbling.

About this point the 1st dad came back, and asked his share, was told, and left most of the parents in shock.  They apparently didn't have that much cash still on them, and Jim wasn't going to give them any more time.  Pay up and board, or stay behind and pay later.  The 1st dad offered to lend money to the rest, (not a guy you want to owe money to from what I gather) with some accepting, the rest 'finding' the cash in purses and wallets.

Jim ended up handing us five hundred dollars.  Almost $200 for the chicken, the rest he charged them as a 'kid-taiment' fee.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Edit: thanks for the great conversations, and the piece of silver (four more and I'll have a whole electrum!).  Hitting bed now, but I'll try to answer any replies when I get up.

&#x200B;

Edit 2:  Wow, this exploded!  Please no more awards, give the money to a good charity instead.This one comes from my old man. He use to work at Ford Motor Company for many years and has many stories to tell of how insane it was to work there. However this one is short and sweet and I found it hilarious.

Anyways, as you might imagine, there were many hundreds of workers onsite and most drove to work in a variety of cars. Management and HR decided that it would be best for the company if as many people as possible drove a Ford. So they printed off a shit load of flyers that said "Why isn't this a Ford?" on it and put them on the windscreens of all the employee cars that were not Ford's. 

Que hundreds of flyers coming back to HR and management with the statement; "Because you don't fucking pay us enough" and various other offensive words written on them. Management decided that they didn't care what car their employees drove after that.I'd like to preface this post by saying that both my ex and child are in a very comfortable situation - money has never been an issue and my kid is well looked after, fed and generally very well cared for. At no risk whatsoever.  I have also never missed a child support payment, nor do I intend to.

&#x200B;

However...

&#x200B;

My ex and I have been at odds for a couple of years now about the custody of our kid. She's repeatedly lied to the court, made fake reports to the police, filed for restraining orders, the whole 9. None of this has worked - I've been battling it by being consistent and defending myself.

One of her tactics has been to set her lawyer after me to demand every penny for every little thing.

I started a new job back in January, with which came a nice pay rise. I told my ex of this, she did nothing - she would have received the increased child support payment following the next tax return anyway, so no bother. However, in the most recent conflict we had, her lawyer picked up on my "change in circumstances" and demanded that I adjust the child support payable with immediate effect, as opposed to at the end of the tax year. I am not legally obliged  to do this, however I comply - like I said, I'm happy to pay child support and it'll reduce conflict.

Now here's the kicker. I've just received my annual pay rise: 2.1%.

Given my ex's stance that I absolutely must inform her of any change in circumstances, I have sent these details over. However this equates to roughly only $2 a month difference. What this has done, however, is cost her about an hour's worth of time with her lawyer to calculate the difference, at roughly $300/hr.

The time to recoup this legal cost with increased child support?

12 and a half years.


Edit: a lot of comments about 2% being only $2 so I only pay $100. No. My annual salary has been increased by 2%, not my child support payments. It just so happens to work out to a $2 difference. Believe me, I pay a LOT more than $100 a month!Before you start, know that this is way longer than I expected. I tried to summarize as much as possible but there are a lot of relevant details. Before deciding if you want to read, this is my perspective of an incident when I was a teenager where my parent very much regretted grounding me.

So, this was back in the early 2000's, I was 17 and had very interesting parents, at least, my psychologists have said so. I got my license on my 16th birthday and became responsible for many of my parent's house management responsibilities. I dropped off bill payments (before online payments were a thing you had to drive to their offices if you didn't mail the checks in time), did the grocery shopping, and taxied my sibling to school and Dr. appointments and friend’s houses. I was completely on board as I loved driving and I'd always get an extra couple bucks in gas money. But I also spent the previous year homeschooling so I could commute to my mother's company an hour away and work for 40 hours a week...for free, so any freedom I got was like scraps at a starving dog. At that point, I pretty much was an adult, but was allowed to go to public school my senior year and reconnect with my old friends from grade school. It was kinda like being half teen, half adult with the entitlement of a teenager who thinks they’re an adult.

My family's dynamic was interesting to say the least, I was the oldest, my younger sister was the obvious favorite. Each developmental milestone was met with resistance and as I grew into new interests like makeup, music, and social activities, my parents insisted on getting the same things for both of us and giving us the same freedoms at the same time, she was 3 years younger. But, the rules were strict for me, but never enforced for her(I wasn’t allowed to date till I was 18, she was allowed to date at 14). They also brought her shopping all the time, but I was the responsible one, so they signed me up for free work with their social group to increase their social standing. My sister never had to work, but, "We're so proud of you, you’re the only child we can trust with the credit card." "Yeah, because I've been contributing to this household since I was 14, it's called child labor.”

I counted the days till I'd be free of my family, but while I was stuck, I found ways to have fun and I had a lot of friends. At 17, I was randomly given a curfew. I never actually had a curfew until that month and was used to being out until 2 or 3 am, but in their words, "You're going to be home by 10pm every night because you keep coming in late and waking us up when you brush your teeth." Yeah, neglect is kinda funny when you look back on it. I especially love that I was a teen who still brushed her teeth every day and it inconvenienced my parents enough to notice me. An additional background tidbit is that my younger sister had been caught with pot in our Evangelical Christian family's home. She was in the most trouble she'd ever seen, one month grounded, but they let her off the hook after 2 weeks. This occurred the month before the following story.

So within a month of my new curfew, I was 5, yes 5 minutes late getting home. I didn't rush home, I figured it wasn't a big deal, after all, I made their house run and I actually never got in trouble because aside from brushing my teeth too late, I pretty much was an adult with adult responsibilities. I could literally ask my mom to call me in sick for school because I didn’t feel like going…AND SHE WOULD! Boy was I wrong, they went nuclear. I was screamed at for an hour and grounded for 2 weeks from the car. Well, growing up in that house, it kind of rolled off my back, lol, but I was pretty angry that my punishment for being 5 minutes late was equal to my sister's punishment for storing and smoking drugs in our house. I also knew that my parents were about to regret this punishment. I have quite the mean streak when I'm pushed and I’m ashamed to admit, I loved torturing them at every opportunity. I know they were expecting me to beg for the car and apologize, but I did not. I knew exactly what was coming and how little they thought this one through.

There's a phrase, don't kill the golden goose, well, when your entire household runs on the shoulders of a 17-year-old, you've made some bad life choices. Especially when that 17-year-old is as smart and reliable as the adults are supposed to be. The next day, yes, the very next day, my mother comes into my room and asks me to drop off a bill she forgot to mail. This isn't word for word, but the gist. 

Mom: "I have to meet with a client and don't have time, I need you to run this to *local utility company*." (Yes, she never asks, she demands)

Me: (Looking up from my book) "Sorry, I'm grounded."

Mom: "Well, we'll make an exception."

Me: "No, because then I'll never learn to not be 5 minutes late for curfew." (Yes, my smartassness was the main reason I wasn't the favorite child, as they explained to me many times. I apparently had an "attitude problem" from the age of 4.)

Mom: "Well, I really need to you take this to *local utility*. If you don't, we'll have to pay a late fee." 

Me: "Well if I'm grounded from the car, I'm grounded from the car, I won't be doing any errands until it's over." 

She huffed off, realizing her mistake. I never followed up with how that one turned out for her. 

Over the next week, I started acting like a normal teenager. I walked to my friend's houses(I was only grounded from the car), would call my parents when I needed a ride home, lol, that was my favorite, “I can’t be late for curfew and you don’t want me walking home in the dark.” I actually walked so much and so far that my thighs were rock hard at the end of that week. 

During that week, my parents looked a mess, they had to drive my sister everywhere and learned how exhausting it really was, they had to actually plan their errands and watch their own kids. I was on vacation. During that week, the requests went from, "We'll make an exception," to "We never meant you couldn't run errands," to "These errands are the only reason we let you drive that car," to "Please, just this once, we only grounded you because we love you," to "You're so ungrateful, you're supposed to be the responsible one." Basically, the whole gambit of manipulation. At this point, I’m gaslight-proof and I had actively hated my mom for over 3 years. I was enjoying myself so much that I sometimes wonder why I enjoyed being a psychopath to her when I’m actually not one at all, I have diagnostic proof that I’m not a psychopath, lol. 

By the end of the first week, I was called out to have a talk with them. My mother was the tougher of the two, my dad was pretty cool, but always sided with her. 

Mom: "We've decided you've learned your lesson, we're letting you off your punishment early, but you have to start running your errands again and driving your siblings."

Me: "No, I'm good with the current system.”

Mom: “I insist, we don’t have time to run errands.”

Me: Smiling because finally… “Well maybe you should have thought about that before you took away my car.”

Mom: “Well, if you don’t run the errands, you can’t have the car back.”

Me: “Fine with me,” I walked out of the room like a proud peacock.

After the 2 weeks were up, they assumed I’d be back to normal, nope. I basically told them that I’d rather walk as the number of responsibilities far outweighed the benefits of driving. They were not happy, but what could they really do? 

They lasted one more week, I went carless for a total of 3 weeks. Finally, my mom broke down and did the unthinkable, she begged. Well, the words were begging, the tone was sucking up, but I truly enjoyed it. It took all my energy not to beam with self-pride. Now, my mother was a saleswoman, she had been inadvertently training me for years. In that moment...I opened negotiations. 

In the end, I got an extra $10 a week in gas money on top of the $3 bucks here or there for unscheduled errands. I still had the curfew, but I got a few minutes grace period from then on. They never even dared to threaten to take my car or license away again. But the cherry on top, my sister’s personal taxi service was closed. Apparently, she treated them the same way she treated me during her frequent and unnecessary rides and from then on, she had to be nice if she wanted a ride. There were a few incidences where she tried to get my parents to force me to take her or tell her where I was going, but they didn’t. They knew better than to kill their golden goose of home management and for the rest of the year, I finally had a great childhood because I was left alone on my own terms.Many years ago I had succumbed to a patriotic fever and enlisted in the Air National Guard. As such I went to basic training. Yes, it's the same basic training the "Real Air Force" goes to. Anyway... 

One of the first bits of training they try to hammer into your skull is the importance of the Dorm Guard (DG). DG is responsible for controlling who has access to the dormitories, reporting headcount to nightwatch, and making sure nobody is slitting their wrists in the shitter or starting fires. It is a very easy job but trainees regularly fuck it up because they can't think straight in a military training environment. 
If someone knocks on the door the DG has to verify their ID against a list on the back of the door. No ID? No entry. If ID is presented but there is no matching name on the list? No entry. There are only two exceptions. If the person requesting entry has a key and uses the key in the lock (because holding it up to the window to show you are a key holder isn't good enough. Yes, one trainee learned this the hard way.) Or the person requesting entry can use a known code word, but this will only happen in an actual emergency and isn't part of the training experience. To quote my MTL (Military Training Leader) "If Osama bin Laden shows up to the door armed with an RPG and wrapped head to toe in dynamite and he gives you the code word, let the fucker in and stay out of his way." 

Everyone will do DG duty and you should expect to be tested. They will yell and threaten, try to trick you, intimate you and beat on the door mercilessly, but the protocol is gospel. Break from the rules and you'll find yourself writing letters to the families of your fellow trainees, explaining that they were killed because you couldn't remember how to guard a fucking door. (Looking at you, Trainee "Oh I see you have a key, let me open the door for you"). 
Basic is a headgame. They aren't allowed to physically touch you so you are never in any actual danger. All danger is simulated by big bald Sargents yelling. I had the advantage of being almost 10 years older than the average trainee (I celebrated my 28th birthday during BMT.) I've been yelled at before. It doesn't bother me.

It's the middle of the night and I'm on duty. I do a head count. 51 people present, 50 people assigned. This means either I miscounted, or someone is here that isn't assigned to be here, not to mention whoever did the count before me has been fucking it up. I recount, 51/50, and call it in to the MTL on duty (not our regular MTL) via the loud ass squawk box intercom on the wall which everyone in the dorm can hear. 

Me: Sir, trainee Youse reports as ordered. Blah blah blah other shit I had to report... Headcount, 50 assigned, 51 accounted for. 

MTL: "WHAT WAS THAT HEADCOUNT AGAIN?" 

ME: Sir, 50 assigned, 51 accounted for. 

MTL: WRONG. COUNT THEM AGAIN. 

Now I've already checked and double checked and I have already assumed that this was a paperwork error and not my error but they want me to follow orders and procedures so that is what I will do. I recount and report.

"Sir, 50 assigned, 51 accounted for. "

SO HELP ME TRAINEE IF I HAVE TO COME UP THERE BECAUSE YOU CAN'T COUNT I WILL CHOKE YOU TO DEATH WITH YOUR REFLECTIVE BELT AND BURY YOU IN THE PARADE GROUND WITH THE FLAGPOLE UP YOUR ASS. NOW GET EVERYBODY UP. SOUND OFF ONE BY ONE SO I CAN FUCKING HEAR IT. 

By now almost everyone is awake anyway so everyone begins to sound off. 

"One sir, Two sir, Three sir..... Fourty nine sir, Fifty sir... Cut to the last guy, shaking his head because he's scared of what he knows is coming next... Fifty one sir. "

GODAMNIT! ONEOFYOUUSELESSFUCKSISGOINGTODIETONIGHT! I'M FUCKING COMING UP THERE! 

The dorm is a 2 minute walk from CQ. He was there in about 9 seconds banging on the door. But, being as mad as he was, he stormed over without his key, his ID, and had apparently forgotten the fact that there was a single word that would open the door instantly. He was focused on fixing whatever was jacked up with my headcount. 

Banging on the door. OPEN UP! 

"Sir, may I see your authority to enter? "

I JUST GOT OFF THE COM WITH YOU LET ME THE FUCK IN!

"Sir, without valid ID I am forced to refer you to CQ for authorization." 

ARE YOU FUCKING SHITTING ME? I AM THE CQ! CUT YOUR SHIT AND OPEN THE FUCKING DOOR! 

"Sir, without valid ID I cannot allow you access to the dorm. Please contact CQ for authorization. "

By now the other trainees are nervous, and some are telling me to open the door while others are insisting I keep it shut, perhaps indefinitely because the Sgt. sounds like he may actually end someone's life tonight. I stick to the program and we go back and forth like this a few more times. I've honestly never had anyone this angry with me in my life, but all my replies are literally written on the back of the door so I keep reading them to him, which only makes him madder and madder each time. By now it's been 20 minutes since first count and he's used up every threat and insult at his disposal and is forced to stop and think. He remembers the code word. 

CODE WORD

I opened the door immediately. He bolts passed me with only the slightest pause for some direct eye contact which sent the message that he would be back shortly to harvest my flesh for a new suit he was going to make, and he begins to count. 

51

WHO OF YOU IS NOT SUPPOSED TO BE HERE? 

Silence. 

Then from the last bunk "Umm, sir?" 
It's a guy we don't recognize. All our counting thus far took place in the dark. Until the Sgt was in the room and he turned the lights on we had no idea. It turns out this kid had graduated the day before but needed to be warehoused for a few weeks while he waited for his next training assignment to begin. He was supposed to be there, but since he wasn't on our roster, he was not included in the headcount. Promises of extreme punishment were issued and we were told that this wasn't over and that the morning would be terrible for all of us, especially me. 

At 0530 I was called on the carpet to explain why I refused to allow the Sgt to perform his duties. I stated plainly and simply that there were protocols and procedures in place for me to follow. I had been told never to deviate and that I would be tested. I had performed my duties to the best of my abilities. They could find no fault with this and I was never punished. 
My MTL (not the one from night watch) later quietly congratulated me for sticking to the protocol. Ultimately it reflected well on both of us. 

Tl;Dr: Fix your attention span and learn to read a page or two of text. This post may or may not be worth it but someday one will be.TLDR: lawyer tried to hardball my client, i proved his client committed a statutory offense and got what i wanted plus damages and dobbed his client in.

So i work as a specialist property valuer. A few years ago a real estate agent friend approached me on behalf of his client. His client was a book seller who operated a specialist book shop on the 7th floor of a City building. A one man band small business. Nice bloke.

Unfortunately nice bloke had decided to renew his lease for 5 years and signed the new lease without getting advice. His new building owner enacted the market rent review clause and jacked up his rent by something like 50%. Tells nice bloke, your new rent for the next 5 years is x. 

Nice bloke is distraught! He cant afford it. So he asks nicely to rescind the lease and he will move elsewhere. Estate agent friend has found a cheaper space for him. Denied by building owner. Building owner says he will also sue if he breaks the lease.

So the agents asks me to review the case. I look through the case. Nice bloke is stuffed. The lease is lock tight and they are justified in jacking up the rent. I think our only hope is to appeal to the mercy of the building owners lawyer. So i call him and ask for release, penalty free, for my client. Mr Lawyer says "stiff cheddar, you need to comply with the law, try reading the lease". A real arrogant a-hole. Cue malicious compliance "ok, i will".

I read through the lease and note that all references to the Retail Leases Act have been crossed out. Fair enough. The act only applies to retail tenancies IF they are below the 3rd floor of a building. Nice bloke is on level 7. Act should not apply. But hold up imma gonna check that. 

I call the small business commission who administer the act, and they advise that, if you retail a good (like books) it doesn't matter what floor you are on the act applies. You could be on the friggen roof if you want. The level 3 provision only applies if you retail a service. This means the building owner has breached the act and failed to comply with the law (theres certain things they have to provide before signing a lease and timing they have to follow). A breach is no small thing. I get a ruling from the commission.

I call for mediation with Mr Lawyer. Present are Mr Lawyer, building owner and their agent and nice bloke and me. I again plead for a penalty free release. No dice and they threaten to sue. I gently slide the ruling accross the table to Mr Lawyer. 

Me:"Ok. Well as per your suggestion i read the lease. We have a ruling that proves the act applies to the lease. Your clients failed to comply with the act and committed a statutory offense "

Lawyer: (reads ruling)...."um ok. We will grant you a penalty free release"

Me: "oh. We dont need that. We enact our right under the act to terminate the lease, penalty free, and to seek damages for the landlords breach of their statutory obligations and ill be reporting the breach to the commission "

Lawyer: "no need for all that, lets just tear up the lease"

Me: "sorry, that wouldn't be complying with the law would it?"

UPDATE 1: I just spoke with the agent on our side, we are still good mates. He cant remember the outcome off the top of his head but he thinks he might have leveraged a waiver of nice blokes make good obligations (requirement to replace carpets, paint walls and remove fitout etc) and he did move nice bloke to a cheaper space. He thinks he might still have a file on it so he will ring me back when he gets into the office.

UPDATE 2: so i spoke to the agent today and he doesn't have the file anympre but his recollection is that he negotiated a waiver on the make good obligations,  got 60 or 90 days rent free and relocation as a deal for nice bloke. We canremember if anything happened from the dob in.This is my tiny MC story, which happened in my first year at uni, about 8 years ago. The bus I (then 20f) had to take to uni was the most popular route in town, meaning it was always packed. Because I got on at the first stop, I always had a window seat, which meant that someone was usually sitting next to me when I had to get off, and I had to do the awkward thing of lifting my backpack and straightening up in an exaggerated fashion to show them that they had to stand to let me pass. No problem, usually, just a bit awkward for socially awkward me.One morning, a guy in his 40s sat next to me and promptly Manspreaded across my seat, pushing his leg right up to mine. I thought it was weird, but hey, maybe this guy had a painfully swollen scrotum or no self-awareness. Or both. Anyway, I was giving him the benefit of the doubt, and as he was focused on his phone and ignored me I did the same for the rest of the journey.

Then, when we were getting close to my stop, I started the awkward I-have-to-get-off-so-let-me-pass show. No reaction. So I stood up from my seat. Still no reaction.

Me: "Sir?"

No reaction. I tapped his shoulder.

"Sir, I need to get off. Can you let me pass?"

The guy looked up at me and, with the widest, most disgusting grin, said: "Well, sweetie, looks like you're gonna have to squeeze past me. No problem for such a skinny girl, right?"

Some of the passengers standing around us noticed and were about to intervene, but I was *pissed* because at that point I had missed my stop and I wasn't sure if he was a pervert or just liked to piss on peoples days, but I didn't want him to win. Also, no one had ever called me skinny. I have what one could call child-bearing hips, thank you very much. So I smiled at him and said: "Okay, have it your way."

My backpack was filled with half a dozen library books that I was going to return that day, and it was bulky and heavy af. Usually, I would have put it on after leaving the crowded bus, but not that day. I shouldered my backpack so it was hanging at the right height and clumsily, forcefully and (just in case he was indeed a pervert) in no way sexily squeezed past the guy, dragging my huge backpack across his face. If I leant back to make sure to reallyget his nose, well, that surely wasn't intentional. And if he emitted any pain-fuelled protests, well, they must have been muffled by my backpack.

As I was standing by the door waiting for the next stop, I looked back to see him covering his nose with his hand. It looked like he was checking if was bleeding, but I don't think he did. He might have had a scratch or two from my backpack, but he wasn't injured or anything. His pride was, though. He kept glaring at me for the glorious half-minute it took for the bus to reach the next stop.

I was in such a good mood that I didn't mind walking back to where I was supposed to get off.This story comes from my favorite teacher in high school, Charlie. The time was the 80s. He was a chemistry teacher. Mild, short man. But devious. If you tried to take a nap during his class he would just keep talking, walk over to the ammonia bottle, wet a rag, and drop it beside your head. All while acting like nothing was going on.

Charlie, for quite some time, would let students have fun on the last day before break - until the principal told him that he HAD to teach the kids something. So he complied. He set up an experiment for that day. The ingredients included: sucrose, glucose (in solution), protein pellets, and (I had to look it up) 4-hydroxy-3-methoxy-benzaldehyde.

As the students happily performing their experiment, the principal sticks his head in the door to ensure that Charlie is actually having them do something productive and is happily surprised. Charlie fills him in on the experiment (in big scientific words). As the principal is about to leave, he remarks, "why does it smell like peanut brittle in here?"

And every year after that, we made peanut brittle on the last day of class for the semester.It is NOT okay to print or record this content for use elsewhere. That means you, [**u/A\_I\_Reader**](https://click.redditmail.com/CL0/https:%2F%2Fwww.reddit.com%2Fuser%2FA_I_Reader%2F%3F$deep_link=true%26correlation_id=a39fb207-c6d3-4548-b3a0-6930d869674b%26ref=email_post_reply%26ref_campaign=email_post_reply%26ref_source=email/2/0100017c578395f5-e92adb4a-7bd9-48a3-b52c-28c0f6adeaf0-000000/cxVdA-NqsrfiPN4k_cjhWPW2YurFq3hqwsHJkCF50RY=218)

We’ve moved several times for my husband’s career, so I haven’t really had a career of my own, just a series of jobs. Some were great, some were crappy. This happened at one of the crappy places where I worked as a lowly customer service rep. I was late 40s, very dependable, and my manager Ann called me her ideal employee. Never had any customer complaints, never tardy, sick once in 3 years, submitted many time and money saving ideas, always worked late when asked. I  worked 32 hours a week, Monday through Thursday, so I was typically the one she asked to work late since everyone else was full-time and no overtime was involved if I worked a few extra hours.

I was having migraines and my doctor could see me the next afternoon. I asked Ann if I could leave two hours early the next day to go to the doctor. She said work was slow that week and no one else was off, so yes. But since I was giving less than 48 hours notice, it counted as unexcused and I would get a written warning. I said that I was giving 24 hours notice and we were slow and fully staffed, so I just didn’t get why there would be a warning. (Four warnings in 6 months and you were  terminated. They didn’t care if you had a doctor’s excuse. Tardies were a warning, calling in sick, returning late from lunch. It was not difficult to get four in 6 months.)  Ann said that it was a matter of her having to shift the schedule around. It was inconsiderate to not plan ahead and she didn’t want to set a precedent and be taken advantage of.

I went to the appointment, got the warning, and was ticked off about it. But I decided I would be happy to comply with their petty policy in my own malicious way. I didn’t have to wait very long.

A couple weeks later, Ann came to me an hour before closing and said she had a stack of orders that had come in via Amazon and they needed to be put in that day. The phones had been busy, so the reps who normally entered orders didn’t get to them. Could I stay and put them in? I said I really had no other plans, but I’d been thinking about what she’d said about giving 48 hours notice when asking someone to change their schedule, and she was right; it does lead to them taking advantage of you. So I would be willing to stay late two days from now, but I can no longer stay late on such short notice. ”But, I didn’t know that I’d need you until just now!” “Oh, I totally understand. It’s like when I was having migraines and needed to get into the doctor as soon as possible. I think I deserve the same consideration that you deserve. If you give me 48 hours notice, I am happy to stay.” She was speechless. She had to pay someone else overtime to stay.

A couple days later she thought she’d get back at me when she told me that I could not remain part time and would have to start working Fridays the following week. I calmly told her that the following Thursday would be my last day then. By that afternoon she changed her mind and I could stay on my current schedule.My job is 12 hour shifts with a flexible start time. You must show up before 7, but you can start as early as 6 if you want, and most people opt to show up before 6:30. The last person is usually in before 6:45. We let people go home at the end of shift on a first-in-first-out basis. In theory you should be able to go home after you've worked your 12 hours, but in practice there is usually a disparity of arrival times between the outgoing shift and the oncoming shift. For example, I may have started at 6:15 as the 4th person in, and I'm relieved by the 4th person in on the next shift, but that person might show up at 6:45, making me stay 30 minutes late. I can't complain to that person because it's their right to show up at 6:45.

I talked to my supervisor about this because it had been happening pretty frequently. She said the company won't pay me for the extra time because, according to her, it's my choice to arrive earlier than 7 and that's just the risk I take in being early. She also said she's not willing to move any people around to cover my role to get me out on time, even though they regularly do that to let people take unscheduled bathroom breaks and do training. She said it'd be different if I wasn't relieved by 7 because someone is really late, but before 7 they don't care.

Solution? I show up at 6:59 now. I'm always the last one in. I leave later than everyone, but I'm also guaranteed never to work a single extra, unpaid minute. It also means that the person I relieve is having to stay late because again, the last person usually shows up before 6:45. It *also* means I usually get relieved earlier than 12 hours. I still have to stay in the building until I reach 12 hours (tracked with badge cards), but ultimately they're still paying me for 10-15 minutes of wandering hallways or reading a book.

So basically they went from regularly stiffing me 15-30 minutes of pay to regularly having to pay me to do 15-30 minutes of nothing.  

[edit] a lot of people are asking about the unscheduled bathroom breaks. Probably sounds worse than it is. So we get 15 minute breaks every 90 minutes, and generally if you have to use the bathroom, that’s when you go. You have about 8 opportunities throughout the shift to do it. And then on top of that, you can still go between breaks if you really need it. That’s what I mean by unscheduled. We get paid on these breaks, it doesnt deduct from the 12 hour time card.So in my early 20s (21) I start working as a Phlebotomist (I drew blood in a large hospital). I had just moved and knew no one and also just didn’t know the area/city. I worked evening shift 1300-2130. After completing the training I was put on my normal shift with my fellow workers who to my surprise were all my age or younger. We became fast friends! Great peeps!

Fast forward a year, our shift is the busiest shift for STAT draws and Traumas in ER, the pace is tough but we’re great friends and we handle it and help each other out a lot. All the hospital staff for the most part know us and love us for our hard work and professionalism. 

Our boss let’s call her Karen, solely works day shifts and has no idea really what it’s like on our shift. She loves to nit pick about silly things and she doesn’t feel like she is accomplishing anything unless she is telling you where you’re wrong and how you can improve. 

Our shift is 3 guys and 1 girl, we all dress in scrubs with a T-shirt underneath. We usually wear any kind of T-shirt as long as you can only see a solid color and it matches/ looks ok. 

Karen one day notices and reminds us all that the handbook specifically says that our undershirts have to be white, and that with colored undershirts we are very unprofessional. 

I make a remark about all of crazy colored/printed/ graphics of the scrub tops on dayshift( who are all female) and how I don’t think having our undershirts are any more unprofessional than a spongebob scrub top. She explicitly says they are permitted in the handbook but our undershirts were not and we better fix it ASAP and the next person to show up to work without a white undershirt will be sent home to change. 

So later that night I have a solid idea and propose it to my awesome evening shift cohorts, let’s all go out and buy white undershirts, along with the most outrageous and ridiculous scrub tops we can find. My idea is praised and we all go shopping after work. 

The next day me meet in parking lot and all walk in together, my buddy Jonas is sporting a black scrub top covered in vivid red smooching lips, Will is looking very professional in a white top with strawberry shortcake cartoon images all over, and I’m wearing a baby blue and pink Dora the Explorer scrub top, all with white undershirts. 

We walk in and there is lots of laughing and yelling and we draw a crowd in the lab, in walks Karen. Her face turns red as we proudly display our commitment to professionalism and our 100% handbook dress code compliant outfits. She mutters a thank you and scurries off to consult the director who is awesome, the director laughed and said “well, you won Karen, they’re compliant” 

We became famous all across the hospital for our Malicious Compliance and occasionally wore our fun scrubs to work for the rest of our time together.  Great times!I work in a highly specialised field, where it's very difficult to find and train suitable personal. By pinching pennies and not holding his promises about pay grade changes, my boss successively drove away the three specialists working in the department I led. Right before the last one put in her notice, he argued that a 2 person department didn't justify a leadership position and demoted me, and we were integrated (on paper) to another department. This was done outside of any legal framework and with a one week notice, which is illegal.
During the reorganisation, the manager of the department we joined was assigned to R&D, and another manager and his deputy promoted to lead the department's daily business. We effectively had no less than 3 supervisors, all of them lacking managerial training and technical knowledge about the duties of our now defunct department (and only one of them can read the language in which 50% of our reports are written).  
Right after the reorganisation, I was granted one last meeting with the boss, where I pointed out that several of my duties cannot be bestowed upon the mere foot soldier I had become, nor taken over by the new leadership. He answered that his decision was final, I was to revert to my previous job description and take up any future matter with my new supervisors.

I did just that, and some more : I read the state law and ordinance about state and university employees (should have done it earlier, in hindsight). I discovered that :  
- the illegal move by my boss doesn't carry any penalty, so there's fuck all I can do legally  
- I'm allowed to take on private mandates for anything that is not explicitly mentioned in my job description (it's a gift normally meant for professors)  
- I get to take up to **15 days of additional paid leave** per year to hold a public office  
- the pay grade I reverted to doesn't match my responsibilities today, even excluding the absence of leadership position, and there's an independent procedure with state HR to reevaluate the pay grade  
  
The kicker ? My old job description that dates back to 7 years before is short, to say the least : 3 lines that don't even cover 50% of what my duties in the last seven years consisted of. And I have a side gig as a retained firefighter and fire instructor for which I used to take vacation days. This counts as a public office according to state law.  
  
*The fallout*  
My new managers both signed the authorisation to take on private mandates and public office without understanding the implications. I used all of the 15 days, where I legally get paid by the FD and my employer at the same time. I took on several private mandates totalling nearly an additional month of salary for 4 days of work. And the pay grade reevaluation has brought me back to the same income as with the previous leadership position. Oh, and since my speciality now has a bus factor of one and my new supervisors have been unable to staff the open positions, it was very unlucky that I fell ill at the time where I had to submit paperwork for a research grant, costing the institution 30'000$ in lost research funds.  
  
TL:DR : my boss demotes me and dissolves my team. I find several legal loopholes that allow me to work less and get more income, without my boss even noticing and with the naive blessing of my new leadership.

Edit : I used the expression "private mandate", which is a direct translation of the state law legalese and seems to confuse a lot of you. Think of it as taking the contract in my name, as opposed to in the institution's name, and working on it outside of my regular hours. It's not exactly like a contractor though, because as a  member of the institution, I'm still bound by some rules that don't apply to contractors.  It is very weird and would not be possible if the transition had been planned and managed properly, with an update of my job description for example. /u/Dif3r explained it well :  
>Faculty at universities will sometimes consult on the side. I've heard of engineering and marketing professors doing design or doing research and writing internal white papers for companies before. Or collaborating on a research project under their own name/lab as opposed to the universitys "brand". 

Edit 2: some of you were hung up on the lost research fund, so I want to clarify 2 things :  
1) this was no part of the MC and I really caught a potentially serious disease. But since I had been warning for months about the lack of substitution or cross training, this came as a vindication  
2) no grad student or junior researcher were impacted. It just erased part of what the institution gained in not staffing the open positionsThis happened a while ago. The free donut story reminded me of this.

I was going to a family event and stopped at a local farm fresh ice cream shop on my way there.

My bf gets out to get a gallon of ice cream. He comes back all exasperated telling me that the girl at the counter won't sell him a gallon of ice cream.

I get out of the car and go up to the window and asked for a gallon of ice cream.

Ice cream shop server: We can't sell you a gallon of that flavor.

Me: Are you out of that flavor?

Ice cream shop server: No. We just don't sell it in a gallon.

Me: It doesn't matter what size the container is in, I just want to purchase a gallon of it.

Ice cream shop server: We can't sell you a gallon.

Me: OK, I will have 2 half gallons.

Ice cream shop server: We can't sell you a half gallon.

Me: (getting frustrated) What size container do you sell this flavor in?

Ice cream shop server: We have it in a quart, pint, cup or cone.

Me: Great! I would like 4 quarts please.

Ice cream shop server: (Hand packs 4 quarts, puts them on the counter with snark and ignorance) You can't just buy a gallon of any flavor and we only have half gallons of vanilla and chocolate.

Me: (Blank stare) 4 quarts IS a gallon.

Ice cream shop server: (confused look) Really?

Me: Yeah. 2 pints are a quart, 4 quarts are a gallon.

Ice cream shop server takes my money then goes to talk to another server. I don't even want to know that conversation.

EDIT: my bad for not explaining US liquid measures.
A cup is 8 fluid ounces, a pint is 16 fluid ounces, a quart is 32 fluid ounces, a half gallon is 64 fluid ounces, a gallon is 128 fluid ounces.

Also this was a large dairy farm but the sign isn't like a menu. First there's a list of standard flavors, then hand written are the seasonal and special flavors, followed by a list of prices. I think that the half gallon price says 'when available' and 'brick packed' all other sizes are hand packed.

There's not a limit to how much a person can buy and I've seen people order insanely large amounts.

It wasn't busy when I ordered and I told her to take her time, emphasizing that I was not in a hurry as I realize that hand packing takes a while. At this particular place they prided themselves on really packing a lot into a container so it was totally worth buying 4 quarts. I would have ordered it that way if I had known it would be an issue for her. I wasn't looking for special treatment just a gallon of awesome ice cream for a gathering of people, pre-covid.When I was in college I took a class with this gem of a professor. On the first day of class he asked how many people thought they would make an A. This being a tough engineering school where a C actually was average, something like 5 students out of a class of 60 raised their hands. He then announced that's how many A's he would give out that semester.

All of our tests for that class were multiple choice exams we took online. We were allowed to refer to our notes during the test and we were allowed to study from old tests as long as we didn't refer to the old tests during the exam. Fair enough.

I studied for the first test but didn't have access to any old exams so I did fine but not great. By the time the second exam rolled around I had made a friend who was in a fraternity that had multiple copies of old exams from this professor. We and a couple of others took advantage of the rule allowing us to study from old tests. We quickly discovered that on these 50-question tests the professor had a repertoire of about 75 questions he pulled from. On the first copy of the test we studied from we took the time to work through the answers to make sure we understood. By the time we got to the 4th copy we could answer before we even finished reading the question.

Exam time rolls around and, just as with previous years, he pulled from the same pile of questions. I think it took me 12 minutes to answer everything correctly. In hindsight I probably should have let the clock run for a bit (we had an hour) but I went ahead and submitted it because I had other things to do. I checked in with the others I studied with the next day and all of them had gotten 90%+. Sweet, definitely using that plan for test 3 and the final!

The next day we all received an email from the professor letting us know we were being reported to the Dean for an honor code violation. He claimed he had never had anyone make better than an 80 on one of his tests before, so the fact we all made 90%+ was clear proof in his mind that we cheated.

This being an engineering school we were all nerds who were pretty scared about receiving such an email, but we agreed the best course of action was to talk to the professor before he went to the Dean to tell our side of the story and see if we could sort things out. We reached out to him and he agreed to meet with us after class.

When we met with him and laid out our case he was surprisingly receptive to our explanation; I think in reality he didn't want to go through with the hassle of reporting us to the Dean. So we left the meeting feeling pretty good and agreed within our study group we would keep studying from the old tests.

Well, about a week before test #3, this guy announces to the class that because some of us had found the previous test so easy, the next one would have twice as many questions in the same amount of time. Being the cheeky SOB I am, I asked him as I was leaving class what would happen if someone made a 100 on this test. "God help you on the final" was his response.

So we used the same approach in studying for the test and found the same pattern of a limited set of questions. Of course, in addition to the extra questions he had promised all of the questions on this test would be new. So while we again got to the point we had the questions and answers memorized, we tried to make sure we understood the concepts as much as possible to deal with what we expected to be his wrath.

Test day comes around and lo and behold 87 of the questions are pulled directly from old tests. 10 are from a guest lecture where he basically pulled the question and answer directly from the slides, and 3 were filler questions like "1 + 1 =" and "The Earth revolves around the Sun, True or False." I knew I had everything right. I also knew I didn't want to screw myself and everyone else for the final. I purposely answered the filler questions incorrectly so if he looked at the results he would know what I had done. I got my 97. I never heard from the professor about that third test, but I like to think of him rage scrolling through the results.

I don't remember details about the final, but do remember the format being the same as what had been announced at the beginning of the semester. My study group also worked together on a group project which we also made A's on, so if he really only gave out 5 A's that semester, we received them all.

Edit: 1 hour in and this is by far my most upvoted post and my first awards. Thanks all!I want to state there are no good people in this story. Only pure, 100% unadulterated malicious compliance. 

I'm at Costco trying to order a pair of glasses. If you've never been to Costco, the optical department is usually either next to the entrance or next to the Membership desk on the way to the exit. If it's the latter, the entire area is pandemonium from people trying to exit/return things/get memberships/order optical lenses. My local Costco is the latter. 

I'm standing there with my ticket waiting to be called. My ticket is like 54 and they're on number 48 and there are only 3 guys so this is taking a while. I notice a woman in the area hold a fussy toddler, I suppose just on the verge of being able to talk, looking for the first available employee. It just so happens that one of the optical guys was done with a customer, so the woman goes up to him and they have an exchange like this.

Woman (W): "Excuse me, I--"

Optical Guy (OG): "Ma'am, you need to take a ticket and wait."

W: "But I just--"

OG: "Ma'am, take a ticket. There were other people in front of you,"

W: "Yeah but I just wanted to--

OG: "Ma'am! Take. A. Ticket. That's the last time I'm going to tell you. You can wait in line like everyone else."

At this point, the woman accepts "defeat" and her toddler is getting fussy. She grabs a ticket and puts her child on the ground. The kid is crying at this point loudly but I have my headphones in, just trying to wait for my turn.

And then it happens.

This kid unleashes a torrent of shit that basically explodes his pants and gets all over the AC display shit they try to sell you on the way out. I'm amazed that much poop came out of this little boy. He's crying up a storm and his mom is trying to comfort him but it just keeps coming and coming. At the same time, he's waddling around and getting it all over the place. The entire area, myself included, jumps back and is giving this lady some space. 

Finally, after what seems like an eternity, it stops. The kid is crying, his mom holding him, shit running down her arms. There is fecal matter in about a ten foot radius everywhere. All traffic to the exit has stopped as horrified shoppers look on. The optical department, including OG stare at this woman. She marches herself, son in tow, up to the man.

W: "I was wondering if you could tell me where the bathroom was."

OG sheepishly points to an area behind the registers and W walks away. I decide to come back later when the area doesn't smell like a raccoon fucking died, trying to stifle my laughter the whole way through.

TL;DR: Lady took a number and it happened to be 2. 

P.S. Before you ask, there is no big sign pointing to the bathrooms visible from the Optical Department at my Costco. I imagine that will be changing soon. 

Several years ago at my first IT job, I worked in a pretty great office.  Well, great except for one coworker.  Everyone in this office had the same job, we worked desk side IT support.  This required a lot of walking, crawling under desks and carrying equipment. Each of my coworkers had an assigned area that they were responsible for and pulled their weight.  All except for $blondie.

&#x200B;

One day at work, we had a large project.  My manager required everyone to pitch in to get this done by the deadline.  Everyone, except $blondie.  Every time there was work to do she would say she couldn't because of her heels or skirt.  Someone else would have to do her share.  Normally I do not care what she (or anyone else) does or does not do.  I do my work, she does hers.  On this day, I was tasked to do the work she was assigned.  I was not happy.  The next day another coworker of mine (also female) was assigned the work $blondie could not do because of her wardrobe choices.

&#x200B;

That day at lunch we come up with a plan.  We will wear kilts the next day and the other 2 women will wear skirts and heels to work.

&#x200B;

The next day at work, we show up to our morning huddle to get our assignments for the day.  My boss is visibly uncomfortable, half of his team is in skirts or kilts.

&#x200B;

I get my assignments for the day and immediately tell my boss I can't due to my wearing a kilt.  The rest follow my lead.  I feel bad for my remaining coworkers having to pull my weight but they think what we are doing is funny.  This day was amazingly unproductive.  No one can say anything about it because they have let $blondie do this for literally years.

&#x200B;

Day 2 my boss is even more frustrated and pulls me aside.  I hand him a well written dress code policy that another office uses that has already been approved by legal.  He spends the day fast tracking the approval this policy.  At the end of another horribly unproductive day, we have a surprise team meeting.  There is now a dress code that requires long pants and closed toe shoes for "safety" reasons.  $blondie's look of rage directed at me made no mistake that she knew I was responsible for this.

&#x200B;

Note:  I do not care who you are, what you look like or what gender you are.  I care about the quality and quantity of your work.  If you are hiding from pulling your weight intentionally, I will put a stop to it.

&#x200B;

Edit: I hope I tagged everyone that asked.This didn't happen to me, but to a coworker, whom we'll call Alex. We worked for a chain of English-language schools in Japan, and, if you're a sub, you're likely to be dispatched in many different directions, to various schools.

One day, Alex was riding the train, when he received an international call from his family. The call lasted only a moment, but he didn't realize there was a student on the same train who recognized him, and was offended by the conversation. It's not illegal to talk on your phones while on trains, but it's considered bad form and a faux pas. Anyway, the student complained to school staff (without saying anything to Alex himself), and word eventually made its way back to Personnel at HQ.

Now, the personnel coordinator at the time was a dick, and he decided to flex his managerial muscles. Rather than sending a simple email asking Alex to refrain from using the phone, he called Alex in on his day off, talked to him for a great deal longer than was necessary, and made Alex write two statements-- one, a letter to the (unknown) student apologizing for the incident, and a promise that would go into his personnel file saying he'd never answer his phone on the train again. 

Fast forward a couple of months, and Alex, working as a substitute teacher, takes the train to his base school, where he'd be stationed in case of emergencies. The train arrives, and he steps aboard-- but then gets a call. Caller ID shows it's personnel, and the only reason they'd call at this time is if an emergency arose, and he needs to get to another school ASAP. 

Alex ignores the call, and enjoys the 40-minute train ride to his base school (while on the clock) with a nap. When he gets off the train, he calls back personnel, who's livid and demands to know why he wasn't answering his phone.

"Why, Mr. Coordinator, you told me to *never* answer my phone on the train, and I would *never* think of contradicting you. You made me promise, after all," Alex says.

There's an angry silence and a gnashing of teeth on the other end of the call, with the coordinator probably holding back an angry tirade. "Just get on the damn train and get back here; we need you at [another school location]," he says, and hangs up.  (This was 40 minutes back the way Alex came from, plus a good 20 minutes further)

Alex shrugged, and grabbed the next returning train, where I like to imagine he enjoyed another good nap (while still on the company clock).My dad was a tire builder and union organizer in Detroit.  At our local bank there was always a sort of conscious condescension by the tellers for blue collar workers.  My dad was in weekly to deposit his check and take cash for the week. He finished one visit, and turned away and walked a few steps, then turned back to tell her he got the wrong amount of cash.  Before he could say a word, she snootily said "You should have counted before you left my window. I can't do anything for you now."  He smiled and nodded and walked out with his extra $50.  That was a good week for us.  As  a reference, gas was 19 cents a gallon at the time. The next week he went to a different teller and waved casually in response at the former teller's frantic motions to see her.So I worked for a company for a few years, got turned down for every promotion but was still expected to do the extra work because they stopped scheduling anyone to do it and I though it would make me look better if I just did it, covering breaks, checking logs, safety walks ect. 

 We had 3 Department managers who only work during the day and a supervisor for the mid shift but no management at night, a position opened up for the job and I put in for it but then was closed because of "labor and budget issues" and "lack of applications"
 A few weeks later they complained I wasn't doing enough production and needed to focus more on my work, so eventually I just stopped doing the extra work and let the department fall to shit. 
We got pinged from the regional manager for missing too many safety walks, we got pinged by health and safety for not having properly filled logs, customers complained about lack of service due to employees being on breaks.
Management flipped shit and said this would probably prevent me from getting a promotion in the future, when I asked why they told me that these were part of my job duties.

Me-"But you told me to focus on productivity not any extra duties, these are part of a Supervisor role not mine"

Mgmt-"You have been doing them for months now, why did you just stop?"

Me-"You told me to focus on production"

Mgmt- "Well until we fine someone to work at night they have to be covered"

Me- "Wow so one of the managers will have to close every night, that's rough"

Mgmt- "Come on were all a team, you can help us out right"

Me- "Sorry, I'm not comfortable doing extra duties beyond my role without proper training and compensation"

Edit: Thanks for SilverThis is part 2 and the conclusion to this post: https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/hjuqha/boss_think_about_whether_you_want_to_keep_working/. Also, I never thought I'd ever be one of those people, but due to the response on my previous post, no one has permission to recreate or retell this story on any medium whatsoever. Please do not bother me about it. Also, once again apologizing for the English, I'm not a native speaker.

tl;dr if you didn't read the last post or are looking for a refresher: Boss is most likely bi-polar, or has some crazy anger management issues. Boss flips his lid on me after I make a simple mistake (remedied within a few hours) and tells me "Pack your things up and go home. Think about whether you want to keep working here” - which is in essence an illegal termination. After asking for a raise for nearly a year and not receiving one, I decide that No, I don't want to keep working there.

And now the story continues. 

Where I left off, I was waiting for his pre-dismissal hearing, after he tried backtracking from his illegal termination. I decided to play along, because the longer I was there the longer I had to stay on his payroll and keep collecting salary. 

THE HEARING 

They originally tried to schedule the hearing immediately (against the law, hearings require giving the employee a minimum of 24 hours to prepare), I told them to bite me. They tried to schedule for the next morning (still illegal), I told them to get bent. Finally agreed for the morning after. Fuckup 1: My direct manager (the CEO) wasn't present in the hearing. Fuckup 2: The HR lady who held the hearing belonged to another company owned by the CEO, but held at arm's length (legal term?) from my company. She was not eligible to hold the hearing. Fuckup 3: The dismissal needs to have at least 2 people from the company's side - the direct manager (who was not present) and a witness to the meeting to record and create a written record/protocol of the meeting. I was met only by the HR lady. Fuckups 4 & 5: No recording or protocol was taken of the meeting, and I was not provided a protocol of the meeting to sign and verify authenticity (this is probably the biggest fuckup on their part). 

The hearing went as expected, the HR lady really had no idea why I was there (in two years never had any disciplinary issues), and I read out a prepared statement outlining the CEO's illegal and verbally and almost physically violent behavior. I told them that by law I considered myself to have been illegally terminated and was at the hearing to hear what they had to say for themselves, not to defend my own actions. 

A few hours after the hearing I received an email saying they were terminating my employment. This is Fuckup 6: It shows they did not give me a fair hearing and had determined the outcome ahead of time. I took all of this and went straight to my lawyer, who (at least in my telling of this story) lit up with a nasty grin on his face. He was working commission and he said their actions during the hearing pretty much quadrupled the amount he was now going to demand from them. He immediately prepared everything, with all the legal statutes backing him up, and sent it off to the CEO. 

<Insert SpongeBob Three Months Later> 

THE FALLOUT 

We never made it to court, but only because they realized I had them over a barrel and going to court meant the judge could potentially award me with even MORE than what I was asking for. I was eventually paid out for the entire 30-days notification period they were required by law to give me (without having worked a day during that period), and all my vacation and sick days were paid out at 100% (another month's salary right there). They agreed to pay me one year's salary, at pre-tax rates, in order to keep this out of court. They even covered my attorney's fees! Finally, CEO was prohibited from giving me a negative review if called for a reference about me. In turn, I agreed to not mention the lawsuit to any potential employees of the company (I checked with my lawyer who went over this post, it's OK), and to not take them to court now or in the future. For the money I got, it was worth it. 

Following this entire fiasco, two other people also left, essentially shutting down their departments as well. They left and weren't fired, so things went smoothly for them. 

It took CEO 2.5 months to find a replacement for me, and since I was a one-man department, nearly all of the activity (aside from tasks I had automated to execute before the blowup) ceased, including at least one event with one of the world's largest tech companies. Being that my field is a specialized one, I'm still in touch with many of my vendors, and they all tell me my replacement is nowhere near up to the task, which feels good on a professional level, but on a personal level, I shudder to think how she is dealing with CEO. 

My new position is very similar to my old one, but I'm now making nearly double what I made (pre-tax). 

tl;dr, the second - living in a country with employee's rights is awesome, CEO had to pay out my fair share and another 12 months' salary to stay out of court, I found a job doing the same exact thing at almost double the salary. Life is fairly good, all things considered.Hey everyone. Long time lurker, first time poster. This MC comes from my time working at a bank, in their contact centre. I literally have hundreds of stories about that place and its customer’s, but today I’d like to share a story that has always bought a smile to many a suffering customer service co-worker’s face about the time we got one back for the good guys. 

Backstory: I was employed as Customer Service Officer. I’d been with the bank for about 18 months at this point, mostly working afternoon shifts, but recently the bank had moved to a 24 hour customer service model, so while most of the bank would be closed (Head office, Complaints, Credit etc) — we were still open. 

Cast: Me, Night Manager, Customer, Head of Customer Relations and Retentions

Let me set the scene: ~10pm, midweek, fluorescent lights flicker overhead, the call board empty and I’m literally counting the seconds left in my shift, ready to go home.

*phone call pops onto my screen*

I think ‘Shit! I always get a call just before I finish’

Me (mustering my best customer service voice): “Hi, thanks for calling (bank), you’re speaking with u/Absurd-n-Nihilistic, how can I help you?”

I hear nothing but dead air, so I start to repeat myself. 

“Hi, you’re speaking wi—“

When I hear the tone of voice and words every contact centre worker has heard at some point. It just lets you know you’re in for a great call (not!). 

Customer: *loud sigh* “Yes! I’m here! God, what takes YOU people so long to answer?! What are you doing?”

As noted before, there was no calls on the board, this customer didn’t wait in queue. He would have dialled, gone through to the IVR to enter his customer number and pin before being put through to me. Max 60 seconds. 

Me (trying to not provoke any further and get this customer off the phone as quickly as I can so I can go home)
“Oh, I’m sorry about that. Our system doesn’t show a queue, but I’m sorry that you had to wait. What can I do for you this evening?”

Customer seems to settle down and starts explaining that the reason for the call was the interest charges on the most recent credit card bill. He was sure they were a mistake because “I always pay my bills on time” and “I don’t like paying you blood suckers anymore than I have to”. Charming, I know. So I place him on hold to look at his account. I started looking at the payment history, when payments were due/received, what the balances were etc. Then, I quickly looked at the customer’s interaction notes. This is where the bank records any contact with the customer as well as, any fee waivers, special interest rates etc. and I see an interesting series of notes from colleagues of mine stating things like “customer advised interest was charged due to full payment not received by due date. Customer threatened to close all accounts with bank. Manager approved interest waiver”. Notes like this went on for months, until there was a note from the head of customer relations and retentions stating “if customer threatens to close accounts to seek waiver of fees, interest or other charges, please process immediately. No retention authorised”

I was a bit shocked because usually the bank would do a lot to keep existing customers, like they told us in training, ‘it’s cheaper to keep a customer, than it’s to gain a new one’. So I call over my night manager to read the notes and give him a heads up I’ve got a feeling the customer is going to be demanding another interest waiver. My cool night manager said “well if he does, do what the note says”. 

Total hold time: maybe 2 minutes. 

I take the customer off hold and thank him for waiting. 

Customer: “About time! My time is very valuable, you know. So have you fixed it yet?”

I start explaining that the interest charges are valid because he didn’t pay off his balance before the due date. 

He goes ballistic!

He starts calling me every conceivable name under the sun and mid sentence stops, he plays it like he’s just had an idea “fine. If the interest charges are valid, I’m going to close my accounts. I want to close my accounts with you now!”

At this point I’m excited about putting him in his place but I also want to cover my ass, so I ask:

Me: “So, just to be certain. You are instructing me to close all of your accounts with us, including your credit card, savings account and transactional account?”

Customer: “Are you stupid? That’s what I said!”

Lady’s and Gentlemen: We got him!

Me (Grinning my ass off): “Okay no problems. I’ll just place you on hold to do that for you.”

I hit the hold button fast just as I heard him say  “no I—“

With my night manager’s help we close his accounts. His savings account was a term deposit so by breaking the term early he had to pay an early access fee of 10% of the balance. We used the money in his transactional account to cover the outstanding balance in his credit card (including the interest) and sent a request for a cheque to be issued for the remaining money. 

I took the customer off hold. 

Me: “again thank you for your patience. As requested your accounts are now closed. Was there anything else I can help with tonight?”

If I thought the customer went ballistic before, oh boy! There was talk of suing the bank, suing me, suing my night manager, suing head of customer relations and retentions. That we were guilty of discrimination. That I didn’t have the authority to do what I did. He’s going to call the police. We’re thieves. Some other ways of telling me how useless I am and how I can kill myself. You get the picture. 

Me (still smiling because I know I nor anyone else at my bank will have to deal with this asshole again): “sir I understand you are upset. However, on a recorded phone call you instructed me to close your accounts. I’ve complied with your wishes. As there is nothing else for us to speak about tonight. Thank you for calling (bank) have a good night!” And hung up on him before he could say another word. 

My night manager created a incident report and sent it to head of customer relations and retentions with an attached a copy of the call recording. I later found out head of customer relations and retentions sent the customer a letter telling him he was banned from our bank for life due to the “vile and disgusting” way he had spoken to me! We would never do business with him ever again and if he called or visited a branch, we would be the ones calling the police. 

Do you want to know what the total interest charges were that started all this? ~$30. 

His term deposit had $20,000 in it. He cost himself $2000 in early exit fees because he thought he could bully his way out of ~$30 in interest.

Edit: Wow! Thank you to everyone, the response has been amazing. My god! Thank you for the Gold and Silver! I just wanted to blanket answer some questions/assumptions made in the comments. 

1. I’m Australian, not American. Our banking laws/code of practice/terminology are a bit different. 
2. Normally no, I wouldn’t close an account or a suite of accounts. That’s something customer relations and retentions would do, but it was outside of their hours of operation and  with the note from the head of the department stating not to retain the customer, I was authorised in the situation to close the accounts. I needed my manager to approve the closures with his RSA passkey. 
3. If you close an account with any bank and you owe the bank money best believe, if you have another account with money in it with the same bank, you have authorised them to use those funds to clear your debt. Check your terms and conditions. 
4. I can’t remember why the exit fees on the term deposit came out of the principal balance rather than the interest earned. I do remember if the bank created a tailored term deposit for a customer (usually an unusual length of term, higher interest rate or pays interest before term) it can come with added conditions from the bank. I’m guessing that’s what happened in this case. 
5. I say “long time lurker” because I’ve read Reddit stories for years without an account and finally created one to contribute instead of just consume. 
6. I’ve removed a lot of the acronyms seeing as it annoys sooo many of you. 
7. Thank you everyone for suggesting I should cross post this to other subreddits.Edit 2: Thank you so much for all of the awards, I couldn't thank every single one of you. I appreciate also to some of the readers who applauded me to do this to a power tripping cops. While it is highly effective, I don't condone on doing it unless it's the last resort, like in my situation. I actually found most cops are extremely friendly and helpful to drivers. In fact, I got pulled over before for speeding 5 above limit on a downhill. The cop is extremely understanding, waived my ticket, & also gave me tips on the load that I carry at that time, which is a completely new information for me. The cop actually went beyond extra miles to educate me. I still have faith in humanity.

Edit: For those who asked "did I do anything on my log book during laughter?" you all have asked the most important question, bravo. I did set it as "Off Duty" but did not put comment on it. I guess, in the eyes of my dispatch, it looks like I'm doing 1 minute of silence. I did get questioned by my dispatch and after thorough explaining, he too, did a 1 minute of silence.

This malicious compliance has brought to you by my trip from Chicago, IL to Los Angeles, CA.

Background: I'm an over the road truck driver and most of the time, it's more convenient for me to do my "business" on the highway shoulder. I don't have to drive around & around just to park to use the restroom. Just a quick 30 second emergency stop, do my business (either on the side of the road or empty bottles that I'm saving up [gotta do what you gotta do when you're on the road]), then off driving again. I'm sure I'm not the only over the road truck driver who have done these, it's very common.

Side note: According to FMCSA, by law, we have to carry log books to calculate our driving & on duty time. This is relevant to the story.

On to the story:

This happened just a few hours ago somewhere in I-40 WB in New Mexico. I was suddenly in need to relieve myself badly, so as usual, I pulled over to a clean, wide highway shoulder, then I put my log book to "Off Duty".

Note: this isn't my first time today doing my business.

I have a habit of being very meticulous with my driving time. Which means, when I'm not doing anything, even for 30 seconds, I put my time in off duty. I tried to save as much driving time as possible, those multiple 30 seconds can add up to a lot to avoid doing 34 hours reset too soon.

I looked at the passenger side window & sees multiple cars passing by. Turns out, there's a road where cars drive by on the side of the highway. Doing my business on the highway shoulder, nope! Instead, I did the alternate route, do it in a bottle, seal it, and stow it for trash later.

Just as I finish doing my business, I heard a knock on my passenger door. Very weird, because this is at the highway shoulder, where no one should randomly be walking around. I stow away the bottle and go look who it is and it's a cop. I was thinking, crap, this isn't happening.

I switched my log book to "On Duty - Inspection" and go answer the cop. Before I could say anything, the cop asked me to see my log book (it's part of their job to check whether we comply to the rules or not) so I show it to him. The graph looks like a heart monitor, as I was relieving myself probably 4 or 5 times per day (tiny bladder problem).

The cop questioned why I was off duty for 30 seconds to 1 minute every 2-3 hours almost everyday (electronic log book can be backtracked up to 14 days). I explained to him that I have to relieve myself every 2-3 hours, give or take. The cop didn't believe me and assume that my truck had a problem, that's why I have to stop every 2-3 hours. I repeated myself about my bladder issue but the cop still didn't believe me. Instead, he said:

-Cop: Unless you have proof that you're actually relieving yourself, I'm afraid I have to give you a ticket for false usage of log book.

Cue malicious compliance.

I told the cop to wait a moment and went back inside my cabin. I grabbed every single bottle of urine that I've been collecting today and the previous day (I haven't had the chance to throw it away), put it in a plastic bag, and for extra measure, grabbed the newest one out of the plastic bag (it was still warm). I showed the whole bag to the cop, plus the warm bottle, told him it's the newest one I just did a few seconds ago, and asked if he would like to hold it for further inspection.

The cop had the mixed look of disgust & horror. He was literally gagging, so I put back the evidence back inside my truck so he can recover. Then the cop says:

"I was expecting doctor's note or something like that. What you showed me was disgusting!"

-Me: But you asked for proof that I was, in fact, relieving myself.

I was holding back my laughter so hard that my cheeks started to hurt. Then he gave me back my log book and told me to have a good day, then drives off. Have a good day, indeed!

I took an extra 1 minute on the shoulder to laugh until I'm satisfied, then I'm off to drive again.This isn't my story, but the story of a friend of mine I'm going to call Steve.

He ownes a landscaping business and has several employees. They work hard and get along really well. Steve pays them for their work done by the yard, not by the hour, in addition to buying his workers two meals a day.

Steve hired a guy named Jim, who isn't a bad worker at all. Jim is just a little slow on the uptake sometimes.

Jim decided to start a fuss. "I don't like that we're getting paid by the yard," he told Steve one day. "I wanna be paid by the hour." Steve explained to Jim that, when you break it down, being paid by the yard comes out to over $10 an hour (about $22 in today's money, this was back in the 80's)--or more, depending on how many yards get done--and his hourly workers only make minimum wage. Steve further explained that the paid-by-the-yard workers get perks like meals, and operate on a true merit-pay because the more they get done, the more they get paid.

Jim was adamant, though, so Steve agreed. 

**Day 1**

Jim showed up, ready and raring to go. He decided, it appeared, to prove to Steve that being hourly doesn't mean he'll slack off! Like I said, Jim is a good guy and not a bad worker; he has a good work ethic and a big sense of pride. A couple yards got done, and it's lunchtime. Steve grabs everyone's order and asks Jim if he is going to buy anything.

Jim looked confused. "What do you mean?"

Steve re-explained. "If you're going hourly, I can't cover your meals anymore. You'll have to buy your own lunch."

Jim grumbled but ordered something small, and after lunch they all got back to work.

**Day 2**

The crew was down two guys. Jim was in a good mood, maybe out of schadenfreude, because less guys on the crew meant less yards done--but Jim was going to make the same amount either way!

With a little bit of a smug attitude, Jim got ready for work, but when he looked at the job list for the day he looked taken aback. Steve had rearranged the yards for the week so that, for this particular day, they would be working on their smallest-yard clients. That way, the workers would get paid around the same amount they normally would if they had a full crew. 

Jim hadn't noticed that Steve did this anytime he had a smaller crew: both because it guaranteed his guys were making over the legally-required minimum for per-part work, and because it kept their pay consistent.

**Day 3**

They got a lot of yards done this day. In fact, they worked really well together that day, and really dug their heels in to get the last few yards on the schedule done. They'd taken about two hours less than expected, so everybody was able to head home early. 

Jim asked if he could maybe go take on another yard or two himself, since if everyone got off early, he wouldn't be paid any more. Steve understood, and sent Jim out to get some hedges done, which took a couple hours because he was doing it by himself. But that was okay, because that was a couple extra hours of pay, and Steve was nothing if not fair.

**Day 4**

Jim showed up to work a little late, because the extra three hours of hedge-trimming had left him more exhausted than expected. Steve was placing an order for breakfast as he showed up, and he just stood there for a few minutes as he watched Steve writing down orders for bacon and eggs and pancakes. Finally Steve stopped at Jim. Steve didn't say anything about Jim's tardiness; it was clear Jim had worked hard the previous night.

"You buying anything, Jim?"

Jim swallowed hard. "No, sir."

"It'll be mighty hard to work on an empty stomach, Jim."

Jim nodded. "Yes sir, I know. I..." I mentioned how much pride Jim had, and he really couldn't buck up enough to admit he had miscalculated. He knew he was wrong, but he was prepared to suffer.

Steve, however, was a good dude. He recognized where Jim had erred, and didn't lord it over him. He made it plain and simple: "I'll just put you down for some eggs and bacon, then." And with an understanding and appreciative look, Jim started packing the truck for the morning.

~

They never really discussed moving back to per-yard rate, but Steve was nothing if not fair. Jim got his next paycheck to find that he had been paid per-yard as if they hadn't changed his rate at all. This meant not only did he end up with the better rate, but he even got some extra in his paycheck for the three yards worth of hedges he had done by himself. 

Jim stuck around a long time, and ended up managing the crew after a while. He tells people that if you treat your employees right, they'll stick around. And that's worth more than a handful of pinched pennies.

~~

Edit: this was the mid-80's. $10/hr then was about $22/hr today.2012 working in a call center for a financial institution as a customer service rep. Got calls all the time about ruining birthdays and Christmas for overdraft fees. Was always pretty good at getting the customer to focus on the solution and understand I’m there to help. 

Call comes in : 

“Thank you for calling ______ this is _____ How can I help you today ?”

“You can start by turning my fucking card back on” 

“Sorry to hear that, I can definitely help with that...let me just collect some information” 

“What more do you Fucking need to hear ? My card doesn’t work, so Fucking fix it”

“I understand how that can be frustrating , so let’s figure this out together and get it resolved” 

“Whatever man” 

So I verify him and do some research and find out his card was comprised from malicious charges so we shut it down and attempted to reach out the day before. He argues for awhile about me not being able to turn his card on and that we have to dispute the charges and send him a new card. He gets pretty nasty but I offer to overnight him a card and waive the fee. 

“JUST GET ME A NEW FUCKING CARD”

“Okay, absolutely. I see you had the ‘sports team card’ do you want the same design?” 

“I DONT GIVE A FUCK WHAT IT IS , I JUST NEED A NEW CARD”

“Okay, sounds good. The new one will be there via FedEx tomorrow , make sure you are there to sign for it “

He hangs up, and I sent him the card with kittens on it.Hi i drive charter tour coaches for a living, our industry is VERY heavily regulated, as it should be as we carry the most valuable of cargo, your family/kids/relatives, and if I fall asleep and hit your car, well you can work it out.   Now one of the rules is after a working day a minimum of time in complete rest must be given undisturbed...by law, this time can be reduced but only 3 times a work period (between 2 weekly rest periods... basically between your days off).  Another interesting rule is, by law, if your rest is disturbed, your rest must restart as though you have had no rest..this will be important later.

It sounds confusing, but I can have only 9hrs rest 3 times a week and the rest must be 11hrs, minimum, less than 11 complete hours rest period and it's treated like I had 9hrs only...even if it's 10hrs 59 mins.  Because of this most tour companies keep rest periods to 11hrs minimum, looking on the reduced rest as a "just in case" we get held up and get finished late etc, so we can start on time the next day and stick to the itinerary.

Now we worked with one tour company, I'll call them mega-cheap tours, and their tour leaders like to squeeze every last bit of driving out of their tour hires, excursions all day to some out of the way flea pit, as long as the tour leader gets a kick-back, travel to hotel, then a dinner transfer and back to the hotel at night (none of it as the itinerary stated).  Most good companies eat close or in their hotel to allow the driver to rest, but for these guys, cheapest was best, and if that meant an hour there and an hour back at night...so be it, screw the driver, we are paying for him.  The reason for this is the tour leader got a kick back if they ate at the tour leaders "favorite" spot, and they had one in every overnight stop.   I had spoken to my traffic manager about how these guys just ignored the itinerary, and was told "just do what they say, they are the customer".

Now I was working with one tour leader we will call him Wan, well known for not only working you to death but also stiffing you on your gratuities (he collected them from the passengers on the last day as we traveled to the airport  to "help you", sat behind you then placed them into an envelope,  an envelope you knew was light from experience). It's the last day of the tour, tomorrow I get rid of them all at the airport, and good riddance I thought, as the passengers are in an excursion, Wan comes to the coach.

"We need to go here for dinner tonight" (passes me the address)

I looks at the satnav

"wan that's 1hr 15mins away from our hotel tonight, you lot will be eating for 2 hours then an 1hr 15 back, then I need to shut down the coach and park it, i wont be finished until about 11pm"

He looks at me "i know the rules, you only need 9hrs rest, we will leave at 8am, plenty of time for a 2pm flight (international)!!".

He was right of course, but remember that 3 times a week thing...he had already had me on short rest 3 times this trip owing to dinner transfers, not 9hrs but 10hrs something each time (this guy always pushed it to the max), it was at this point malicious compliance kicked in,

"Your right, i can work after 9hrs"

I changed the subject quickly as he smiled at me thinking he had screwed me over. Well the dinner transfer was worse than I thought, heavy traffic getting there meant I was late, which meant they started eating late, which of course meant they came back late, by the time i parked at the hotel it was closer to midnight.  I knew what was coming in the morning so phoned my 24hr traffic department, as I expected I was told under NO circumstances was i to break the law and run without my legal rest (massive fines for the company and for me if I did).   Normally I set 2 alarms when I'm on reduced rest as, to be honest, it takes it toll, and i need them to get up, but tonight....I set nothing, and took my hotel phone off the hook.

I went to bed, I woke up to thumping on my hotel door there was the hotel manager and a very irate Wan

"You stupid driver, it's 8am, everyone is outside, checked out, with luggage, and you've slept in, get dressed and get the coach"

I smiled "Wan, I'm on my legal break, we got back nearly at midnight so can't start to nearly 9, but besides, I've worked 3 times after reduced rest this trip and can't go anywhere until 11hrs undisturbed rest,  also you've just disturbed my rest as this gentleman can confirm (I was friendly with the hotel staff, they use the same hotels every trip and the staff hated Wens trips, as he never tipped..or rather his guests did through his suggestion, but he collected it to "hand in"), which means by law my rest period re-sets and starts again, but you know this, as you know the rules right?..., so see you at 7pm tonight..I'm cool for a late check out right? (I said to the manger who was nodding enthusiastically, knowing what I'd just done)"

Wan's eyes nearly bulged out of his head...which was funny, "Wait, what do you mean, we, we, need to get a 2pm flight"

"I know" i said "Best start organizing taxi's for the 40 odd people out there, and next trip don't stitch up your driver" As i shut the door on them both.

I knew what was about to happen, within 5 minutes my own phone rang, the traffic manager, asking what time I finished the night before, then saying you can start at 9, until I pointed out the 3 late finishes...silence..then

"Well your right, but don't expect to be doing anymore of this companies tours, they will request we never send you"

I asked if he wanted me to drive without legal rest...I knew he wouldn't dare say yes, as i could be recording it.

"No you must take legal rest, this is the tour leaders problem, of his making if he had stuck to the itinerary's hours everything would be fine, just do me a favor and start at 11am...not 7pm, we need the coach back here tonight"

I knew when to not push it any further, and said i would be happy to start at 11am, and would start getting ready now and go down for breakfast.  An hour later I went down and saw Wan surrounded by angry passengers screaming at him with a phone to his ear, he saw me and came over

"Mr driver, please, i nor my company can get a coach to hire and it's 40 miles to the airport and our flight leaves in just over 4hrs, my company are mad I've not left you legal rest, and blaming me..please help me"

I couldn't resist

"Wan, if you use all those gratuities you have stolen from me and everyone else over the years, you will be able to afford to hire 10 taxis no problem and make the flight, but I would be quick about it, otherwise you might get stuck with 40 odd replacement flights as well as taxis"

Wan gulped, eye bugle, and went white..all in one..it was funny to watch, and ran to reception asking for 10 taxis, what was funnier was when the taxi's showed up they said he needed another 4 or 5 just for the luggage (Each person had 2 massive suitcases), i just sat watching the show through the window eating my breakfast and drinking my coffee.  The staff thought I was a hero, and all smirked and looked on from their respective posts, i knew after this, no tips from the passengers would change hands and the cost of those taxis would hit his current fiddle bankroll hard (or so i hoped).

My boss was right, i never have nor never will do this companies tours again, it was quickly passed back I was not wanted, but Wan has never been back leading this companies tours either, my ex-colleagues (I knew my cards are marked as "trouble", and found another job with another charter company VERY easily) have told me that now the tour leaders are told by their head office to NEVER give the drivers less than 11hrs off EVERY night and factor this into any dinner transfers, if it can't be accommodated then no dinner transfer, and NO off itinerary excursions...period,

&#x200B;

TLDR: Got own back on tour leader using malicious compliance over-working me and stealing my tips

Edit: Thanks for the Gold, my first ever

Edit 2: platinum wow, thanks, and the silvers

Edit 3: in the comments it has been stated I set him up and it was a dick move, well i saw it as his greed for a kick back set himself up...the itinerary said 9pm finish, this guy did this to me all the time.   He was supposed to (as much as me) be monitoring my hours to ensure the tour stayed legal, yes I could have pointed out the night before I needed 11hrs, but sometimes you just have had enough...so I complied and did as I was told.     As for possibly harming the passengers, making them miss their flight home, all this happened at 8am, 6hrs before their flight, if he had got taxi's then, which was what I wanted,  him to pay out money he wouldn't get back  (and he had the money on him plus to pay for those) they would have been at the airport before the coach would have got them there, no one was more surprised than me when I came down and they are all still there. If they HAD missed their flights, I assure you the tour company would have rebooked everyone on the next available plane...then came after my blood.

Also folks have got confused about the disturbed rest, why I didn't sit until 7pm, by the letter of the law I could claim this, and if wan had pushed it I would have, but I'm brave, not stupid, if the guy paying your wages says do him a favour and start at 11am after your first legal rest period...I start at 11am.In 2017 I signed for my webshop a contract with our national mail carrier to deliver my parcels. The more parcels the better rates you get. In my league they had a 1000, 2000 or 5000 parcel target contract. I went with the 2k one. At the end of year 1 there would be an evaluation, and they said they would be very flexible and reasonable because their priority is "to help grow my business". I actually had that in writing.

For any parcel I had sent through them beyond the 2k target I'd get a 50% refund of the difference between the 2k and 5k rate (e.g. 2k rate is 3,5 euro/parcel and 5k rate is 3 euro/parcel, they would refund me 0,25 euro back for each parcel above my 2k goal).

On the other hand, for each parcel I was short at the end of the year of the 2k target, they would charge me double the difference between the 2k and the 5k rate, on top of a flat rate penalty fee (so basically 1 euro per parcel I was short in the above example + penalty).

End of  year 1 of my contract is 2 weeks away and I'm sitting at 1850 parcels. Thinking that 92,5% of my target is pretty good for year one, I gave them a call to talk about the extra charges and the penalty, and see if I could get the 5k rate for the next year as I was seeing / expecting strong growth. In the end it was their priority to help grow my business, and they are very flexible and reasonable.

No sir! They were dead set on me paying the penalty, charge me extra for the 150 parcels and on top of that they would set me back to the more expensive 1k target rate for the next year. Tried to escalate it but to no avail. So far for 'help growing my business and being very flexible and reasonable'.

In comes malicious compliance: I did the math and paying the penalty + extra charges was nearly double of what it would cost me to reach my target if I would just pay for 150 extra parcels out of my own pocket.

I bought 150 bubble wrap envelopes dirt cheap, printed 150x stickers with my own address, put those on each envelope, drove to the mail office and dropped off 150 empty envelopes. Next morning the mail man arrives at my door with a grin on his face (he is a cool guy) and a stash of envelopes, wondering wtf I am up to.

Later that day I called them to let them know I had reached my target and that I would not renew my contract. I signed with a competitor for about the same price per parcel, no strings attached  and did 17k parcels in year 2, which amounts to \~50k euro in business they missed out on.So this isn't my story, but my father's. 

My dad is a now retired police officer, which he did for 30 years. Over the years, he has worked patrol, undercover, as a detective, and as part of a DEA taskforce back in the 90's. About five years ago, he transferred to the local Sherifs department and once again returned to being a regular patrol officer. 

If you don't know, or live outside the US, Sheriff's are elected as a part of local elections. During the 2018 election, our local Sheriff had reached the maximum terms he could serve, leading to an open election. The one who ended winning was a person my dad was not the biggest fan of. Prior to his election, officers could have a moustache and goatee as long as it is well-kept and not too long. But, one of the first things that were changed was the facial hair policy. 

The new policy, said that "facial hair could not be grown past the edge of your lips." But it forgot one piece of the original policy that was important: the legnth. 

So here's what my dad did to piss off this new boss: he started growing a handlebar mustache. It didn't grow past his lips, but it was long enough that he could shape it with beard wax into a handlebar that was frankly huge. The ends reached to his ears when he didn't put wax in it. 

Well, this policy change didn't just change my dad. Many of the officers had goatees and we're already a bit annoyed with the new boss. So about another 10 officers decided to join my dad in growing out handlebar mustaches as well. In a department of 25 officers, almost half were rocking handlebar staches while going on patrol. 

Eventually, the new Sheriff decided that the handlebar mustaches were getting out of hand and finally relented and reinstated the old policy. My dad had grown this out for about two months and I watched him quite literally cry when he shaved it. But, he got his favorite facial hair to be allowed again.I'm a nanny for a small agency and I love my job so much. Except when I dont... yesterday I took care of a 4 year old girl,   a 2 year old boy, and a 5 month old boy. 

I was there yesterday and I know kids at this age have enough energy to make the world stop spinning and they tend to not listen... but damn these kids were TERRIBLE. No control of themselves at all. There was paint on my dress, I was hit by glass cups and plates were thrown at me. Glasses covered in jelly. Kids were purposefully coughing in my face and I had some spit on me (I think they were sick too ugh)  needless to say my first thought was a shower and a hot meal. 

I lost my cool and I had to issue timeouts and separate the kids when they fought. Cleaned messes. Shield the infant. Take toys and TV away from kids and not allow them to choose movies. I record these so the parent know what happened.

I always try to keep a positive outlook every day. Smiling and being super nice to everyone and ask how they are. I do this, and the mom told me when I first step in her house, was, "do NOT parent MY kids. YOURE NOT THEIR MOM!!". I was taken aback and wanted to be petty. So I said "aight". Mom left to go to work and I am currently letting the kids go ham in the house. There's a mess everywhere and I'm not even being bothered. Hit me with a glass? I hope it breaks and MOM can pay my medical bills.

The 5 month old is really the one I'm caring for at this point and I'm making sure he's safe. He's being cute af right now.

I have yet to be done with my shift as I type this. The house looks horrid, there's a red spot on me from a kid hitting me, I am covered on coughs and paint and markers (thank the gods for washable shit). I'm not parenting them.

I hope the mom enjoys the mess when she comes home.

Edit 1: yall are amazing! Thank you for the awards! And the comments are making me ugly laugh!! I will absolutely be posting an update when I get home.

--UPDATE--

mom came home and was APALLED at the house. The cut on my hand (from me being stupid on thanksgiving) was torn back open because of kids and it needs to be patched. My hair is covered in peanut butter. My leather shoes will need to be cleaned and polished. Theres literal shit on the walls! And so, so,, so much more that happened. And I put the baby to sleep and walked out. Mom screamed she's gonna get me fired. I said nothing. She also followed me to my car saying she will pay for the damage to her home and the maid service. I'm not worried tbh

Shes being blacklisted by me. Never again am I going back. I need to take a nap and a shower and I need some mac n cheese lol

Update 2: was on the phone with the agency and the mom. The family's contract is being voided and I'm being paid more than the extra money they were giving me. Plus the mom will pay for my medical bill to patch up my hand, cleaning my clothes, and clean my glasses

 Edit 2: some of you are concerned about the coughing. I had a rapid test done today while the doc was fixing my hand. I'm negative! 

Edit 3: Some of you have expressed concern about the incubation period. I will be self monitoring and getting a second test next week. Until then I'll be isolating as much as possible. I had it once and it sucked but at least I know exactly what to look out for symptoms wise.To start, I work at an Enterprise Rent-A-Car in a less... desirable part of Arizona. I’ve been at my new branch for a week now, and customers are pretty wacky so far! 

Today, a middle aged lady named Cheryl (name changed) came in to pick up her car, and was furious from the minute she walked in the door. She slams her reservation papers on the counter and demands me to “explain myself”. I smile, and reach my hand out for a handshake to introduce myself (as I do with all my customers). She stares at me, and says she doesn’t have time for “this nonsense”. Alrighty, apparently I have some “explaining to do”.

Cheryl was upset that her 6 day car rental, Saturday to Friday, was being charged at the weekly rate of $260, even though she only has it for 6 days. I explained that this rate benefits her, because anywhere from 5-7 days is the same price. To get the daily rate, you take the weekly rate and divide it by 5.  I offered to extend the rental to a full 7 days to take advantage of our weekly rate, and then she went on to tell me that she doesn’t need it for 7 days, but only for 6, and that I better give her the daily rate instead of the weekly rate, or she will never do business with us again. I smile, and say, “Of course I can do that! Your new total is $312”.  Cheryl smiles condescendingly and says “See, that wasn’t so hard! I know that you’re probably not used to us older people with more life experience than you asking the difficult questions, but we’re used to paying attention to the details in order to not get ripped off!” 

Dumbfounded that she didn’t get upset at the HIGHER price, I walked her to her vehicle, and sent her on her way!
My dad gets sent on business trips fairly often. As with most business trips, all of his expenses are covered. When he has to spend money during the trip on things that can't be paid in advance, he gets reimbursed by the company when he gets back and lets them know what he spent and what he spent it on. This is just stuff like the hotel, food and transport.

During one of those trips, he was staying in a Swiss hotel, taking a plane back home the next morning. As he leaves the workplace, they ask him if they should order him a taxi for the next morning to get to the airport, which is about 50ish km away. My dad replies  that its a 5 min walk from his hotel to the train station, so he'll just take a train to the airport instead.

He does, and a few days later he gets a call from whatever finance departmant handles repaying expenses. They ask him if he's got a receipt for his train ticket, because otherwise they can't cover it.

Dad replies he only has the actual train ticket which has the price on it but thats all he has, you just buy it at a machine in the station and all that you get is the ticket, there is no receipt. So the lady at the phone tells him they can't pay him the cost because he doesn't have a receipt.

So a few weeks later, he's back in the exact same spot, and when they ask if he's going to take the train again, my dad goes 'no can do, I dont get a receipt that way. Order me that taxi. So the next morning he goes on a fairly long taxi drive to the airport. Fun fact: Swiss taxi rides are expensive as fuck.

Once again, a few days after he's back, a call from finances. About what the hell this 200 euro charge is, and how he had to spend so much this time. Dads reply was something in the lines of

" Well last time I took the train, but you didn't want to reimburse my ticket because I didnt have a receipt. So this time I took a taxi, but don't worry, I made sure to get a receipt this time, so there should be no problem with paying me back for this right?"

I was told they accepted because technically there was nothing they could do: the expense was necessary (to get to the airport) and he had a receipt proving it. Later that day they informed that in the future he was allowed to use the train if it was cheaper, and he would only need to provide them with the train ticket.Years ago, I was working for a large organization. My boss was very nice and pleasant to work with at first. I was hired and tasked with taking a very troubled department and bringing it up in standards. My boss was fairly supportive during the initial few months on the job but then, something changed. The department began to perform and improve greatly within the first 6 months and this was recognized and heralded by upper management. This made my boss look good and also improved overall morale on the team within the troubled department as they were finally recognized for their efforts and talents,

About this time(6 month mark), I was told to watch my back by a few other colleagues (both men and women) outside of my department, because my boss had a reputation for putting her own success over anyone else's. They also warned me that she was known for being very threatened by any successful males who worked with her (male here). She was a very big champion of the women on her team and regularly promoted and advocated for them but it seems that every male that worked on her team ended up leaving or getting fired (this was something I was not aware of when I was hired. I also am the ONLY male on the team). After investigating this further, I found there to be some truth to all of this. As it happens, over a 12 year period, over 8 men on her team either quit or were fired (6 fired and 2 quit). Of the women on her team during the same time period, 8 were promoted, 2 quit, 4 were still on her team and 0 were fired. So, I am a bit concerned about this now as 1) I am a male and 2) she has this reputation for making it difficult for men on her team. 

I just took this all in stride however and focused on continuing to manage the department to greater levels, work on continuing to increase the morale of the department and ensuring I communicate with my boss regularly about any situation that would become problematic for her or me. I also focused on ensuring that she got maximum credit for the improvements of the troubled department and credited her with being a great boss that ensured that the department received the resources and support that it needed to succeed.

Fast forward to about my 8th month there and I am in a meeting with my boss and she begins to rage against me that I emailed someone who was in the upper management of the company. I explained to her that yes, I did cc that VP because the email in question was one that necessarily involved the entire area under which this particular VP lead. She said I am not to do that and then proceeds to tell me that I am forbidden to email anyone that is above my pay grade as 'that is not my place.' She then tells me that ONLY SHE is allowed to email these people and that if an email needs to go to them, cc or not, SHE WILL send it. I ask her if she would like me to send the emails that would need to go to VPs to her for her to send and she tells me "Yes, send them to me and then I will send them." I ask her also if she wishes I do not 'call the VPs on the phone as well'  and she say "Yes, you are not to call them either". Then she says "I know you may be used to getting your way because you are a man but this doesn't mean you can try to take my job."  WHAT?!!  I'm kinda befuddled at this and just take it all in and decide that I need to respect her wishes because there must be something else going on here of which I am not aware. 

OK, fine. We will do it your way.

About a month goes by and during that time I only need to email a VP once and I write up the email to this VP's department, send it to her and then wait for her to send it on. Now this email is time sensitive and involves giving the VP and his people a head's up about resources needed for a particular project. Now the VP MUST be included in this email because this request involved budgetary issues and only the VP over a specific area is allowed to change or adapt their budget. Otherwise, I would have just communicated directly with the members of this other VPs team to give them the heads up. So I send the email to my boss, ask her to send it on within the next 3 days and then I wait.

About a week goes by and I happen to run into this particular VP in the elevator. She asks me about the project, resources etc etc and I let her know that things are good. She then asks about the overrun on this one particular area and I tell her that it is best she ask my boss. She then asks me to send her an email on this particular overrun and I let her know "Sure, I will make that happen." I follow back to my boss, let her know about the conversation with the VP in the elevator and she blows up at me. Starts yelling and screaming and telling me that I am not to even talk with that VP or any VP about this project. I explain to her that sure, I get it but it would have been rude to not acknowledge this VP's questions since we were stuck in the elevator together and I did not seek out that meeting. She then begins to tell me that she has to write me up for being insubordinate and not honoring her request to not email, call talk to VPs'. I am floored but nothing I can do. As I am leaving her office, she tells me that "I made a mistake in hiring you. I though you were different but you are just as entitled as all the other men I've hired."  DAMN!! Ok, so this is going really well. 

Do I go to Human Resources and have them play their stupid games with me? Nah, not gonna solve anything especially with a boss that has been at the company for 10 years or so. Human Resources generally cares very little about employees and only really worries about risk and protecting the company. They aren't gonna do shit for me so I don't report any of this. I seriously thought about filing a complaint about my boss's comments to me. But, when I had the meeting where I had to sign my write up, I decided against it given the HR officer had to read the write up before I signed it and I figured that since the write up was based on a BS policy that my boss created out of thin air, I was right in assuming that HR would do shit for me if I had complained anyway. So I just try to get through all this shit and start looking for another job on the side.

2 days later I get a call from an SVP (to whom the VP from the elevator reports to). Now my boss also reports to another VP (this VP is a female and also not the same one from the elevator) and this VP to whom my boss reports, also reports to this SVP. This SVP asks me to come to a meeting that next day. I explain that I am happy to do so but I will need to check with my boss first to ensure that there are no conflicts in the schedule. I also state to this SVP that I would appreciate it if she would contact my boss as well to ensure that my boss is made aware of her request. The SVP pauses and then tells me "No, that won't be necessary in this case" and then hangs up. 

SHIT!!!

So, I email my boss, tell her that the SVP is requesting to meet with me the next day and wanted to make her aware of the meeting. She comes storming into my office around 5:30pm (about an hour before I usually leave) and closes my door and berates me for a good 20 minutes for talking with the SVP. She was so loud that one of the members of the department in which I worked was about to call security just before my boss exited my office. I knew my boss would be mad but didn't expect anything like this. 

So, next day, I go to the meeting with the SVP. At that meeting is another 3 VPs: the first is the female VP whom I ran into in the elevator and was asking about overruns; the second is the female VP to whom my boss reports; and the third is a female VP that used to oversee the department in which I presently work. The SVP proceeds to ask me about the overruns. I explain as best as I can about the issues involved and also explain that I had prepared an email a few weeks ago about this. The VP whom I ran into in the elevator states that she never got that email on the cost overruns from me. I then explain that it would not come from me but would have come from my boss. The VP asks why I wouldn't send it. I say that is not my place to send emails to VPs. Then the SVP stops everyone from talking and says "What did you just say?" I then reiterate my response. Then the SVP begins questioning me about this point. After about 15 minutes of my explaining to them that I am not allowed to communicate with them per my boss's orders, they are all pretty disgusted and frustrated. I further explain that this policy was created by my boss and has been consistently enforced by her for the past month or so. They tell me that they will have to come back to me on this but in the meantime, they will get the emails about the overruns from my boss and follow up with her.

SHIT SHIT SHIT!!!

So, I go back to my office that day and realize that my head is on the chopping block. I am really in a no win situation and I just have to wait for it to play out. And play out it did.........

I come into work the next day (it's a Thursday) and I don't think anything has changed. Seems like a normal oppressive day and I am just waiting for the ax to fall on my head. I work most of the morning and then right before lunch, I get an email. The email is from the SVP with all the VPs copied in on it, that my boss is taking some time off and will be back in a few days. During her absence, all requests and management decisions will be made by the VP to whom my boss reports. I am not quite sure what this means but given the weekend is coming up, I am just glad this friggin week is almost over. Day goes by uneventful and the around 4pm , the VP responsible for the department in which I work ,comes down and comes into my office and tells me that as of that day, my department and I am no longer reporting to my boss but I was now reporting directly to her. I ask what that means for the department and my job. She said nothing, it just means that the department will be better served under this new reporting structure given the increase in the amount of business that the department was engaged in since my hire as well as the strategic internal leverage that would be needed going forward. I also was explicitly told that I was free to now communicate with ANY other VPs or SVPs of the organization as I saw fit. She then apologized for the experience I had with my boss and told me that she was unaware of my boss forbidding me to communicate with her or other VPs or SVPs. I take this all in, not knowing whom is telling the truth but relieved that I will no longer have to endure being treated like a child by my boss. I then ask about my boss and her reporting relationship to my department's other team members and was told that she was forbidden to execute orders to them on her own unless she has my prior approval. 

KARMA!!

I stay at this company about 3 years total, have a great working relationship with the VP, whom was now my boss as well as the other VPs and SVP to whom they reported. I only left when I got a better offer in a different industry.

My former boss was eventually counseled out (over a 3 month period) after HR investigated her behavior, interviewed me about the arbitrary rules about communicating with VPs that my boss had enforced on me (as well as her shouting at me and writing me up and disparaging me as a male). Talk about karma, her write up of me was used as evidence that she actually had implemented this no contact policy solely with me and because she wrote it up and put it in my employee file, it proved my veracity about the entire no contact issue. In addition (and also compounding the problem) other alleged issues concerning cost overruns/financial reporting irregularities that she had hidden over the years. 

I have never seen her again but if I ever do, I would love to be able to say to her "Great seeing you again. I always tell people that you are the boss that taught me the importance of using email to further my career." 

**TLDR**: Boss forbids me from emailing/communicating with upper management in an effort to ensure that she is the only one who gets credit for anything. Boss has a track record of bias against men and exhibits bias against me based on this same bias. This gets found out by upper management and then this leads to exposing my boss's attempt to hide her alleged financial malfeasance. Boss loses her job and I keep mine.So a few years ago my dad was moving out of his house and in with his parents due to some health problems with my grandma. This was iver summer break and i was just out of high school at the time, about to go into college so i had absolutely nothing to do all summer as i waited to move out of state.

My dad never was and still isnt super organized, where as I am *alphabetize my own bookshelf with a full system* Type-A about keeping things in order. Call me weird but i really enjoy reorganizing things/cleaning, it just hits that button for me. 

So being that he had about 2 months until he closed on the house, i just start to pack up some of the house for him (basement was a DISASTER and i had wanted to tear it up for years). So within the first day i had made a significant dent in the basement, which ended up being a very involved process. I didn't realize when we had moved in that a lot of the stuff from our old house was still packed haphazardly because my brother and i were too young to really help. So i went through the process of unpacking the still packed boxes from house 1, labeling the boxes the way i wanted to and then repacking those boxes appropriately. After about 3 days of this i get about 50% done, including cleaning/packing my room and some of the garage. 

Heres the buildup to the MC

My dad comes down to help me, all good with me. I start explaining where things go and my dad wants to change it. I resist, explaining that i already have the system and that i have been doing the bulk of the packing so he should probably just go with me on this one which is when he hits me with the namesake of this post.

So i relent, because i know what will happen. 

Anyone thats really type A will agree with me that the only thing more frustrating then things being chaotic and out of order, is things that are *slightly* out of order. Which is what i KNEW would happen. Regardless of the fight dad and I had, he ended up almost following the system. Mostly things that belong in the labeled boxes went where they were supposed to, except for a few VERY important odds and ends that got put... well... not where they were supposed to. I noticed this but because of "my house my rules" CLEARLY he has a plan so i dont say anything -.-

I knew the payoff was going to be a slow burn, and it came several months later when i was in school across the country and unable to help.

Dad calls me one day very flustered because he cant find something he NEEDED. He had been in the storage unit he rented in my hometown for the better part of three hours looking. 

Now the storage unit got packed HORRIBLY by the moving crew, i have been in there a few times after this story and i feared for my safety, its a legitimate labyrinth/jungle gym and a nightmare to get through, not to mention this was mid summer and there was no AC.

So dad is mad on the phone asking me where it is and i ask him if its in the box I labeled in big red sharpie IMPORTANT SHIT. He says no, and i smile a bit. Then he says, well you were in charge of packing all of this stuff and now I can't find it. That's when I calmly reminded him of the blowout fight we had over this exact issue and how he commandeered my operation afterwords. I told them that if I was actually in charge it would be in the box labeled important shit. He hung up on me after that.

I love my dad and I had no problem helping him out, we laugh about it today but I can't say I didn't get a good chuckle at the thought of him sweating and cursing climbing around in that fucking storage unit death trap. He recently found another place to live now that my grandparents have more in-home assistance and I've already worked out that I'm gonna come help him move. 

We already agreed I'm in charge this time.I (23F) started a new job last summer as a part-time fellow with the possibility of going full-time. I was hired to replace someone who was full-time, so my responsibilities were much greater than the time that I was allotted to work, which was 29 hours a week. Basically, my bosses kept piling work on me and since this was my first job out of college, I finished it but was basically working full-time for about a week and a half. I had flagged the issue with them and they told me to reflect the time on my timesheet.

Fast forward to pay-day, my bosses are livid that I worked too much, saying that I had to stay at exactly 29 hours to be a part-time employee. Cue the malicious compliance.

I started vehemently tracking my hours. I would plan my weeks in advance so I knew the maximum amount of hours I could work each day to stay at 29 hours. I basically worked from 9:30 to 3:30, but obviously there were days that I had to work longer. When my bosses would give me tasks on Thursday and Fridays, I would say to them, well I have to leave at 2 pm today so I'm under 29 hours this week and go home and relax. This obviously made my bosses frustrated since they needed to offload work, but I was just following exactly what they had told me to do. After about 3 weeks of this, and multiple tasks not being able to get done because of my strict 29 hour work week, they finally offered me a full-time job.

EDIT: Wow this blew up! I had 14 karma when I posted this so I was not expecting this at all. Thank you to everyone who has commented. It's been great to read all of the support and solidarity to everyone whose employers are attempting to take advantage of them. For all of the people saying this isn't malicious compliance, I think that 11k people beg to differ so I'm not going to argue with you in the comments. I used to work in a pawn shop as both a sales associate and a pawn broker. I have so many stories I could probably fill this subreddit, but this one always makes me smile because of how smug the man was. 

When I was a sales associate, I sold a lot of jewelry. I often had to tell people that we couldn't hold items because A) someone might come in and want it and have the money right there and B) we had a layaway program. So, unless you put some money down, 20%, holding it wasn't an option.

So, one day this man comes in and is looking for a very specific type of ring: diamond channel set anniversary ring set in white gold size 5. The pawn shop I worked at had a VAST collection of these types of things in many sizes and with many different carat weights. He needed a specific size and a specific carat weight and he was very much in luck, because we HAPPENED to have it. Most pawn shops are you get what you see and you can see what you get. Basically, we don't have inventory/stock of any specific item and our jewelers are for sizing and dipping purposes only. So, I show him my ring that I have in the case.

Me: here you go. Exactly the size you need and just over the carat weight.

Man, pulls out a loupe, looks at diamonds: okay, they're not AS clear as I normally like them.

Me: yeah, I understand, but the price is only $350 and at a regular jewelry store, this would easily run around $1500, so while the clarity isn't as nice, it's still a really good deal and I don't know if you'll find another this size with the same carat weight.

Man, sighing: okay. Well, I know your sister store also has some rings, right? Do you think they might have a better one with better quality?

At this time, there is a woman looking at rings and clearly listening to our conversation, but I'm positive he hasn't noticed her. She sees the ring in my hand and I see her eyebrow go up.

Me: Im not sure, but they are a smaller store, so their inventory is smaller. If they do have one, there isn't a guarantee the ring will be the correct size or the same carat weight.

Man: hmm. Okay, well can you hold the ring for me? I want to go see their inventory.

Me: I'm sorry, we can't. Company policy is that all items held must be put on layaway for holding. If someone wants to buy an item and it isn't in layaway, we don't want to stop them.

Man: Hmph, well, I'm gonna hold off and go check that store. IF someone comes in and sees THIS specific ring, yeah, go ahead and sell it, but I doubt that's gonna happen. 

He walked away with a kind of smug look on his face. Just as he left, the woman who was listening to our conversation walks up. 

Woman: can I see that ring he didn't want?

I hand it over to her. She slips it on her finger and smiles.

Woman: I'll take it.

She didn't even hesitate. She straight up bought this ring after wearing it for 5 second's. During ring out I asked her why and she said she had been searching for a channel set ring for a few years at the pawn shops, but none had caught her eye like that one and it was her size, which can be hard to find. I told her have a nice day and cleaned it before she left.

45 minutes later, the man walked back in.

Man: okay, they didn't have anything, so I guess I'll take that one I was looking at.

Me: I'm sorry, sir, but just after you left a woman came up, tried on the ring and bought it. I don't have anymore in the carat weight you're looking for. I have some in the higher carat weights, if you're interested!

Man: are you fucking serious? You knew I'd probably be back! Why did you sell it?

Me: well, you did say I should if someone came in and saw it. Just because you doubt something is going to happen doesn't mean it can't.

Edit: some of y'all are saying I didn't say the last line. Let me make something clear: the pawn industry is  incredibly different than normal retail stores. I have actually told customers to straight up "Get the fuck out of my store" and had 0 consequences. I promise I said this line. If you're wondering what happened after, he demanded to speak to my manager who shouted through the window: "we don't hold shit for assholes unless you put it in layaway. Don't assume shit here, buddy!" That manager also looked exactly like the BTK serial killer, so.....I was telling this story in another forum and thought I’d share here.

This was a year or two ago when Amazon fresh were opening up new stores in London. For anyone not familiar with they, you just walk in, take what you want, then walk out. Your Amazon account gets billed as they use cameras and sensors.

So I used the one in white city after it had just opened, I went in just for the novelty factor and got a few things. I found a couple of pricing errors, in my favour, a couple really big pricing errors. 

I done the decent thing and told Amazon, expecting a thank you, but got a call from an irate call handler insisting I got and was charged the correct amount and I wasn’t over charged and wasn’t due anything back, I repeatedly tried in vain to say no, you’ve undercharged me, but she was having none of it, so I gave up.

Naturally, after the call, I changed my tube commute for an 5 minute longer route and I went in each day and bought only those items priced wrong. 

Suffice to say I have enough toiletries for a few years… also I am now sickened by a pricey cheesecake brand and have gone off haloumi cheese .

TLDR . Got treated like a dick by Amazon customer service on the phone when trying to be honest because undercharged a lot on a few item in there fresh store. So went back each day and only bought they wrongly priced items to the point where I wiped them out daily of those items.



Edit : for a bit more clarity on the prices, The cheesecakes and haloumi cheese were pennies in the pound I paid about 2% of the actual price, so about 8p per £5 fancy small artisan cheesecake, and about 9p for the block of haloumi.

The toiletries I paid about 6 or 7% of the actual price, so about 50 to 60p per item instead off £9 to £11 each plus it’s toiletries I’d have been buying anyway, only thing now is I had to get a few big boxes in the garage to store them.

Going via this store cost me nothing extra in travel as in London you get charged a fixed fee for unlimited travel within zones, it only cost me 5 min extra commute each day.Just found this sub! This story dates back to my senior year of high school (2013).

My school was quite small, we had a graduating class of 92 so everyone knew everyone. All the teachers were amazing and very involved in our academic lives, but for the most part had nothing but good intentions. Unfortunately there was 1 teacher, our English AP teacher, who was just an absolute jerk. She was the type of teacher that if she saw you with your cell phone out, even during lunch or in between classes, that she would take it, give it to the principal, and give you a detention.

I decided to fuck with her one day because she was quite clearly in a pissed off mood and the opportunity was perfect. I was standing in line for lunch and I got my pump out (I was diagnosed with diabetes at age 8 and I have had a pump since 9). It looks a whole lot like a cell phone other than the tube running from it to my body. Without really looking closely it can easily be confused with a cell phone. She sees me playing with my pump and comes over to me. This is obviously not exact words used. I more than likely was a little disrespectful but I definitely knew the boundaries and would never be so blatantly rude or disrespectful that it would deem necessary to get a detention.

Teacher: Give it to me now and follow me to the principles office.

Me: Um no, I need this to live.

Teacher: Give it to me now, I will not ask again.

Me: No, leave me alone I just want to eat my lunch.

She then grabs my arm and drags me to the principal's office. I was very close to the principal as I was the class president so I spent a lot of time with her planning school events and such.

Teacher: This student had their phone out during lunch, refused to give it to me, and was rude and back talked me.

Principal: Is this true (Me)?

Me: No ma'am, my cell phone is currently in my locker.

Teacher: I saw you playing with it in line!

Principal: (Me), please give us your cell phone.

Me: Okay, follow me to my locker then.

Teacher: No, give it to us now, it is in your pocket.

Me: No it's not.

Teacher: Then empty your pockets.

I proceed to empty my pockets which was a pack of gum and then I have my pump in my hand because it's connected to me so I can't put it on the table.

Teacher: Why would you lie to me when you obviously have it in your hand?

Me: This is my diabetes pump.

Teacher: Why didn't you tell me?

Me: You never asked if it was a cell phone, you just tried taking it away from me.

Teacher: This is ridiculous, you need to show more respect.

Principal: I think we are done here, Teacher you can leave I will talk with (Me).

Teacher leaves and is quite obviously pissed off about the situation. I tell Principal the truth about the trap I set for Teacher and that I hope she isn't pissed at me and I won't do it again. She chuckles a little bit, tells me to go eat lunch and she will see me later for a school fundraiser event. I never had another encounter with Teacher and during class she made it a point to try not to talk to me.Whilst in University I was working in a popular supermarket chain as a Team Leader. I worked evenings, so this meant that I was essentially in charge of the checkouts as there were no managers in. I wore a headset and if the cashiers needed assistance, they would buzz me and I would go help. It wouldn't say what help was needed on the headset, just which number checkout. 

One night, I am in the middle of the store putting away some abandoned items. My headset tells me checkout 4 needs help. On it. 

As I am walking over, checkout 8 also buzzes in. Fine, I will go there next. It takes a good couple of minutes before I get to checkout 4. Some discounted items weren't going through and I needed to authorise something. It took about 3 minutes to put through all the items that the customer wanted and then I make my way over to checkout 8.

As I approach, I can hear this guy causing a scene. He is moaning about how long I am taking and how incompetent we clearly are. As I get closer I see this middle aged man with his arms in the air in a "come on!" gesture, complaining at the cashier that he has been on his feet all day and all he fucking wants is another box of eggs. 

I am super polite and ask how I can help. He turns with the biggest frown and I fully expect him to rip me a new one, but alas... he suddenly looks sheepish, and his body visibly shrinks in with shame. You see, redditors, I was 8 months pregnant at the time and as big as a house. 

The cashier explains that the eggs the man chose are broken and he needs a new box. Immediately, he says, "Oh... um... I can go get them?" There isn't even a queue behind him; he could have gotten them at any point.

I say, "No, that's OK sir; you've been on your feet all day. Let me get your eggs." I waddle away and take my time.

Edit: Thanks for the love, man!A guy I know (we both work in emergency services/public safety) was at a restaurant with his family. He racked up a $100 plus bill. Waitress brings the bill, he puts his credit card in the receipt thing, hands it to her. She comes back a few minutes later, tells him she can't charge the meal to that card because he doesn't look like the picture on the credit card. Well, that's true, he had lost 150 pounds in the preceding 2 years.

"Oh, that's me, I used to be fat..."

"I'm sorry sir, you don't look like the picture, my manager won't let me run the card."

"Well I don't  carry that much cash, and that's my only credit card, so what do you wanna do?"

"I don't know sir, but I can't charge this card if you dont match the picture. "

"Well kids, you heard the lady... FREE MEAL!"

*Manager comes out*

"Sir, you're going to have to find another way to pay for the check."

"There isn't another way. I gave you my card, you refused to charge it, so it's your problem now."

"Well if you leave, I'll have to call the police."

tEn MiNuTeS lAtEr

Cop: "Oh hey Josh, what's up?" (Remember that Josh works public safety, he personally knows all the local cops.)

Josh: "They won't take my card because it has my fat picture on it."

Cop, trying VERY HARD not to laugh: "Uh, yes ma'am, I can vouch for him, he is the same person as that extremely fat picture on the card."

Manager: "I can't charge the card if the picture doesn't match."

Cop: "So he's tried to pay, and I've confirmed he is who he says he is, and that picture on the card is him, and you won't run the card?"

Manager: "I'm not allowed to, no."

Cop: "Well Josh, you heard the lady, FREE MEAL!"

Josh and the cop then proceeded to stand in the parking lot for another 20 minutes laughing and talking, while the manager glared out the door from behind the hostess stand. (Josh's wife and kids (teenagers btw) had long since walked to Target across the parking lot.)

I often would ask him if he had been back to that restaurant, he said he got a new card recently (with no picture at all) and he did go back, just he and his wife. Different waitress, never saw the manager, ate, paid, left.

It was a Longhorn Steakhouse, if you were wondering.I originally placed this story at r/talesfromtechsupport, some people referred me to this sub so here you go.

About 3 years ago I used to work at the tech department for a customer support provider. Our client was a budget ISP, so you know what's up. Besides customer support, I also worked a few hours per week as Quality Monitor (QM). This basically means that I listen recorded calls and grade them on how well the employee did. My colleague (let's call him Burt) e-mailed me that I have to listen to the call he is having right now with a customer, Miss $ladypants.

Ten minutes later I see that he is done with the call. I download the recording which also contains a screenrecording of Burt's desktop, so I also could see what he was doing during the call. The call was not in English so I translated as accurate as I could.  


Burt: Good afternoon and welcome to $client, my name is Burt, how can I help you?

$ladypants: Ya hi you need to fix my Wi-Fi, it just stopped working on all my devices! This is the 2,147,483,647th time this week!

Burt (loading the customer data): That sounds like quite the problem ma'am, on all your devices you say?

$ladypants: Ya but I still have TV.

Burt: Indeed, I can see that your internet still works, so it seems to be just the Wi-Fi.

Burt follows the regular troubleshoot which takes a few minutes, but $ladypants becomes impatient quickly and starts to scold Burt.

$ladypants: Why does this take so long, is this your first day or something?

Burt: No ma'am, but not all problems can be fixed quickly.

$ladypants: I don't have time for this BS, can you transfer me to someone who actually knows his shit?

At this moment is Burt audibly getting pissed. I see him opening up his workmail and sending me the actual message as I think to myself: Burt you baldy motherfucker you...

Burt: I'm sorry Miss $ladypants, but you'll have to deal with me. Let's just focus on the problem, OK?

$ladypants (starts screaming): NO! I'm done with you! All of you! I want to cancel my whole package, you hear!? Right now!

Burt: Are you sure? I think it's better if you-

$ladypants: No! I don't want to hear anymore excuses! For the second time, cancel it!

Burt: Okidoki ma'am this will take only a minute, I'll be right back.

Burt (calls to $admin in the backoffice): Hi $admin, Miss $ladypants would like to immediately cancel her complete subscription.

$admin: Uhm.. Is she sure about that, buddy?

Burt: Yes, I asked her specifically (he didn't lie)

$admin: Allrighty then, the order is first in the list so that is... done! All the services are terminated, the final bill for this month will be recalculated around $somedate.

Burt: Cool, thanks.

Burt (goes back to $ladypants): Thank you for waiting miss $ladypants, I ha-

$ladypants: WHAT HAVE YOU DONE MY TV STOPPED WORKING!

Burt: Well, that's because you have canceled your subscription, so the services stop too.

$ladypants: WTF I DIDN'T MEAN THAT?! You know what I'm gonna file the biggest complaint you've ever seen! Give me your name and transfer me to your complaint department!

Burt: I'm very sorry ma'am, but if you want to do that you will have to become a customer first.

$ladypants: ...

Burt: ... can I do anything else to help you with?

$ladypants: FUCK YOU YOU PIECE OF SHIT \*click\*

And the recording ends there. Burt has never heard about her again, she went to a different ISP.

Edit: grammar, a bit more elaborationBack in senior year of High School (last year of HS), I had an amazing English teacher. Very engaging and passionate about what he did: a great class to have first period.

Well, the class is all seniors, and it was the end of the year and finals were coming up, you know how that goes. Our school's schedule for finals was 2 periods/classes per day for 3 days. 

The administration, wary of senioritis and kids skipping class, warned the teachers that they must hold class on the day of their scheduled final and that they cannot tell the students that they do not need to show up.

So my teacher, the week before finals gets up in front of the whole class and says,

"For our final, we will be watching a movie. Now, the administration has told me that I am not allowed to tell you that you do not have to show up to this final..."

He stares at us and pauses for a few seconds.

"...so I will not do so."

Needless to say, I got some extra zzz's that finals week.I am not sure that this post qualifies, as it didn't end well for me.

Back when I was in high school, I used to go to a Roman Catholic school, here in the UK.  We had a rather irate RE (Religious Education) teacher.  One Friday, we were set homework to write 2-3 pages, describing world religions as if we had just discovered the planet as an alien.

I set to work and wrote it out on the Friday evening...  then had a thought...  If I were writing this from the perspective of aliens, then it wouldn't be in English (foolish me).  I came up with a symbol for each letter of the alphabet, and re-wrote the entire thing with these symbols.

Monday morning rolls around, and I handed it in (with a decoder, of course).

I ended up in detention for 2 days.  I also understand I probably wasted that teacher's time when they just wanted to read and grade - but part of me wanted to get some kind of credit for the extra effort.

&#x200B;

Oh well, sometimes compliance isn't all roses :)I was a weird kid who HATED telling people I was sick. 
In elementary we were having a movie day and nothing would stop me from going. I threw up before school and told no one so I wasn't forced to stay home. During the movie I kept feeling sick So I would ask the teacher if I could go to the bathroom, right next to our class, throw up and then return to the movie. I did this about 3 times before the teacher decided I wasn't allowed to go to the bathroom. Next time I was nauseous I went to the teacher and said I was sick and needed to go to the bathroom. She didnt believe me (obviously) and I then stood by the garbage. She was having none of that told me to sit down and not get up again. I tried to hold it in but I threw up all over my desk. And wouldnt you know we had some sympathy pukers there. 

Edited for spellingI’ve named this tale The Long Game, since it actually spans over the course of several years leading to the satisfying conclusion. Also, because its a long story. I’ll understand if you skip this one for a shorter one. 

Several years ago I was in desperate need of a job. I was recently released from active duty in the US Army under a medical discharge, met my girlfriend (who is currently my wife) who moved in with me with her two small children from a previous marriage, and I was bouncing around from dead end job to dead end job. I had very little real world skills to offer to employers so my options were limited. I took a chance and interviewed with a small security company and was immediately hired. They liked that I was prior service, grilled me with questions only a veteran would know, and sent me to work on their biggest contract. 

I was on a site of a massive multi-million dollar construction location. A large named oil company was building a new headquarters and well... massive construction project just doesn’t seem like a big enough description. As security, a bulk of our responsibility was checking and vetting all construction workers and contractors through the gate, inspect vehicles for possible stolen property, and generally serve as a deterring force. To put it simply, everyday my gate alone would process about 1-2 thousand cars during my 8 hour shift. The site was running 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to meet the very tight construction schedule. I was only on one of 3 gates so thats about 3-6 thousand cars that came on site every day in an 8 hour period. Massive construction site. 

(As a side note that will become very important later in the story, each car that came through had to undergo a strict inspection when the driver is FIRST assigned to work on the site. Then the vehicle gets a sticker and is allowed to drive onto the construction site. We would ensure the car has the sticker, and then just process everyones badge through a verification machine. If all badges passed, and the car had a sticker, then we would let the contractors on site so they can get to work.)

Working there was great. All the security were ex-military so, beyond a little teasing about who they served with, everyone bonded really well. We didn’t have sick days or vacations days, so when people would call off for personal reasons or illness, everyone happily chipped in to make up the lost hours. And, because of this teamwork, our big boss overlooked the call offs and let us make overtime money. No write ups, no punishments.

Sometimes we were working 16 hour shifts back to back. I spent many nights sleeping in the parking garage in between shifts because it was easier than driving home, to sleep a few hours, only to come back to work for another 16 hour day. We were in outdoor conditions in all weather, and were on our feet on concrete the entire time. Sitting down was a luxury that we rarely saw. We couldn’t leave the gate for any reason unless we were relieved by a supervisor who would try to come by twice during an 8 hour shift to let you go to the port-o-potty or quickly eat your lunch. Rain, harsh summer heat, bug storms (yes thats a thing), hail... you were out by your gate with no protection other than a construction hard hat. I know these sound like horrendous conditions but really, it was the best job I ever had. 

Because of the conditions it was no wonder that 95% of the employees were male. We tried hiring females but most would last a few days before quitting. Those people who did not quit in a few days were lifers and loved the job. 

The problems began about 3 months into the job. One of the supervisors was quitting to go back to school so a position opened up. Everyone was given an opportunity to apply for the supervisor position. I was encouraged by the night shift supervisor (who was the one quitting) to go for the promotion because he thought I would be a good replacement for him, even though I was the newest officer on the site and had the least amount of experience. So, I threw in my hat just for laughs. 

Two other people applied. One was a guy who had obvious seniority. The other was a girl (one of three on the site) who had been there for about a year. We were given a face to face interview with the boss. We’ll call him Jim. My interview went well and Jim liked that I was ambitious. Jim was also the guy who accepted me onto the site in the first place. 

The next phase of testing was a practice run as a temporary supervisor. We were each given a day to be the supervisor in charge. Jim was there, along with a junior Supervisor named... Ray, yeah, thats a good name for him. (For clarification, Ray did not want the promotion and was happy performing his regular duties) both were present just incase situations occurred that was beyond our ability to handle they were standing by to assist. My test day went well. I finished all tasks assigned to me and I even managed to handle a minor emergency on my own. The other two applicants apparently didn’t do to well...

The senior guy kept forgetting his list of tasks he was given to accomplish and kept going back to the office to ask Jim what he should do next. The Girl did ok, but every time she would check up on the guards she would flaunt around her temporary rank, make employees call her “ma’am”, and bragging about how she was definitely going to be getting the promotion.  Imagine her shock when I was given the position as the new night shift supervisor. To say she was angry was an understatement. 

Apparently she was so upset that she didn’t get the promotion that she called me on my personal cell phone. She stole my number from the supervisor emergency phone. To add to the situation, I had not yet been informed I got the promotion. Nothing official had been put out just yet. Not a direct quote but paraphrasing as best as I can:

Me: hello?

Girl: How does it feel?

Me: um... who’s this?

Girl: what? You don’t know? I thought supervisors are supposed to know EVERYTHING!

Me: (very confused) You called OP, I think you may have the wrong number.

Girl: I know who I called! Don’t pretend like you don’t know. You got the promotion because you’re all sexists pigs!

Me: I got the promotion? Cool!

Girl: That promotion was supposed to be mine but I guess since Im not in the bro-club they just gave it to you. If you don’t resign the position to me I’m going to tell HR about all this sexism and you’ll all be fired!

Me: What sexism? I got the position by passing the tests. Isn’t it sexist to assume you should get the promotion only because you happen to be born a female? Isn’t that act alone sexist? 

Girl: But only men get promoted to leadership positions!!!

Me: 95% of the site is male! Odds are males are going to get promoted. Sorry you didn’t make the cut but none of this is my problem. 

So I hung up the phone and called both Jim and Ray to inform them about the call. I was assured that I was promoted, they didn’t know how she found out, and they were going to file harassment on my behalf to HR for her stealing my phone number from the work phone and contacting me with threats.

And thats where the story SHOULD end. But oh no fellow readers... it has only just begun. Now would be a good time to get some popcorn and a drink. 

So about two to three months roll by and I’m getting into the role of Supervisor. Girl, has since been removed from the site, and the employees are really happy that Im the new supervisor and that Girl is gone. Things continue as normal and I begin bonding with my staff. I especially bond with a guard that no one liked. His name for this story is Victor. Victor is a marine veteran, he was in the initial invasion of Iraq and developed severe PTSD. It makes him very confrontational, argumentative, and a super big A-hole to anyone who talks to him. I liked the guy from the get go and we quickly became close friends. 

Every night I would hang out with him between my duties and we would talk. I eventually convinced him to seek help from the Veterans Association, and go to PTSD counseling. He was also going to school to get his Masters degree (Thanks to Ray who convinced him to not give up on his education) and would just need to vent sometimes. I was that vent. He would blow up at me, yell and scream, and when he was done we would hug it out. It was therapy for him and I didn’t mind. 

All seemed to be going well until one day I came to visit with Victor. What I didn’t know was that Victor was pulling a 16 hour shift and actually worked the afternoon and the night shift. So when I showed up to work he had already been there a majority of the day. He asked me if I spoke with Jim recently. I hadn’t. Apparently Jim didn’t show up to work today. A few days go by and well... Jim mysteriously disappeared. 

After 3 or 4 days of his disappearance, Ray called an emergency meeting with the supervisors. In attendance was myself, Ray, and another supervisor from the second shift who is not important and does not require a fictional name. The meeting was to try and figure out what happened to Jim. We pooled our knowledge together and decided the best course of action was to contact the main headquarters branch to see if they knew something. He wasn’t answering the phone when we called him so we feared he was in the hospital and no one bothered to tell us. 

When we called we were given the run around, but eventually an HR rep who was friends with Ray spilled the beans. Jim had quit the job. Girl (from earlier) apparently made good on her threats. After she was kicked out of the site, she got ahold of a lawyer and began the process of suing the company. Not only for sexism and favoritism, but also sexual harassment. 

As it turned out, Jim was a lonely man. Girl and Jim began flirting and eventually sexting... and the idiot used the company supervisor cell phone to do it. She not only had copies of the messages, but when the company dug into the phone records they had all the evidence needed to see she was not lying. There were pictures... lots of pictures. 

Girl was brilliant. Evil, but brilliant. She knew that the old supervisor was going to go back to school eventually so she began flirting with Jim. She pursued him. Each conversation in person she would be flirtatious, rubbing him and even having sex with him. On the phone, however, she played coy and made him take charge. In the end, the evidence looked like he pressured her to have sex with him... and promised a promotion (in a bout of pillow talk and before anyone knew that the position was going to be open) to her in exchange for sex acts. At the time it was role play, but now it appears like this was all part of her insurance plan to get promoted for real. 

That was more than enough for the company to do something. When Jim caught wind what was happening he took off. 

This left us without a boss, and worse, in order to avoid a lawsuit, the company rehired Girl to her old position, replanted her on our site, paid her enough money to cover her missed salary plus a bonus and a raise, and promised to get more females on the site and on supervisor positions. This was enough to satisfy Girl so she dropped the lawsuit. 

As the only form of authority on the site, we three supervisors took it upon ourselves to run the site as best as we could until a new boss was assigned to help us or one of us was promoted to the position. 

Almost two months went by and Girl was a huge nuisance. She was constantly calling off her shift at the last minute and since everyone didn’t like her, no one was willing to cover her shift. We attempted to write her up for the situation but she quickly threw it back in our face and threaten to call her lawyer for harassment. After all, “none of the male employees get written up when they call off... obviously this is sexism and boys club all over again.”

She pushed her luck too far one day, however, and severely disrespected one of the oil company representatives during his visit. He had her permanently removed from the site. When the security company tried to take her side (for fear of another lawsuit) he said either Girl is gone or he’ll get another security company to take over the contract. The company gave in and moved her to another site. 

But even though Girl was now out of our lives forever, the absolute nightmare she started was still forming overhead. The company finally found a suitable replacement for Jim, that was also female to satiate the terms set forth by Girls lawyer. 

Our new boss was named... well, i have lots of names for that sea hag but for now I’ll refer to her as Tasha. 

Tasha was a handful from the get go. As the new boss she was working on the site for nearly two weeks before she ever introduced herself to either the second shift supervisor or myself (i still worked nights). What boss does that? Two weeks before you introduce yourself to the supervisors? It took her another month to eventually meet all the guards. The site was busy but it wasn’t that big. 

Already she was off to a bad start. She was also non-military and didn’t seem respect the fact that every guard and supervisor was a military vet. Most of us served in war zones, lived in the dirt, and were very self sufficient. She saw everyone as a brainless meat head who needed CONSTANT supervision. The term micro-manager isn’t strong enough of a description to understand the level of hands on she needed to have. And it probably would have been much different if she was improving things, or making things more efficient... but she was barely able to perform the simplest tasks, made constant poor decisions, and just kinda ticked everyone off whenever she was around. 

We three supervisors tried to train her and bring her up to speed with the site but she wouldn’t hear any of our advice. After about another week or so from her introduction to everyone she began to get worse. 

We started seeing a ton of write ups flooding across our desks. Like, dozens and dozens for a single employee. And the write ups, while technically correct, were of the most petty things imaginable. Her favorite was writing up employees for breaking uniform regulations. You have a stray string on your uniform? Write up. Shoes dirty? Write up. A haircut she didn’t like? Write up. Glasses smudged? Write up. The best was her writing up a guard because his uniform was wet... because it was raining outside, and we were not allowed to seek shelter because of our duties. 

Every gate had a “guard shack” available. It was a small space with just enough room for a chair and a table to write on. It had a small A/C and a mini-fridge to keep water, Gatorades, and our lunch cold. But no one could use the guard shacks because they were so far away from the gates. Still within eyesight, but we had to physically badge in vehicles and employees and the verification machine was set up next to the gate. When you swipe a badge, a green or red light flashes and it makes a little beep sound to say wether or not someone is allowed on property. But if you’re in the guard shack you can’t physically hear the beep (reminder, this is a construction site) nor can you see the lights because the lights face the vehicle. So you have to stand there and swipe the badge and physically look at the lights to know wether or not to let anyone in. Also, remember the car stickers? They were positioned on the windshield so you can’t see them from a shack 30 feet away from the gate. And because of the massive volume of cars coming and going, there just wasn’t any time to walk to the guard shack, much less sit down. 

We tried to explain that to Tasha who just didn’t seem to care. 

It also became very clear that she was focusing on one guard at a time. Every write up and disciplinary meeting was laser focused on one individual. Eventually that person would get so sick of the harassment that they would quit. As soon as they were gone she would focus on another guard. 

The entire site went from a dream job to the most hostile work environment i’ve ever bore witness too. I served 10 years in the Army and served three tours to Afghanistan. I served under some of the most idiotic leadership imaginable, people who only got promoted because they were in the army soooo long that eventually they would get promotions. Ask a Veteran, they’ll understand what I mean. And all that time, all those dead end jobs with king of the tiny pond managers i used to work for, were NOTHING in comparison to Tasha. 

After two months under her reign 12 employees quit... including Ray. Yes, apparently supervisors were also under fire. I feel that I’m obligated at this point to mention that Ray is the best damn leader I’ve ever had the luxury of working with. Even though he was technically under me, he was and is the most professional man I have ever known. Period. Everyone on site respected him, everyone would have followed him to Hell and back, everyone loved Ray. Even when I was promoted above him, instead of being petty he encouraged me to do better. He trained me and became a role model to myself and many others on the site. Including Victor. Remember him from earlier? The PTSD guy that no one liked. Apparently he had two friends in this world. Me and Ray. And now Ray was bullied out of his job. 

Protip: Never fuck with a Marine. Especially one who has nothing left to lose. 

To put into context how bad this really is, no one quit the company before Tasha took over. Some people left to better opportunities, or were new hires who couldn’t hack it, but overall people had worked on that site since construction began 5 years prior. Some people had been with the company going on 10 years. These were the people she was going after and who she forced to quit. I had quit smoking for three years and things got so bad everyone started smoking again, even myself. 

You would think with as many people quitting that we would have a worker shortage but then you would be mistaken. As soon as someone quit, the next day the position was filled again. But 2nd shift supervisor and myself quickly learned that these people were not ex-military. These people were moody, had very bad attitudes with other guards and the many contractors we were dealing with on a daily basis. They were lazy, would often hide in the guard shacks and would not verify wether or not cars could enter the site. They were messy (both in personality and their surroundings) and generally what one would consider horrible employees. 

We called Ray to see if he could contact his HR buddy to find out where these people were coming from. And here is where the story gets even worse...

Remember when old boss Jim took off? Well, someone had to take the fall for the sexism lawsuit that was forming. So the company terminated another employee. That employee was responsible for staffing the oil company contract. He was also responsible for hiring veterans and verifying them. Remember the questions I was asked at the beginning of this story that only a veteran would know the answers to. Yep, that guy. He was gone. So unfortunately no more veterans were selected from the hiring pool and sent our way. He was terminated because he originally hired Jim.

As it turned out, Tasha (the new terror boss) was actually in charge of an office building contract in another part of the city. She lost the contract to that building and herself and all her guards were now in limbo and out of a job. Some of the guards were issued to new contracts but pay in security is usually pretty lousy. Normally about minimum wage. But our job paid very well. $15 an hour to start off because the company was supposed to offer it only to ex-military guards due to the site contract. 

I discovered years later that Tasha actually lost the building contract not because the contract ended naturally, but because she and her guards were useless that the building hired other people to do their jobs. The person in charge of contracts... was sleeping with Tasha. They covered up the contract loss so she can still have a job. Oh, and since military guy got fired during the lawsuit... Tasha’s fuck buddy took over his responsibilities.

Hence, Tasha got another site contract, a pay raise, and was selected only because she was female and sleeping with the contract guy. Hows that for ironic sexism? 

And... it gets better... and the write ups and harassment on our site were a ruse to get the Veterans to quit their jobs, forcing the company to fill the spot with whoever was available due to a loophole clause in the oil company contract. It basically allowed the security company to staff open positions with non-military employees in an emergency employee shortage incident. 

And guess who the new lazy employees were? Yep, the old guards that served under Tasha, who were so bad at their job that they lost their own contract. But why them? Because they were requested, by name, by the largest contract supervisor Tasha. 

One by one I watched my fellow veterans and employees fall under attack and quit, only to be replaced by useless people and backstabbing thugs. 

I really could go on, there is a TON that happened during that time period, but its well past the time for some Malicious Compliance. 

I was the next to be targeted... and I was the next to quit. 

The malicious compliance, unfortunately was not caused by myself initially. But, by Victor who now watched his second and only friend quit from the job site. Victor is my god damn hero. 

After I left I started working for another security company. Ironically, the guy who hired me was Jim. My direct supervisor? Ray!!! We three were back together again and worked for another oil/gas company. The pay was awesome and info was shared about Jim getting set up for the fall and what not. We tried to get Victor to quit his job and join us at the new company... but the old marine was on one last mission. 

Remember those car stickers? Well, as it turned out, Victor had a super power. For whatever reason, he was able to spot forged stickers from across the gate.

Ok, so forged stickers? Yep, they were a problem. The construction site had very limited parking and safety regulations were put in place that only licensed drivers could come onsite. The cars also had to pass crazy tests in order to meet the safety regulation compliance. The problem is that construction companies and sub-contractors often hire illegal workers, or people with criminal history, or people who just have crapy cars that probably aren’t registered or even inspected by the state. No one really cared, but without licensing they could not drive onsite. So, someone began forging car stickers and selling them to all the people who would not legally be able to get them. 

At first they were crude, obviously crayon on tape. If you glanced at it, it was passable but any close inspection would reveal that the sticker was fake. If a fake sticker was found, regulation stated that the car must be pulled over, and a security supervisor would need to be contacted. The security supervisor would have to get ahold of the site foreman, a supervisor from the fake sticker driver, and a police officer who would remove the sticker and permanently remove the employee from the site forever. 

Now, because all the replacement guards were really bad at their jobs, the fake sticker business was in full swing. They were getting better, laser printed on vinyl, and nearly indistinguishable from the real stickers. 

But Victor was now on a mission. He took a position at the main entry gate and began pulling over as many cars as he could with the fake stickers. He pulled over sooo many that a security supervisor (Tasha) was assigned to be nearby at all times. The site had to hire an additional police officer and the Site Forman had a permanent representative at the gate... 

Everyday Victor was pulling over car after car. He started training some of the least useless guards how to do it and what to look for. It became a HUGE nuisance for Tasha but she technically couldn’t do anything about it because he was following the site rules to the letter. 

After a month of aggressive crackdown on the fake sticker problem, the Oil company representatives held a special meeting with Tasha and Victor to plead with him to stop. He had singlehandedly removed so many construction workers and contractors that many companies were pulling their long term contracts with the oil company. Construction came to a sudden halt, and the oil company was hemorrhaging tons of money to either keep on contractors or find new ones willing to pick up the job where others left off. 

Best of all, the construction should have been WAY ahead of schedule so the Oil Company sold their old headquarters to someone else in the expectation to move into the newly constructed headquarters. However, incompetent security replacements were not checking vehicles exiting the properly and thousands upon thousands of dollars worth of tools and construction supplies were stolen, causing massive set backs. 

Then, the sticker fiasco cause any progress that was still going on to come to a sudden halt. 

The Oil Company now had to pay and greatly inflated rent at their old headquarters because the building was sold but they had nowhere to send the employees!!! So the new owners let them stay and jacked up the rent so high that it was causing the oil company to lose massive revenue and stocks were beginning to drop. 

During the meeting Victor only asked one question, “So, are you changing the regulation to state that illegal drivers are now allowed onsite?”

Of course they didn’t change it. They couldn’t and Victor knew it. The meeting came to a close. Victor returned to his gate and continued his mission. After a few days, an accident occurred onsite. The blame was the drivers, but the buck was passed to Victor who became the fall guy and he was terminated from the security company. Everyone knew it was Bullshit and that he was obviously the scapegoat... but Victor didn’t care. He waged his war, and in my eyes, he won. 

So thats the end of the Malicious Compliance and if you made it this far then good on you. I hope you enjoyed this slice of my life and I leave you with a wish: I hope the best of your past is worst of your future. 

If you’re still here then you’ll be pleased to know there is a little justice in the world. 

Victor left security permanently. He finished school with honors and got his Masters degree. He also took my advice and sought help for his PTSD. He ended up getting 90% disability from the VA and gets a fat check every month.  He technically does not have to work anymore but took a job as a maintenance supervisor at the local city college. He is doing much better mentally and is looking forward to buying his second home. We still talk regularly and is considered a very close friend of mine. 

Jim, Ray and I worked together for years at another security company. 

Jim left that company for better pay at a different security company and has only spoken to me once since his departure. From what I hear, he got married and is doing well. 

Ray took over as a contract manager for an even different security company much closer to his residence. He is still happily married and adopted his two nephews to raise along side of his son. We still talk semi regularly and go drinking at least once a year with Victor.

I became a big time security supervisor at the company and have only recently left due to political conflict. I now am an HVAC technician and me and the wife are doing well. 

And what of Tasha? Well... she was eventually fired for the hell she caused. It took years to unravel the drama but eventually karma caught up to her. Jim called me once (after he left to work somewhere else) and warned me that Tasha was looking for a job in a new security company. He just denied her application when he realized who she was based on the stories Ray and I told him. 

She then interviewed for the position at my company. Guess who did all employee hiring? This guy! I had another officer send her into my office. She walked in all dressed up, smiling and ready to do her interview... then she saw me. Her smile faded and she walked out without ever saying anything. I then made a call to Ray and gave him a heads up that she was out there. Several weeks go by and she walked in to interview with Ray. 

He told me that when she saw him she broke down crying. She confessed that since she was terminated she has been unable to find a job. Everyone who interviews her just so happens to be an ex-military veteran who used to work on an oil company construction site. She was losing her home, her husband left her and took her kids (he found out about the contract guy she was sleeping with), she was living out of her car... she pleaded him for a job. And Ray, the most professional man I had ever met, was an ex-marine. He knew what happened to Victor, about how she threw him under a bus. He told her to beat sand, and to tell Satan “hi” for him when she goes to hell. 

Protip: Never mess with a Marine.

——————

Edit for added info and concerns:

Firstly, thank you all for the overwhelming response. I figured my story would be overlooked and possibly read by a handful of people. I never would have imagined I would get this kind of response. Thank you all for the awards, the updoots, and the kind words. It really means a lot to me and yes, I read them all. Wish I could respond to everyone but I can only say “thank you” so many times before it loses its sincerity. But thank you to everyone. Also, I will pass on your good wishes to Ray and Victor the next time I talk to them. 

Secondly, few commentators correctly noted that this story is very one sided and sexist against the female employees. I’m just popping this here to address their concern on a few points:

1) The female character named Girl should have a real name and not just labeled as a gender. You’re right. Didn’t even think about it while I was writing this and frankly I don’t care enough about her to justify giving her an identification. If this upsets you then I understand and accept your criticism without any negativity on my end. 

2) This is a boys club, all females in the story are depicted as evil or were oppressed, ect... the story most certainly had that vibe and really that wasn’t my intention. Consider it a big oversight on my part. The whole story is incredibly long and there were so many people involved that if I got detailed it would be like a marvel movie. In fact the persons Girl and Tasha were the only females on the site that were a problem and were not liked. We had other female officers on site that were well respected and were treated just as equally as everyone else. One female in particular tried to be a huge help to us and she was one of the replacements. She was an ex-police officer from Chicago who helped us legally build a case of workplace harassment and even coached us on how to lead the investigation. The case was ignored and nothing productive came of it. Its a story all on its own so I excluded it due to length. 

3) Jim was not a victim. You are correct. What he did is idiotic and an abuse of power. I will not argue with you there. However, note that I don’t talk to Jim anymore. There are reasons for that and the fact that his loins caused numerous people grief and sorrow is a big factor. What he did was reprehensible. However, Girl using the sexual relationship to push her own agenda also negates her being able to claim victimhood. If she was a victim, she should have sued instead of going right back to a company that allowed this to happen. At least, thats my opinion which really means nothing.  

4) If this story offends you then too bad. Hate to be the jerk but I can’t change events that happened in real life to suite your political correctness. Things happened, and as the world crumbles around you sometimes the moral compass get spun. It’s not an excuse, just a very sad fact of life that is highlighted when you are trying to claw your way out of a shitty situation. 

Either way, thank you for everything and I’m greatly humbled by you all.1990 I am a relatively new corpsman (medic) assigned to a surgery ward at the Naval Hospital. Our patients are all post-op and there are 60 beds. There are 6 or so corpsmen assigned to take care of these patients. As part of our duties we are to chart our findings and observations as we make our rounds.

This surgery ward is usually a first assignment for corpsman and nurses coming fresh from school. I joined the Navy at 21yo so am a little more world wise than my peers who are all 18 or 19. I know, especially in the military, there is the book way of doing things and the effective way of doing things. We had volumes of manuals that covered every aspect of our jobs and duties that you could imagine.

Cue the new nurse who has been assigned and wants to show how good she is at managing the lowly corpsman troops. She was merciless. Always looking for opportunities to embarrass or cause trouble for us.

One evening I observed her shouting at one of the corpsman for using an unapproved abbreviation in a patient's chart. What was the offensive abbreviation? ASAP He had written that the patient needed an evaluation ASAP. You would have thought that he had personally offended her honor.

I went and looked in the approved abbreviations section of our operations manual to confirm that it was not there. It was not. I did find that there was a very extensive list of approved abbreviations available to use though.

Cue the MC. I pulled all of the corpsmen on the shift and told them to bring their charts to the break room. We then charted all of the notes together using nothing but approved abbreviations. The notes looked like another language! I made sure everyone could read their own notes and sent them out to put the charts back.

Nurse "pain in the butt" came in to review the notes with the corpsmen. I take the first round. This is done while standing at the bedside of the patients. She opens the chart, looks at the note and says

Nurse: WHAT IS THIS?!!

Me: I do not understand. What do you mean?

Nurse: I do not understand anything you have written.

Me: It says that the patient is recovering well with little difficulty but will need further evaluation based on his comments and visible demonstration of discomfort and reduced mobility in his left upper limb.

Nurse: That is not what it says.

Me: Maam, I assure you that it does and that those are all approved abbreviations. I am sorry that you do not know them. I do realize that you are new.

I smile. She does not. This is the first of 60 charts she is to review. I have never seen corpsmen so eager to review chart notes. We did go get the manual for her, just to be helpful.

&#x200B;

Posted in  [r/militarystories](https://www.reddit.com/r/militarystories) as well.Added TLDR in the end.

About a couple of decades ago, I used to work at a concrete production plant for a reputable construction company. Our company, like several other construction companies, were awarded a portion of a larger project.

A large portion of land was earmarked for setting up temporary office buildings and concrete plants for the different construction companies. The “sites” were separated by temporary barriers and had separate entrances. 

As many of you may (or not) know, concrete is produced my mixing cement, water, sand and stone grits (size 20mm + 10mm) along with special admixtures in a specific ratio. Our recipe also contained a special ingredient - stone dust. Turns out, only our company used stone dust in our concrete and the neighbors did not. So a special truckload full of stone dust was specially shipped for us. This is important later. 

My job entailed orchestrating concrete delivery to our project sites apart from regular quality control tasks like checking incoming materials for quality etc. Only after I had signed the delivery receipts, our stores personnel would unload the trucks at designated areas. A log of all trucks entering and leaving the concrete batching plant would be kept by security at gate (Relevant later.)

Since my job entailed checking incoming material before accepting, the suppliers would usually try to offer some petty bribes, from cash to booze to flesh - if you know what I mean 😉 
I always declined such offers as once accepted, you became their dog and lose all respect in their eyes. Moreover, bad material also impacted the quality of concrete produced: strength, consistency and setting time, to name a few. Since concrete delivery was also part of my job, it was in my best interest to only accept good material, otherwise the client would chew me up during casting. 

One night, a supplier truck entered the premises with 20mm stone chips. Upon testing, I found them to be undersized for 20mm and oversized for 10mm. I went ahead and rejected the load. The driver and supplier started pestering me, offering bribes and what not. When I didn’t budge, they called my boss who asked me what was going on. I explained that the quality of material was unacceptable and I have rejected this. When I mentioned it is too small for 20mm, he ordered me to dump it in 10mm bin anyway. I knew what that meant. My boss was on the supplier’s payroll. 

A couple of weeks pass by and my boss asked me to reject “a truckload” of material from a very reliable supplier. He knew that the supplier was only delivering stone dust that day and should we reject material, the entire load would be a waste and a loss to the supplier. Once the stone chips or stone dust has left the quarry, they, for some reason, can’t bring it back. Hence my boss wanted to hit the supplier where it hurt most. Especially stone dust as there was no other company that would take it. 

Cue - malicious compliance. I called the supplier, who had become a friend by now and told him that I was under orders to reject “a truck”. He panicked and told me that my boss was putting pressure on him for bribes. This particular supplier believed in providing quality material and always visited my lab to understand how I tested the material and what my requirements were. He would then go back to his quarry and adjust the equipment to deliver the best quality materials. Because he put so much effort in improving the quality of his product, he did not budge and bow down to my boss’s demands. 

I asked the supplier friend to route a truckload of 20mm stone chips meant of some other company to my plant first. I would let the gate security log the trucks’ entry and then promptly reject the material. He was then supposed to send the stone dust which I would accept and be done with my “task.”

Everything happened as planned, I completed my remaining activities for the night and went home. When I came back to work in the evening, my boss was waiting for me at the door. As expected, he had checked the entry/exit log as well as material receipt history. He had noticed that I had accepted the stone dust and was chewing his anger, waiting for me to explain. 

He very casually asked me if I had rejected a truckload. I acted dumb and answered in affirmation. I told him that the very first truck, a 20mm was rejected. Now usually 20mm is never rejected, especially from this supplier, so he asked me what reason did I give while rejecting the truckload. I said flakiness index - a test we never do as a field test, but is mandated by the client to be done once a quarter. 

He knew that I was playing him but he couldn’t do anything. I had done exactly what he had asked meto do, reject “a truckload.” I had covered my bases with the security log as well as material receipt so he just muttered something under his breath and never mentioned this to me again or asked me to do anything similar. 2 months later he was transferred to a different site and I became the overall incharge - same designation and pay, just more responsibilities.

Edit: Wow. So many upvotes and a Gold. I am deeply humbled 🙏

Edit 2: wow another gold and then a platinum. I feel blessed.

Edit 3: TL;DR - manager asks me to reject “a truckload” of material, assuming I would reject the special kind. I reject the generic material which was meant for someone else anyway, thereby saving a supplier a bunch of money and inconvenience.This is the story of how I got hired at an old job I had a few years ago. The technical manager (who ultimately became my boss) was a great guy and was the one who embarked on a course of malicious compliance to get what he wanted. It happened like this...

The company was small, about 20 people, and run by a CEO who knew the company's industry but didn't know anything about technology. What she knew was that she had a team of five developers and one technical manager, and that the company's code was written in the a programming language called C# (pronounced "C-sharp"). One day, her favorite member of the development team quit, whom she regarded as their foremost expert on C#. 

To the technical manager, this was an enormous opportunity. He had four other developers who knew C#, but what he was missing was an expert in database design and administration. The company processed a huge volume of data, and he knew enough about databases to know that theirs were a mess: the same data had to be recorded in multiple places and was always getting out of sync, operations that should have taken a few seconds would run for minutes, etc. He didn't want to replace the departed employee with another developer; he wanted a database expert. But the CEO wouldn't hear of it. Cue malicious compliance. 

Somehow he got a description of the person he actually wanted into the hands of a recruiter, who found me. (I had over ten years of experience in database development and administration at that point, but had never touched a line of C# code in my life.) The technical manager had a "skills assessment" he was giving to all candidates for the job, which was 100% database questions. There was a huge, boldface warning at the top, which I found extremely odd, stating, "These questions are extremely difficult; it is unlikely you'll be able to answer them all. You may not be able to answer any. Do not feel any pressure to attempt questions you find too difficult, as these results are not related to the position." I was told I had 20 minutes to work on it. Well, I finished it in about 2-3 minutes, the questions were all actually very easy, and walked back in to the office of the technical manager to ask if I was missing something and what this was all about. He gave me the "shush" gesture and motioned me back into the conference room. Then he explained. 

His office was adjacent to the CEOs office, so he couldn't talk in there. The warning was something he'd been forced to put on the test after a recruiter (who apparently had initially been just as confused as I was) had called the CEO to ask why they were giving a database assessment for a C# position. He'd had to play it off to the CEO as, "Well, wouldn't it be good to know if we happen to find a C# developer who is comfortable with databases too?" He explained all the backstory described above. And then we talked for about 30 minutes about databases. C# didn't come up. The job sounded really interesting and would be a chance for me to make an enormous positive difference. At the end, he said, "OK, you're perfect, I'm going to recommend you for the position, but first you have to talk to the CEO. Remember, when you talk to her, you're a \*\*C# expert\*\*. Got it?" I was worried, but I thought, "Worst case, I get caught and don't get the job; best case, I can really help this company." 

Into the CEO's office I went. After an exchange of pleasantries, she said, "So, what would you say is your #1 technical strength?" I made a thoughtful face, and said, "Well, it's hard to say. I have skills in a lot of different areas, but if I had to pick one, I'd say probably C# programming." Her face lit up. "Ah, fantastic!" she said, "That's exactly what we're looking for!" We talked for a few more minutes about salary requirements and start dates (I said I could start in two weeks), and at the end she offered me the job. 

That night, I stopped on the way home and bought a book about C#-- I think it was literally called something like "Learn C# in 14 Days." By the time I started two weeks later, I knew enough C# to do my job. As the technical manager had said, there was an enormous amount of database redesign to do, so the C# programming was maybe 10-20% of my time. I was able to get those database jobs down from minutes to seconds like they should have been, and the CEO was so impressed she never even questioned my background. I continued to learn C# on the job, and no one ever found out I hadn't been a C# expert all along.I had a landlord in the past who slipped a 90 day notice requirement into the rental contract after I had signed it.  I was house hunting, so at the end of my lease I asked to go to a month to month lease to make it easier to leave when the time came.  Landlord and I agreed on a higher monthly price to compensate them for the lack of security, and I signed the contract at the office of a business they also owned downstairs.  Landlord wasn't actually present, but one of their employees handled it.  So, contract is signed and they go to make me a copy for my records, but are "having an issue with the copier".  After a few minutes they ask if they can text me when they get it to work.  I naively agree, and head upstairs.  30 minutes or so later, they text me saying they got the copier to work, and I come pick up my "copy".  I didn't think to double check everything at the time.

&#x200B;

So, for the next few months I just pay my monthly rent while I look for a home.  Finally found the right place, and the closing date was about 4 weeks out, so I immediately notified my landlord that I would be leaving on said date.  Landlord responds that it's nice I found a home, but I would be responsible for the next 2 months rent after that as well due to the 90 day notification requirement in the contract.  I'm totally confused, so I go check my copy of the contract, and sure enough, there is a stipulation in there about that.  I also notice that my initials from the top and bottom of each page, verifying that I have read that page, have somehow mysteriously shifted to being doubled up at the top of the page after this stipulation, with none on the bottom of that actual page.  This was because they had inserted 2 lines of text detailing the 90 day reporting requirement, after I had already signed the paperwork.  They didn't notice the formatting error it created, which was a dead giveaway of what was going on.

&#x200B;

I inform the landlord of this, and notify him that this is not a legally binding contract due to this issue, and state that I will not be paying any further rent beyond this month, and expect my deposit back without penalty.  Unfortunately he persists with stating that this is a legally binding contract, and he will pursue it in court in addition to withholding my deposit if I fail to pay, blah blah blah...  I know I am legally in the right, but I don't want to have to deal with courts to settle it as that takes forever, so I come up with an alternative plan.

&#x200B;

The one thing he hadn't thought about was the fact that the contract included all utilities, as the unit didn't have separate meters, and did not have any language forbidding excessive use of them.  It just so happened to be a particularly cold winter, so I informed my landlord that if he wanted to persist with his demands, I would be inclined to leave all of the windows open, crank the heat as high as it would go, open the refrigerator door, run the water 24/7, etc, and if he entered the apartment without my permission to turn any of these items off, I would report him to the police.

&#x200B;

I got confirmation that he would not pursue the extra month's rent or security deposit within 20 minutes.  :)

&#x200B;

Edit:  Just so everyone knows how the story ended, this happened around December of 2016 if I remember correctly, and I did get my security deposit back, etc.  Didn't pursue legal option because I didn't think it would end up being worth the time and trouble, though I understand the sentiment.Excuse any formatting. TL;DR at the bottom. 

A bit of background, I work in marketing and manage a number of client accounts for the business and I'm in charge of a team of account managers. I'm a minority shareholder in the business so, of course, it's in my intetest to ensure that the business operates efficiently and effectvely. As one of the longest serving employees, when given my last promotion, as part of the package I was offered shares in the business, as I would be one of the most senior members of staff. It works out that I own about 5-7% of the business (can't recall the exact share division). 

As a shareholder, you'd expect that the managing director (let's call him MD) would understand that I genuinely want the best for the business, but instead, does not take me seriously at all, and frequently goes out of his way to undermine me. 

So last week I was supposed to come back on wednesday following the Christmas break. Unfortunately, the week I was due to come back, I fell ill and lost my voice (as well as other issues that meant I couldn't make the journey into the office). I did the standard and messaged the MD as well as HR to inform them of what the situation was. We'd recently upgraded to a new project management system that needed a little bit of manual TLC in order to make it work automatically (if that makes sense?) So I figured I'd take advantage of my illness and just vegetate in bed and work on this project management system.

At about midday I get a text off of the MD which read: 'Hi u/benisaboringname, as you know, I would like to bring [insert name of large travel company] on as a client. As they'll be your future client I would like you to jump on a Skype call with them this afternoon.' 

The subsequent (paraphrased) conversation: 
Me: I couldn't possibly do that, as you know, I have lost my voice and I'm currently in bed working on the project management system. 

MD: No I need you to do this. It's very important. 

Me: I have already advised you that this will not be possible. I don't NEED to work on this system today as officially, I'm ill and have no requirement to work at all, as you're aware, so what you're asking is unacceptable. 

MD: I don't care. You may be a director, but you're still an employee. Im sure your dividends are likely to be affected if we were to lose one of our largest potential clients. 


Now, finally (I know, I'm sorry) its time for the malicious compliance. Obviously I don't want my dividends to be affected in the next quarter, no matter how much of an open ended threat that was, so I call the procurement manager of this large travel organisation. I don't turn my camera on and I explain via text input what the situation is. We try our hardest to communicate, them talking via the microphone and me communicating via the chat function. We mutually agree that this is going nowhere and they agree that I shall call them back when Im well. 

However, the next day, I'm still ill and get a message off the MD saying that I need to go in the office for a 'priority one' meeting. Essentially, what that means is that even if you're on your death bed, you're expected to dial in remotely or go into the office. As I walk in, the MD, the HR Director and the Business Development Director are sat waiting for me. I immediately know that this is regarding yesterday...there's no other reason for the HR Director to have crawled out of his cave. 

I'm told to sit down and the MD looks incredibly unhappy. He shows me an email thread from the procurement manager of the travel firm essentially calling the MD unprofessional for making me go on the call. And saying they are having second thoughts about using our services. The HR Director, who has obviously been lead astray by the MD asks how I can explain this and why I didn't raise this as an issue. I ask to link up to the screen and show the HR Director the texts between the MD and myself from my phone. After a grilling, we all leave, putting it down as a 'learning experience'. 

Fast forward 6 days, yesterday I contacted the procurement manager of this travel firm and he explained that he would love to become a client but as long as all correspondence went through me "rather than the dickhead MD." 

Alls well that ends well I guess. 


TL;DR: Managing Director made me do a skype call with a large potential client despite having lost my voice. He threatens my income, so I have no choice. He gets called out by the potential client for his unprofessionalism after I explained the situation to them. Now they'll only deal with me directly and called him a dickhead. My neighbor's 3 years old for some reason was always running around barefoot until 2am and then again from 5 am. You could feel the apartment shaking when the kid was stomping and the parents didn't seem to do anything about it.

I didn't consider complaining, since I grew up in an apartment and I could get used to the noise with time. I was actually happy that I could listen to loud music and the neighbor wouldn't mind since they were also noisy. Well, to my surprise, in a few days I get a very angry building manager telling me that the neighbor complained I was too noisy, even though I was careful to never make noise between 9pm and 10am. Of course I then complained about the stomping and got told that other apartments also complained about that, but neither he nor the police could do anything about natural noises from normally living in an apartment.

Well, from then on every night and early morning I would play very loud and dirty porn, and whenever I had a *guest* I would tell her she could be as noisy as she wanted. Every time I could hear the stomping halting right away and after 2 months they moved out.Many many moons ago, I was in high school in a small town in the central US. We had an open campus (meaning we could leave for lunch) and a popular lunchtime event was to go to McDonald's in a larger, nearby town. We had a 45 minute lunch period, and in 45 minutes, you could drive to McDs, go through the drivethru, and stuff your face on the way back.

Of course, there was also a school cafeteria. However, this cafeteria wasn't actually at the high school -- it was at the middle school, and it served the middle school, the high school, and an elementary school, bussing students in to eat their lunch.

My senior year the administration set up a new schedule, and one thing that it did was shorten the lunch period by five minutes. Maybe not a big deal for some. But the folks that drove to McDonald's? You could do it in 45 minutes. You could not do it in 40.

They complained, it fell on deaf ears. So, someone (and I really wish it had been me) came up with a brilliant idea: eat at the school cafeteria.

So, suddenly, where about 30% of the high school students ate at the cafeteria, that number nearly doubled. The effect of this was that the elementary school, who ate *after* the high school, had to stand and wait because the cafeteria's schedule was based on how many students they expected to show up.

So we are eating in the cafeteria, and then nearly a hundred kindergarteners are just standing outside, waiting to come in. There wasn't anything the cafeteria could do -- they just didn't have the capacity for more students. And there wasn't anything the school could do, because they can't tell us not to eat at the cafeteria -- they're legally obliged to provide a lunch to the students that want one.

It was very effective, and they restructured the high school's schedule less that two weeks into the year to add those five minutes back so that they didn't have dozens of hungry five year olds.So, I worked a full time shift work job, where we changed between 2 positions based on the day and hours. If we were rostered on Monday - Friday, 0600-1800, we were at one position and weekends, night shifts (1800-0600), public holidays we were at the other. We received weekly rosters to show where we were working, and the company faced heavy fines if a position was unmanned.

I knew a public holiday was coming up but the roster had me on the regular Mon-Fri position. I approached my manager and explained, who said she would check it out. 

Further info - I was told by our head office that I would be the manager when the old manager quit and while I was on holiday, they hired this girl (who had zero experience as a manager or on the site, where I had been on the site for 8 years and had been assistant manager), so I was not inclined to put myself out to cover her or the company. 

When I came in for my next shift, I found a note from her to 'just follow the roster', even though it was wrong. Sure thing....

I spent 12 hours watching movies and doing absolutely nothing at 2.5x pay (PH rates). I literally took my shoes off and spent the day with my feet up on the desk!

The company got a minimum $10k fine for not having the other position manned and the manager got blasted for not using common sense.I worked for a major (U.S.) telecommunications company for over 10 years.  One of the jobs I had there was as emergency overnight tech support for our major accounts.  I'm talking about accounts like emergency services, traffic lights, the FBI, NASA, and the White House (I personally fixed the White House Chief of Staff's phone twice).  All of this was handled by 11 people in a call center that was one of two in the country that were open all night (mainly for customers who were overseas).  Because we were such a small team, and the people we dealt with were the overnight I.T. people at their various companies, we were on a first-name basis with many of the techs who called us.

Then, one day, the VP of our company decides to step down as VP and take a job as the head of another call center.  His brilliant idea is to make HIS call center the ONLY call center for all business and government accounts in the country--including the ones my team handled overnight.  Naturally, this meant dissolving my team.

We were all very upset.  We liked out job.  Only the absolute best techs got to be on our team, and for good reason.  When something we handled went down, it had to be taken care of FAST, and some of the systems we dealt with were so obscure or old, that no one at the company except us and our daytime colleagues even knew they existed.  This also meant that we had to be ready to answer at a moment's notice, so we spent most of the night doing nothing, just waiting for a call.  The companies and government entities paid extra for this quick response.  Even so, over the years, my team kept getting assigned more and more little jobs to do "between calls," which we handled easily because, well, we were the best.  It was almost my dream job.

So when we get word that our jobs are going to this other call center that, until now, wasn't even open overnight, we were upset, yet most of my team was still pretty supportive.  We offered to train the new techs at the other call center, some of us even offered to travel there for a week or so to do it, but we were all turned down.

Our last week on the job comes, and we're there mainly as backup for the new team in the other call center.  We're not being routed calls, but we're ready on chat if the new guys have any questions.

The questions start coming in, and they're NOT what we expected.  Instead of asking about obscure, outdated systems that no one but us even knew about, the new team is asking us about things like how to fill out a time sheet for a shift that starts before midnight and ends after.  And this was their supervisor asking me.  We end up answering really basic questions that anyone at our call center, much less anyone on our team, would have known, and we all got a bit worried.  Then the supervisor who asked me about the time sheets asks how many calls we typically get in a night, and I say "oh, between two and five per person, usually."  Then he asks how many people were on my team.  "Eleven," I say, "Eight to ten on any given night."

"Oh," the supervisor says.  "We have thirty-three.  I wondered why we were getting so few calls."  They didn't have to do the little tasks my team did between calls, either--they couldn't, they weren't even trained for the calls they were getting.

The next week, my team was transferred into the normal overnight call queue, handling boring calls from people who didn't read or listen to the directions we gave them about how to make their phones work while overseas.  Sigh.

A week after that, other regular overnight reps start asking me and the other former elite reps questions about systems that only we would know about.  Suspicious.

A few days later, I get a call transferred to me, and it's one of the overnight I.T. guys from the major accounts.  I ask how he got hold of me, and he says that the first guy he talked to transferred him to me.

Turns out, of course, that the untrained reps at the new call center were still untrained, so they were just dumping the calls into my call center's general queue and hoping that out of the 60 or so techs working there, the one who'd pick up would be from the former major accounts team.  Since three of our eleven people had quit when our team was dissolved, the odds of that were pretty damn low, which meant it took multiple transfers, which meant they weren't getting the help they needed in the time frame my company was contractually obligated to provide.

I went to the director of my call center to let him know about this, hoping it would mean that since the new team was failing THAT hard, the company would see reason and reinstate my team again.  Nope.

My director informed me that the team would not, under any circumstances, be reinstated at our call center.  I could tell he was not happy about this at all.  So then came the malicious compliance.

My director told me and every other overnight tech at my center that if we were transferred a call for a major account, we were not to touch it, as we were not authorized to handle those accounts.  The next night, the accounts wouldn't even open for us, because our "security clearance" had suddenly been revoked.  We were to transfer all such calls back to the correct queue.  We were also instructed to forward any correspondence sent to us from the new major accounts team to our supervisors, whether chat or email.  In a few days, the transfers to our center stopped.

Now, I wish I could say that the company saw the error of its ways, my team was reinstated, and everything went back to the way it was, but it didn't.  Instead, the company hemorrhaged major accounts like crazy.  We lost accounts whose MONTHLY bills were in the millions of dollars due to our failure to keep the terms of our contracts.  Barely a month after it was created, the overnight team at the other call center was disbanded, and the jobs outsourced.

Then the outsourcers started transferring the calls to my center.  Again, I went to our director, hoping against hope my team would be reinstated.  Nope.  But the transfers stopped.  Again.  And the company lost even more multi-million-dollar accounts.

Last year, the company announced the layoff of tens of thousands of employees.  I wonder why...  I saw the writing on the wall, and got the hell out with the best severance package I could.  So did my call center director.  He was no fool, either.  All because some idiot executive had a "bright idea" and not even the slightest clue how to execute it.

Edit:  Thanks for the votes and awards!  I especially love how people have listed basically every major telecom in the U.S. as a possible example of this level of idiocy.  Just goes to show that it's a systemic problem.  I was afraid people might find this story too boring or depressing.
It has a happy-ish ending, though, because thanks to my generous severance package, I am now able to pursue my actual dream job of being a professional writer.As the “new person” at my job, I was told multiple times that I was expected to provide donuts for the entire office. Normally, that’s not a big deal... but two people in particular were rude and relentless about the donuts all week. Others joined in also. Apparently, these people recently extorted two boxes of Krispy Kremes from someone else. 

Examples of the behavior  - mentioned buying donuts 20+ times, name calling, interrupted meetings, powered off my computer (losing my work), refusing to answer legit work questions until I buy donuts, on and on.  

Here’s the problem, I was hired in as a Sr., 30 years old, and I was not necessarily loving the idea of being told to buy donuts over and over. Hazing really did not seem appropriate at this point of my career (or for anyone else). I didn’t want to be a “bad sport” my first week, so I played along. I politely said that I will not have time this week but will get to it eventually. In terms of the workforce, I was mature, but I was not very mature as a person overall. I needed a creative way to address this problem. 

On my way to work, I decided to pickup a cheap bag of small powdered hostess “donettes” donuts at the gas station.

I distributed the donuts one by one, desk by desk, making sure to do so bare handed from the bag. I presented the donuts extremely politely, careful to mask my passive aggressive “F U” to the whole forced donut process.

The reaction from the staff was a lot of the “deer in headlights” looks.  People had no idea if I was a “really nice, but clueless” person, or if I was totally saying “F U” to the entire donut idea. Most people took the “safe” choice of being pleasant in return. Some people tried to refuse, but I mentioned the “big deal” about buying donuts, and still left a donut on every desk. 

I had originally considered providing a donut to everyone except the last two idiotic pushy people. I started verbally setting it up where they would not receive a donut. However, these two idiots were still openly verbally complaining about donuts, as adults. I could tell that this was not going to go away - they could not take a hint to back off.

My idea to passive aggressively snub them was no longer good enough. This had to be more direct.

I decided I was 100% done with these guys, regardless of the consequences. I told them I had another idea.

I grabbed a plastic knife from the breakroom, and cut the remaining donut in half the long (horizontal) way, so I still had two circles. The yellow cake was now visible. Then - the most brilliant idea of my life. A new way to hold donuts. One donut on each middle finger, with my middle finger in the center hole of each donut.  

I stopped at both desks. The first guy had his choice of two half donuts on my middle fingers. That’s right, I was able to give him a double donut middle finger. He now understood that I was completely done with his BS, but he never  grabbed a donut. I explained the donuts are actually quite tasty, and urged him to take one, but Im sure I looked like a complete psycho. I was no longer able to stay in character.

The good news - his refusal to take a donuts from my middle fingers ALSO allowed the opportunity to provide the last guy a double donut middle finger!! I mildly snapped, and had a shitty fake grin on my face. I looked him right in the eye. Double Donut middle fingers up, no longer saying a word.

The reaction of the last person is best described as completely frightened. That’s right, I reached a complete breaking point over donuts, and scared the hell out of someone. 

Anyway, after this incident, I was never asked to buy donuts again.


—————————————————


EDIT BELOW due to more responses than I expected, and I cannot reply to all.

Thanks for reading and the (mostly) great responses.

For the possible donut hazers, I don’t know how to explain it further. These guys were way, way over the top. This was not normal office behavior. In fact, these guys were in trouble with management also. This is not a normal “team building” this was two total idiots that pushed and pushed.

I do not need you to go back YEARS to try and retroactively change my behavior. This was a “malicious compliance” story that I thought was humorous enough to share, nothing more. I snapped, and acted crazy, but I’m quite happy now in a good career and this was YEARS also.  It’s all good now!! I do not need career advice here. Again, all good. In no way am I saying that I acted properly lol. In fact it was terrible office response, but I wasn’t fired. I ended up taking another position 3 months later.  Some of the people in the office actually appreciated that I stood up to these idiots, so it was “team building” in a way. There’s definitely different ways I could have handled this, but it’s over now. Even if I handed it differently, generally “nice ending stories where nothing happens” are not considered malicious compliance. Is that really what you were looking for here?

I’ve purchased food/etc for the office many times since. Ive had team building exercises. I’ve never run into idiotic hazing like this since back then. 
Again thanks for reading . I did not intend to annoy anyone that does FRIENDLY or NORMAL team building. That type of thing would not have caused me to snap, that’s very normal.  

OK. Signing off.This little gem came not from me, but from an older guy I worked with over last winter break. We’ll call him Jeff for simplicity’s sake. Jeff was a delivery guy for a certain XYZ delivery company, and my job was as a holiday helper. (Basically I assisted in delivering the influx of holiday packages.)

A couple days into my temporary job, we stop at a house with a pretty long, steep driveway. I do my thing and step out of the truck, arms out for the package, but Jeff tells me not to worry about taking it to the door. Instead we leave it at the foot of the driveway, near the mailbox. 

Not one to question it, I comply and leave it there. All the while Jeff has this huge shit-eating grin on his face as he blasts the truck’s horn and waits a couple moments. Then there’s movement from the house’s front door (hard to see, but I can make out this tubby, balding, 40-somethings guy with a sour look on his face step out.) 

We watch the guy, who we’ll call Gabe, begin the long, arduous descent down his driveway, shuffling along at a slow pace. Jeff stays the entire time, grinning like an idiot while Gabe picks up his package, barely acknowledges us, and begins climbing back up his driveway. 

Jeff calls out to him, “Thank you again for choosing XYZ deliveries, sir! We’re proud to ensure your packages arrive safely.” 

I can tell it bothers the fuck out of the guy, but he only flicks us off as he leaves. Jeff laughs, cranks up the truck, and we shove off.

Completely bewildered, I turn to him and say, “What the fuck was that about.” 

Jeff only laughs again at this, in incredibly high spirits and launches into his explanation. 

Apparently, the guy we just delivered to has had a history of fucking over the people he hires to do work for his home. (He’d scammed a landscaping company with claims that the grass they’d replaced half of his yard with didn’t perfectly match the shade of the other half.)

At the time Jeff got fucked over, he’d already been delivering to Gabe for years, and the guy had never been home (or had been home, but never answered the door.) Additionally, the guy’s garage was always closed, which is important because when it rains it’s company policy to leave a package just inside the garage door for safe keeping.

So one day, it’s drizzling outside and Jeff delivers a package to Gabe’s house. For whatever reason, the garage door is open this time around, so Jeff leans in and plops the package a couple feet from the cruddy weather. Then he goes about his day as normal. 

About an hour later, Jeff gets a call from his supervisor who’s in a massive frenzy. “JEFF! WHAT THE HELL DID YOU DO?! DID YOU SERIOUSLY MESS UP SOME GUY’S GARAGE! HOW IN THE HELL DO YOU EVEN DO THAT!”

Jeff, taken aback, does his best to get to the bottom of things with his supervisor. Apparently, Gabe had seen Jeff deliver the package to his home, seen him lean in to place the package inside, and then claimed that he’d broken the garage door. (In reality, Jeff told me Gabe’s door had most likely broken and the “cheap fuck was looking for some poor bastard to pin it on.”)

Fortunately, Jeff was able to escape any personal liabilities for lack of proof. However XYZ Deliveries itself couldn’t completely throw out the claim without engaging in a costly little court battle as they had indeed had a deliveryman on the premises and no proof of when the thing broke. They weighed the costs and decided on a $600 payout instead of the potential thousands it would cost in legal fees. 

Gabe, the smug asshole, got his garage repaired for free. Luckily for Jeff, however, a small loophole in the delivery company’s policy allowed him to exact revenge. 

The loophole was basically this: “In the case of delivering to locations where the delivery person feels he is at risk or in danger, he does not have to risk his personal well-being by setting foot on said location’s property. Instead said individual is allowed to drop the package off at the safest and most convenient location nearest to the individual’s property (i.e. the mailbox or foot of the driveway.)

Learning this, Jeff takes full advantage. The next package Gabe orders happens to be an expensive piece of electronics and it was marked “Urgent.” Even better, it’s raining the day of delivery. Absolute downpours. 

Jeff pulls up to your friendly, neighborhood asshole’s place and does the same thing he did with me: Blasts the horn several times and waits. Then he places the package just in front of the mailbox, under a plastic tarp (another policy in the case of rain.) 

Apparently Gabe really needed the package, as Jeff’s horn draws him from his home and on a slow, slogging descent down his driveway. He’s fuming by the time he reaches the bottom, with Jeff smiling like a professional. 

“WHY THE FUCK DIDN’T YOU BRING IT UP TO MY MOTHERFUCKING HOUSE?” Gabe inquired politely as he grabbed the soggy-bottomed package.

“Company policy, sir!” Jeff replied. “Can’t set foot on a customer’s property and risk further damages!” 

Gabe’s mouth opened and closed like a fish as he tried to sort this out. He’s completely soaked now and shivering, so he just said, “Go to hell.” 

“Certainly, sir! What kind of shipment would you like for that?” 

At a loss for words Gabe just begins slogging back up his driveway, with Jeff giving him a couple friendly honks to send him on his way. Then he continues on with his deliveries. 

The entire incident took place a couple years or so before I began helping Jeff out, but to this day, he loves exacting company policy on the jackass. I felt a newfound respect for the man after that, and the rest of my time working as a delivery aid was filled with more awesome stories from Jeff, the good-humored delivery man.

Edit: A couple of you wanted to hear the other stories Jeff had to tell. Well here's one of them: [Enjoy!] (https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/6q0e10/she_wanted_me_to_make_sure_all_our_leaves_stayed/)

And here's [another] (https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/6q11cw/when_you_order_weed_illegally_via_public_shipping/)

And the [Final Part] (https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/6q3ib3/i_dont_mind_what_people_stick_in_their_assholes/)Was shooting the shit with my grandma when this old story came up. Pretty mild but still brings a smile to my face. 

To preface, I'm allergic (or at the very least wildly intolerant) to beans. When I was a tot, my mom tried to feed me beans a few times and within five minutes I would projectile vomit right across the kitchen floor. She put two and two together and after that, no more beans for larniebarney.

So jump forward a few years, I was around 6 - 8 yrs old visiting my grandparents for winter break. I loved hanging out with my grandfather; he'd always bring me neat things like books and logic puzzles for us to play through together. That day in particular, he had bought me new crushed velvet pajamas covered in stars and comets. I was super excited to wear them to bed and was already wearing them at the table when everything went down. 

Dinner time rolls around and my grandfather reveals that he made slow roasted beans for us. I immediately tell him and my grandmother that I don't eat beans because they make me sick. My grandfather rolled his eyes and told me to sit and eat my dinner. 

Now, to be fair, I was a little bit of a picky eater, but I never would claim that the food I disliked would make me sick. I'd just say I didn't like [insert food]. Beans were the only thing I'd explicitly say made me sick. 

I repeat again that I don't eat beans, that my mom never makes me eat them, and that they make me sick. Grandfather starts getting mad and tells me that either I sit at the table until I finish all the beans I had been served or I can go straight to bed and expect to be put on restriction for the next few days. My grandmother tells him that he should just leave me be, but he isn't having it. 

This was the only time I ever felt anything other than pure wholesome love for my grandpa. He and my grandmother finished their dinner and started to clean up while I thought about what I should do. On one hand, I could just go to bed and accept that I'd probably have no cartoon time for the next few days, but I was so mad that he didn't believe me that I refused to accept being punished for telling to truth. 

So I sat there and ate the entire fucking bowl of beans. I'm 24 now and that singular bowl of beans probably represents at least 80% of the beans I have ever consumed in my life. I hated the texture, the smell, absolutely everything about what I was eating, but he said to eat them all so that's exactly what I was going to do. 

About halfway through I start feeling strange but push through it, swallowing the beans whole and washing it down with as much milk and cornbread as possible. All in all it probably took me 15 or so minutes to finish, but it felt like hours. 

I finish up, put my bowl in the sink, and softly announce that I'm done with all my food. I remember he patted me on the back and said "see? it wasn't that bad was it?" as we walked down the hall towards the bedrooms. At the very end of the hall was the doorway to his + my grandmother's bedroom, with a bathroom directly across the hall; he told me to brush my teeth while he changed into his pajamas, and that he would come to my room afterwards to tuck me in. 

I open my mouth to say ok and all of a sudden all my larniebarney alarms go off; I about face so that I'm facing the bathroom, try to take the few steps to at least make it to the sink, fail, and proceed to projectile vomit all over the floor, the vanity, the mirror and myself. 

Chunks of beans and cornbread collected at my feet as I coughed up everything I had swallowed whole. The milk mixed with the beans in the most horrific way possible, making the vomit thicker and stickier. My new pajamas were absolutely ruined and the smell only made me vomit even more. I started to cry as I stood in a pool of the vilest mixture of fluids I had ever seen come out of my body. 

It was so sudden and violent that my grandparents couldn't even react right away. My grandmother (who had been lying in bed but could still see everything go down) scooped me up and started consoling me. I peeped at my grandfather, who was still standing there horrified at what he had just seen, and stammered "*I told you beans made me sick*" in the most defeated voice I could muster. 

My grandmother gave him a death glare and told him curtly that since he had pushed me to eat the beans, he could clean up the beans. She helped me shower in their bathroom and calm down, until I asked her about my pajamas. The stomach bile basically ruined them and she told me that we should just throw them away. I cried even harder. When she finally got me to lay down and go to sleep an hour later, my grandfather was still purging the bathroom. 

The next morning he apologized to me profusely and promised he'd never do anything like that again. As far as I know, not only did he never again force me to eat anything I said I didn't want, he extended the same policy to the rest of his grandkids. Years later, he'd say he could still remember the stench of the bathroom that night and the disgusting sensation of scooping semi solid beans from every imaginable surface. 


TLDR: Grandfather doesn't believe that I'm allergic to beans and tells me to finish my bowl of beans or be grounded. I eat all the beans then projectile vomit all over the bathroom, leaving him to clean it up.

EDIT: because quite a few people have pm'ed or commented asking why my mom didn't tell them about my bean intolerance:

"*I'm pretty sure she did when I was younger and they may have just forgotten because they never make beans like that in the first place, even as a side dish. For context, before this happened I had lived with them for six months straight at one point and we never had beans during that period.*

*I definitely remember mom yelling at my grandfather over the phone the next morning saying she had 100% told them before.*"I live in a mostly-quiet neighborhood with lots of snowbirds and weekenders because of the proximity to a lake.  The year-rounders are mostly retired and people generally get along fine.

A couple years ago, neighbors on one side built a new garage and driveway - moving their cars much closer to my existing forsythia hedge.  I love the forsythia in the spring and basically let it grow however it likes so I can have the bright yellow flowers.

Almost immediately they started complaining that the hedge blocked their view as they backed out of their driveway.  In my state, neighbors have no right to a "view" extending over someone else's property, and our supreme court has repeatedly ruled that as long as trees and bushes do not actually impinge onto the roadway, property owners have no obligation to trim for visibility.  I keep a 5 foot strip mowed between my hedge and the road - perfectly reasonable to my way of thinking. . .

Since they have no recourse RE: Hedges, they instead complain to county code enforcement about anything else they can think of.

My brother parked his (licensed and insured) project truck on my property a while back because he was in the process of moving and needed a spot for it while he was figuring things out.  In the meantime, he was in a bad accident in another vehicle and the truck has been sitting for over a year now.  The licence plate recently expired - and I got a letter from the county with threats of fines if it wasn't removed.

Cue the malicious compliance:  My brother decided to sell the truck for scrap and had it towed away this morning.  This gave my neighbors their temporary victory as they observed from their deck - and nearly 6 inches of improved view from their driveway.

At least until I moved my second vehicle - a 1960 Lincoln (which is about 2 feet longer than the truck - with current plates and insurance) into that place this afternoon. . .  As a single person with more than one vehicle, I may get around to driving that old car at least once more before winter. . .I'm a truck driver.  More specifically, I drive a concrete mixer.  That means a large part of my job is dealing with people who know nothing about the material, nothing about my equipment, but still think they know better than me, since I'm obviously just an evil-smelling, gap-toothed hillbilly who didn't graduate high school.  In short, concrete is what happens when Malicious Compliance goes for a drunken joyride down the Dunning-Kruger Parkway.  
  
So, on this particular day, I was pouring at a school out in the middle of nowhere.  Our plant was the closest one to the jobsite, but it was still a half-hour away.  It was also over 110 degrees (schools usually do their renovation and repair work in summer).  The order indicated that they were going to use a concrete pump, and the manager (we will call him Bob) told me to throw in some fiber.  There are a few different kinds of fiber we use, but the only one that works with a trailer pump consists of small squares woven out of a cotton-like material that come apart in the mix.  I throw that in, because it's a pump job.
  
So we get onto the jobsite, and start pumping.  Everything is going well for the first couple yards.  Then the pump's reducer (a pipe running across the front of the pump) snaps, swing out and slams into my foot.  I wasn't hurt, but it turned out the pumper knew the pipe was getting thin and ran with it anyways.  Now I'm pissed; those pumps operate at massive pressures, and I have seen them blow concrete hard enough to knock a man over 20 feet away.  If I hadn't been wearing steel toes, it very well might have broken something.  
  
Eventually, the customer comes over, to see what the problem is.  He looks down at the pile of concrete dripping out the broken pipe, prods it with his foot, and asks, "Where is the fiber we ordered?"  I explain that the buckeye fiber can't be seen after it mixes into the concrete, but assure him that I added it personally.  He then starts yelling at me.  He didn't order buckeye fiber, he ordered plastic fibers.  He pulls out his paperwork, and sure enough, that is what he ordered.  I admit it was a mistake, but also tell him that the fibers he ordered won't work with the pump he is using.  The inspector tries to explain that what he got is as good or better than what he ordered, and he is willing to sign off on the change.  Customer isn't hearing any of it.  We finish the load, and the customer orders another ten yards.  I call it in, adding the bit about the broken pipe and that the customer was upset that the first load had buckeye in it instead of plastic fiber; Bob can hear the guy swearing at me over the radio.  
  
Now Bob tends to be very protective of his drivers.  He is also more than willing to let customers hang themselves with their own lack of knowledge.  I once watched him batch about $1,400 of liquid stupid, because a customer ordered concrete with both an accelerator and a retardant in it.  Bob could have loaded another truck right there and then, and shipped it out.  Instead, he noted that only one truck was scheduled for that job, and waited for me to drive the half-hour back to the plant.  Then he batched the load (with plastic fibers) and brought the ticket down personally.  As he handed me the ticket, he said, "Don't forget, they ordered at a 4-inch slump."  
  
Concrete slump is a measure of how wet it is.  It's measured by packing it into a 12-inch tall cone, setting it on the ground, pulling the cone off and checking how far the pile of concrete dropped (slumped).  4-inch is something of a default order, but the only things you pour that dry are footings and curbs, and you don't put it that dry into a trailer pump.  
  
So I load up and drive back to the job.  By now, they have been sitting out there for over an hour in 110-degree heat.  The pumper is panicking, because the concrete is setting inside his pump, and the patch of sidewalk they are doing is going to have a great big cold joint (fresh concrete poured against set concrete makes a weak joint that is more likely to crack) down the middle of it.  As soon as the concrete reaches the back of the drum, the pumper tells me to stop and add a bunch of water.  The inspector authorizes 10 gallons.  It's still dryer than the pumper wants, but the inspector won't allow more.  Then the concrete hits the pump's grate.  Everything is fine for a couple seconds, then it just starts piling up without going through.  All those plastic fibers were getting caught on the grating and clogging it up.  The gravel can't get through with the fiber blocking things up, so all that is getting pumped is cement and water.  
  
Customer comes out furious.  He accuses Bob of spiking the load with extra fiber and tries to reject the load.  I point out that we warned him the load would not be pumpable, and besides that, by having me add water to the load, they have already bought it.  So now we are pumping a few seconds, clearing the grate, then pumping a little more.  It took about three hours (which translated to about $300 of standby charges).  Most of the fiber didn't go through the pump (the pumper didn't want me throwing the giant clots of plastic in his hopper), along with quite a bit of the gravel.  The inspector ended up taking a couple samples from the pump hose (normally they only sample at the truck chute), because he knew what was going into the form wasn't what was coming out of my truck.  A month later, when those extra samples failed their 28-day test, the school had to tear out that sidewalk and redo the whole thing.  This time, they ordered it with buckeye fibers.  
  
TL/DR: Customer started swearing because I accidentally gave him what the job needed instead of what he asked for.  Brought back a second load the way he ordered it, and it made the entire job fail inspection.  Also made a pumper whose poorly maintained equipment nearly injured me stand out in 110 degree heat for several hours.I worked a month at a cinema and here's a story of malicious compliance by a customer. Please let me know if this isn't allowed and I'll delete it. 

The cinema I worked at had a no outside food and drinks allowed in the theater rule. This was to boost sales of the food and drinks sold in the cinema. We (the workers) would usually let people in anyway if they brought snacks or whatnot as the snacks and drinks inside were ridiculously priced and the manager was cool as well. 

The only time this rule was actually strictly enforced was when the general manager (GM) made his rounds fortnightly. In this case there was a store room where we would keep the customers stuff and give it back when they left. 

This one time a guy around late teens comes in with his kid brother with a 2L bottle of coke in his hand. The GM was unfortunately there that day and was staring right at me so I had to ask the guys to leave it behind. They said ok. 

Cue malicious compliance, the rules stated that outside food and drinks couldn't be taken into the theater where the movie played, not the facility itself. Dude comes out with his brother in 15 minutes and asks for the drink, I take it out, they each take a sip, give it back, and go back inside. They did this every 10 - 15 minutes and disturbed the other patrons and interrupted my work (I was happy to comply) and after they did this about 4 - 5 times the GM told me to just give em the bottle when they came out next and I DID!

Honestly one of my favourite moments of working there.My brother and I aren't on the best of terms. I envy people with good relations to their siblings, because being around my brother is just draining. He seems to follow two very strict rules. The first is that he's always right, even when evidence is presented against him. I swear the guy has developed immunity towards logic and reason. The second rule he follows is that I'm always wrong. Whatever I say, he has to argue against. It's obnoxious. Luckily we no longer live in the same contry, so we see eachother at most two times a year which is barely tollerable.  

This story takes place in december last year. I had traveled to my parents to celebrate christmas, and so had my brother, his wife and his two kids, 2 and 4 (maybe 5) years old. All of us are staying in my parents house. As you can immagine, its rather crowded and the noise level far exceeds that of which I'm used too.  

One morning, I wake up around 8am. My brother and his kids are already awake and eating breakfast from what I can hear. I decide to browse reddit on my phone an hour, just to avoid more interaction than I have to.  

When I finally decide to leave bed and have breakfast, the my brother and his family has moved on into the TV-room. The TV is on and they're watching cartoons on YouTube.  

I make myself two sandwiches and join them. My brother hands me the remote and says; "Just put on whatever 4yold is pointing at. I need to go to the bathroom." Alright, I can do that. Unlike his father, the little guy is actually pretty cool to be around.  

We browse child friendly Youtube videos eventually settling on Barney the Purple dinosaur. My brother has by this point returned. Eventually the video ends and related videos pops up. 4yold is pointing at a video called "Scientifically accurate: Barney the Purple dinosaur". I've been browsing enough internet to know that that is not a child friendly video.  

The conversation goes as follows:  

4yold: "Uncle, please put that one on".  

Me: "I dont think that's a good idea. How about another one?"  

4yold: "But I wanna see that one!".  

Me: "I..."  

My brother interrupts me.  

Brother: "Put that one on, he wants to see it."  

Me: "I really don't..."  

Brother: "Put it on."  

Me: "Trust me, it's..."  

Brother: "For gods sake, just put it on."  

Me: "Alright, but this one's on you".  

I mentally prepare myself for the total shitshow that is about to go down as I place the remote on the table.  

No more than 15 seconds into the video, the first images of cartoon gore is displayed. The 2yold starts crying. The maternal instincts of my brothers wife kicks in and she starts yelling at my brother to turn it of. By this point, the video has reached the point where kids are starting to get killed. Brother finally manages to turn the video off. The 4yold, having seen forbidden content, is now throwing a tantrum over not getting to see the entire video. Brothers Wife does her best to comfort the 2yold, but she's crying her eyes out. Meanwhile, my brother is trying to end the tantrum of the 4yold. 

Despite the mayhem, all I can feel is total inner peace. Never has utter chaos been so satisfying.  

Finally my brother turns to me; "Why would you put on that sht?!".  

In a calm voice i simply reply; "Because you told me too."  

Brother: "But you knew what it was?!"  

Me: "And you didn't litsen when I tried to warn you."  

Brother: "You never tried to warn me!"  

I sigh. At this point I just leave. There is no winning this arguement. Afterall, he's always right, even when the evidence is screaming otherwise.Super minor malicious compliance, so not sure if it's worthy to post.

My job is hardcore about taking time off, basically you can't unless approved in major advanced. I felt sick on Wednesday, so needed to leave early. I had no intention of taking more time than that... Boss demanded I have doctors note to leave early.. so I went to the doctor and the doctor said I can't return to work for two days. Thanks boss, i wouldn't have been able to take those days off otherwise. 

Edit: thanks for the gold! I had no idea my post would take off like this, somehow it makes my malicious compliance feel that much better! I will try to sum this up the best I can so it isn’t long. I got off work at about 11:48 PM on New Year’s Eve, went on a really long date that ended sad, and went to get dinner at 4:20. I ordered a burger at a burger place over their app and paid for it that way, so it would be done when I got there. I get there and the women is very confused. The manager is brought over and he laughs in my face saying,” well your problem is that we are selling breakfast.” I told them about how the app, website, and google says differently and they didn’t care. I sighed and asked for a refund which the women said,” nope. Can’t refund, sorry.” After some back and forth I said,” fine, then I’ll call the police.”

She replied back with,” Do it.” Now I wouldn’t call the police over a cheese burger, but mine had bacon. I called the non emergency number and a police car came over.... then another. When they pulled up I realized,” I just called the police over a damn hamburger.” 

End result, I got basically a slip to come back any time the next day for free lunch which I just finished eating.Our rental contract, as is normal here, stipulates a "quiet period" between 10pm and 7am every night, where we're not supposed to be loud.

We moved in on a Saturday and were of course unpacking on Sunday. So our new neighbour below us knocked on our door and screamed at us around midday, and told us to read the part of our contract about the "quiet period." So I did, and Sundays aren't mentioned. 10pm to 7am every day of the week. Nowhere does it state that Sundays are any different. So we carried on.

He has called the police on us several times for just doing normal things such as rearranging furniture. Each time, he would lie to the police that he had come to speak to us about it first, which he had not. The reasons included things like "dropping things too often" to "using the stairs at night." These reasons are of course ridiculous, but each time I have just shown them the contract which all residents sign. If he has signed the contract, he consents to me making noise during these periods.

We complained to the letting agency that he was harassing us for simply making the normal amount of noise people make from living in an apartment. However, nothing changed.

I checked with our other neighbours to see if they had any complaints about our noise level, and they all said no.

After he called the police several times, I decided to begin malicious compliance. I went down to the neighbour with a copy of the house rules, which we have all signed, and told him to please read them, specifically, the exact times which are the "quiet period." Then for the next week or so, any hammering, drilling or other loud things I had to do, I saved for 9:50pm. Even if I didn't have anything I needed to do, I made sure to make noise right up until 10pm. After I did this for about a week, we stopped hearing from him, and haven't had any noise complaints since, and it's been several months now.

Now, a couple of heavy metal fans have moved into the apartment next to him and I couldn't be happier.

EDIT: To clear up confusion:

1. The neighbor appeared to believe that the whole of Sunday was "quiet time." I checked, and there is no extra provision in the house rules about Sundays. The quiet times just apply "daily." I was unpacking on a Sunday and the neighbor apparently believed this was against the house rules. It is not.
2. The big metal fans are big fans of metal music. They are, unfortunately, human. I do not have animate ventilators as neighbors.So this takes place back in high school around 2001-2002ish. Not a huge satisfying scenario, but it sure felt like it back then.

I was enrolled in a private high school back in the day. This means two things. Basically they can make up whatever rules they want since they aren’t governed by the state, and it means that most of the kids didn’t live in the neighborhood the school was located in.

Personally, I lived about 20-25 minutes away from school. Which coupled with the fact that I wasn’t a very organized person, meant I had trouble making it to school by the time the first bell rang.

Well our school really wanted to crack down on lates. They eventually adopted a system where if you were late 3 times, you were awarded a detention.

After three detentions, you received an in-school suspension. The punishment definitely didn’t fit the crime, at least in my opinion.

Another caveat to this scenario, is that I didn’t have my drivers license yet, so when I got my first detention, my dad had to adjust his day by 60-90 minutes to accommodate picking me up later after school. Especially since I had a younger brother who was dismissed at normal time. So he had to pick him up, wait an hour or so, then come back for me.

I eventually earned my second detention for being late, and my dad did not appreciate doing the whole extended pick-up again.

So cue a few weeks later and I’ve already racked up another two lates. Then one morning I was rushing around trying to get ready and imploring my dad to get there on time, because if I didn’t I would get a third detention *and* an in-school suspension.

To which he replied. “Ok, so what’s the consequence for being absent?”

Me: “Uhhhh........nothing? 🤷🏻‍♂️”

Dad: “Well if we’re going to be late, I’ll just call in and tell them you’ll be absent today instead”

So from then on, if we were ever running late, my dad would call the school and inform them I wasn’t going to be there. 

My dad did things like this ALL the time. And he didn’t care because, frankly, he didn’t like most if their rules either, and I was a good student. So in turn I got a couple weeks worth of days off by the time the school year was over. And 16 year old me couldn’t be happier.A very minor malicious compliance story, but was reminded of it when packing up the house to move.

So my husband works from home, and has a very tidy office. I work in a lab and so can’t usually work from home, and since our house is small, I never really set up a workspace for myself. And to be honest, I am not the most organised person, so usually my belongings are founds scattered all over the house. My husband once turned around the car when he realised that he forgot to make the bed, so my messiness is a challenge for him. 

Anyway, one day a few years ago while my husband was out, I had to sign something, couldn’t find a pen in my bag, and so stole one from my husband’s desk. A few hours later, the following conversation occurred. 

Husband: “Hey, did you take the blue pen off my desk?”

Me: “Oh yeah, sorry.” I rifle through the stack of crap on the kitchen table until I find it. “Here you go!”

Husband, slightly irritated: “I wish you wouldn’t take my stuff, you’re always losing things.”

Now I’m a little huffy, because while it’s true that I lose things from time to time, we’re talking about a £1 Papermate, not a Mont Blanc. “Well you’re the only one with an office full of office supplies, I don’t even have any place to keep my own stuff!”

Husband: “Well why don’t you just get a bunch of pens and put them all over the house with the rest of your stuff, then even you’ll be able to find them!” And then he stalked back off to his office.

Okay fine, I think, lets do it your way. I hop on Amazon and, oh look, 10 pens for £5? Let’s get three sets in each colour. Plus a few pen holder cylinders and a pack of Sharpees for good measure, because you can never have enough Sharpees. Add to Cart and Confirm.

The next day, my malicious package fortuitously arrived while my husband was out of the house. When he returned home, he was greeted by a lovely bouquet of pens in the entry way. He was soon to discover a similar bouquet in the kitchen, on the mantle, table at the top of the staircase, bedroom dresser, and bathroom cabinet. This is a small two bedroom house, so pens had suddenly become the primary design motif. His only comment was an exasperated “*Really?*” to which I just grinned in reply. 

He did move the one out of the bathroom but the others stayed where they were, and actually were pretty handy. I have not needed to borrow any of his pens since, so I like to think we both won.Years ago I saw a big box retailer had a really nice TV on special on their website for about $300 off the instore price. Their store app says they have the TV in stock, so I head to the store, and ask their electronics supervisor if they would price match the website. 

He says no, if I want this TV right I’ll have to pay full price for it. 

I know that when a website instore pickup order comes in, a guy comes out from the back and picks an item off the shelf to fill the order. So I pull out the phone and order the TV for instore pickup. 

Sure enough, 2 minutes later a guy comes out from the back and picks up one of the TV’s that we’re standing in front of, and carts it to the back. 3 minutes after that I get an email saying it’s ready for pickup. 

Head to the desk, get my TV and head out.This happened quite some years ago, when I had dizzy spells and would randomly pass out frequently (still undiagnosed due to shitty doctor but went away on its own). Due to these dizzy spells I was very hesitant to give my seat up on trains/busses, as I was afraid I'd fall and hit someone/something. I would still stand up if someone really looked like they needed it and asked politely, but I just didn't offer. 

One day I was getting on the train and an old lady carrying a cane wanted to board too. A gentleman offered her help:

Man: Do you need a hand ma'm?

Lady: No thank you, I don't even need this cane *swings it around* but my husband insists I use it just in case. *She then hops on the train* 

I end up in the same area as the old lady, in 2 of the very few open seats. After a few stops a Karen enters, she had the haircut, the clothes, and the attitude. By now all the seats are filled, and there are already people standing around due to the lack of seats. Karen pushes through a few people, looks around, and loudly exclaims to noone in particular "Will nobody offer a lady their seat?!" Nobody responds. She then goes around, complaining to a few random people sitting down that she needs to sit because she's been standing for over an hour (oh the horror, try working retail) and just needs to put her feet up (.....on a full train. Okay). One person gets fed up and gives her his seat, right across the old lady from before. The Karen now has a seat, but still no place to put her feet up. She complains to the person next to her and to the old lady that these trains are always so cramped, and it would be good if people who didn't need seats just gave them up. The awesome old lady took this as her cue, made a point of standing up really slowly and carefully, grabbing her cane and clutching it tightly, and said "You can have my seat, your feet probably need it more". She then walked away very slowly, leaning heavily on her cane, and asking people to please step aside so she could fit through. 


Karen got many angry glares at this point, and she called out to the old lady "You can just keep sitting here, I don't need it THAT badly" and the old lady replied "You just said that you really needed it, so take it." And walked to the next cabin. Karen couldn't see her anymore at this point but from my seat I could see the old lady stand up straight and pick up the cane, swinging it around again. 

I don't think many people saw it because everyone continued to glare at Karen until she got off at the next stop. 


The old lady just really wanted to teach Karen a lesson by complying and acting her age, making Karen look like a bitch. She has been my hero ever since.On mobile, English is not my first language, throwaway, bla bla the usual.

Let me first say I have been a lurker here for quite some time and always enjoy your stories. Especially when you stick it to stupid bosses!

This happened some time ago, but as I think it would fit here.

Actors (names changed obv.):

Bob - Boss at the time, old, can't keep up with technology but had been with the company for a long time and so got to be my boss.

Hans - Hero of this story, friend from school who works in the same company but in management but in a different Department. Helped me get this job 4 years prior.

Caroline - Coworker who is not the smartest tool in the shed but makes up for it in work ethic.

Carl - Normal coworker who has worked at company for \~6 years and handles mostly the old clients accounts. Has a family, very busy.

Me - Well, me. Guy in his late 20's, a little geeky, likes computers.

This was a small company and our team of 3 were best described as tech support for our clients but it went a bit further than that. I usually helped with setting up databases and also advised clients from time to time if they would benefit from upgrading their plan etc.

As normal with tech support, we got tickets from the clients and would work away at them one by one. I liked the challenging problems and usually tried to work hard at them, and it just so happened that Caroline liked the more standard problems and enjoy doing something she already knew over something new every day. Nothing wrong with that. As you might imagine, we to made a good team and had this kind of unwritten rules who took which tickets. Win-win-win-win. (Me, Caroline, company and client)

Until we got a new boss, Bob. He immediately noticed that I was working far fewer tickets than Caroline. I tried to explain to him how not every ticket is the same workload, but because he wasn't very tech-savvy and didn't understand half the stuff I was doing, he did not understand.

Also, around one month later, we got a huge new client and I spend a week on site and setting up all the databases and stuff they needed. This drew down my month-average ticket numbers even further, duhhh. If Bob would have only had half a brain cell he could have figured out why. Now came something I did not expect from Bob: He said we need more help on the team and he was approved to hire a forth member for our team. I was exited, we all were. We had this new huge client and things were not yet running smoothly and anyway our company was expanding fast so this actually made sense! And he specifically asked me to basically do the recruiting process and to work the new guy in (he might have figured out that he did not have a clue what we were doing I thought), which I was happy to do.

That same night Hans calls me which is weird because Hans is not a caller, he is a texter. He basically said: "You should come over to my house tomorrow, I have some beers that need drinking."

So the next day I get to Hans' house and we are just talking about normal stuff, we see each other maybe once per month and have a big overlapping friend pool. But this time it was just me and him drinking beers, no other friends around.

After some beers he mentioned that he had just updated his resume the day before and that everyone should always have an updated resume on hand. "Do you have an up to date resume" he asked. I felt this was a weird question and had an idea where this was going so I said no, but should I? Is there something you know about that you want to tell me?Well I am just saying that everyone should have a resume ready but I of course couldn't tell you if Bob thinks about letting you go but I also couldn't tell you if Bob is not thinking about letting you go.I thanked him very much for the beers and left shortly after that. So I know I am getting fired and I have the  suspicion  that Bob has just asked me to hire my own replacement and train him to do my job so he can take it.

This is finally where the sweet MC comes in, I fully comply with hiring a "forth" member of the team and also pick one best suited for what Bob wants: high ticket numbers. So I am thinking not so smart person with a sloppy attitude that does not care if the customer is happy. After all customer satisfaction was not important to Bob when he talked about my ticket numbers.

I get right on it. Many people apply, some good ones, but I weed those out very quickly. Resumes with lots of spelling mistakes and little experience in the sector are the ones I invite for an interview.The interview stage is trickier because now Bob and someone from HR is sitting in with me, but I am still asking most of the questions and giving my opinions on the candidates.But because I weeded out the good ones when Bob makes a decision he just chose the best of the worst (in my opinion not even the best because one applicant was actually quite good but I asked him stupid questions that did not even make sense and when he could not answer them I made him look really bad, sorry John). I advise one candidate he ends up picking because he will work very fast and will get a lot of tickets done.

At this point I have another job lined up in 4 months time, but I wanted to get fired by Bob to get some sweet severance pay. After 2 months of training Mr.. New guy, I have just shown him how to do basic tickets (which he can do quite well and fast but makes a lot of mistakes with) and have let the hard ones slowly build up. Carl notices and as he would be the only one after my firing to be able to handle them I let him in on what I was doing. As chance will have it he had just gotten an offer from another company and since he also did not like Bob he already decided that he will take the offer but said he could sit on it a few weeks and time it with my firing for maximum destruction.

Then I tell Bob I am done working in the new guy and a week later he tells me he sadly needs to let me go because my numbers had not gotten better (he actually used against me that I had not been doing that many tickets while I was training the new guy, how dumb can you even be, Bob?). He also wished me a lot of luck finding a new place to word at with my work ethic.This had been the day I was waiting for and I just thanked Bob and reminded him of the 4 months worth of severance I was owed now and also 2 month worth of vacation I had not taken and carried over and was now entitled to get paid out. As I am heading out I tell Carl what had just happened and he opens his drawer with the signed two weeks notice and walks into Bob's office.

My girlfriend had vacation time left and we decided to leave for a 4 week holiday to New Zealand the next week. I proposed to her there (as the saying goes: spend 1/4 of your severance on the engagement ring)

I started my new job one month after returning from NZ and even got a nice pay bump and a good boss! I made sure to thank Hans again and he kept me in the loop on how my old department went down the drain very quick and Bob was let go some time later. When that happened they actually approached me for taking his job and I declined, but that would have been the ultimate fuck you to him...

About 5 years later (last year) I started a company together with Hans doing much of the same thing but in a different city and so far it is going really well!

TL;DR: who reads tldrs in this kind of subreddit?Boss does not understand what I do, gets me to hire my own replacement which is of course not a good fit and I get a fiance and better job out of it.

&#x200B;

Edit: Spelling and formatting. You pointed out the irony of my spelling mistakes but please see my first sentence. I am sure there are still plenty of mistakes in the text. If you find them, keep them. Also, TIL that a lot of people in fact to read TL;DR'sA long, long time ago in the late 90s when I was a young IT consultant, I was sent out of state an an assignment. The sales manager decided to make all of the travel arrangements for me and my coworker.

&#x200B;

We were to stay at a "Holiday Inn" type hotel he booked for us. When I asked about daily expenses and a rental car the sales manager told me that the hotel had a shuttle that would take us to the work site and we could eat at the hotel restaurant. I tried to argue with him that I'd like to see the town or eat somewhere other than the hotel but he wouldn't budge. He paid for the flights and the rooms and we could charge our meals to our room. Anything else would be paid for out of our own pockets.

&#x200B;

I was young and broke so I didn't have much of a choice. I settled in to the expectation that I would have a boring week of hotel/work/hotel for five days.

&#x200B;

When my coworker and I arrived at the hotel we were quite surprised to find that it wasn't at all a "Holiday Inn" type hotel, in spite of the fact that it had "Inn" in the name. It was quite fancy and the rooms were comfortable and spacious. The hotel restaurant, though, was something my lower-middle-class self had never experienced.

&#x200B;

This was a restaurant that didn't print prices on the menu. In fact, I couldn't even pronounce half of the items listed. Meals were a set cost regardless of what you ordered. Breakfast was $40 per person. Lunches and dinners were $60 per person.

&#x200B;

Knowing we had no car and no way to expense anything that wasn't charged to the room, my coworker and I dutifully ate three meals a day in the hotel restaurant. I had five days of filet mignon for breakfast and various gourmet lunches and dinners while the hotel shuttle took us to and from the workplace all week.

&#x200B;

Now, years later, I'm not even sure I remember the city I was in or the work I was doing but I remember a week of filet mignon for breakfast and the look in the eyes of the sales manager when he saw his credit card statement. That was a great trip.A bit of backstory: I've worked a call center at a well-respected company in my area for about 2 years now. When i was about a year in I started working from home. At this point my supervisor wasn't the best person. I dont know if she didnt like me because i didnt take her garbage like everyone else on the team did or if it was something else entirely. We butt heads a lot.

Anyway, a few months ago in April, the desk chair at my home office broke while i was noting an account (im not the lightest guy, as my username might imply, and it was a really old chair i got from my ex). My back was injured really badly, parts of the chair were dug into my skin, i had cuts, and parts of my shirt were stained red  and cut up from the injuries. I messaged my supervisor immediately about this, telling her i would be clocking out to go to the hospital.

Now, i have never been late a day in my life, and i almost never use time off, even when it's offered. There was no reason for me to be 'skipping work' that day either, especially since the office was so slow.

After im in my car with a towel on the drivers seat, my supervisor texts me, somehow offended that i was going to the emergency room. She later said she didnt believe me, and that if i wanted any kind of workers comp i had to prove it to her. Cue malicious compliance.

Once i was home from the ER i snapped a photo of my freshly stitched back, my stained shirt, and a picture of the broken chair. I sent a photo of these things to her, as well as a screenshot of the texts to HR and the site director, just to make sure nothing got lost.

I later got reimbursed for my time, the medical bills, AND a $400 replacement chair to use moving forward. The day after i came back i was called by the site director who told me i would be changing to another team, and a week later i was told my old supervisor was no longer with the company.

The moral of the story: dont take guff from anyone and always keep the reciepts.I worked at Sears while in college. I was in the warehouse, and throughout the day we would have to bring large items out for customers. We also had an outlet store, so we often had to bring out unboxed appliances.

One day a customer came in with a receipt for a fridge he bought from the outlet store. So I grab it and bring it out. Turns out he has a pickup, with a very tall canopy over the back; and a bed that was absolutely full of construction debris. The crap was level with the top of the pick up bed; but the canopy was pretty tall and would accomate most of the fridge, laying on it's back (we gave him the warning about making sure to set it back vertically for 24 hours before plugging it in).

Anyway, we shoved it in, but it didn't quite fit far enough to close the back doors. So I ran and grabbed some nylon twine to tie the two door handles together to keep it from flying out.

At this point the customer starts giving me crap for using weak-assed twine that will break immediately. I pointed out that the twine was absolutely as strong as could be and definitely would not break. But he started rifling around in the back of his truck and pulled out 10 feet or so of Coaxial cable; cable TV cable.

"Here, now THIS is strong" he told me. I couldn't help looking at him like he was insane. You might make a case that it is somewhat strong; but there's no way at all you could tie it together to secure it. It would clearly unravel almost instantly.

I tactfully tried to explain this to him, but he just got madder and madder.  I began to realize that I better get a witness to me explaining to this dude that he was on crack. So I called Loss Prevention (Security) and they came down and together we explained to him that we cannot guarantee that his jury-rigged bullshit would properly secure his load; and if something happens we would not be liable. And then Loss Prevention took some poloraid photos of the completely tied up job.

Flash forward 15 minutes. The guy is back in are parking lot. There is NO fridge in the back of his truck. He's STEAMING fucking mad. He screams that he wants to see the store manager. So I call the manager, and then also call Loss Prevention; who came a little bit later.

So apparently he drove down the road, and about a quarter mile away, he turned right to get on the freeway entrance ramp; at which time the back doors flew open, and the fridge flew out. Apparently it was currently sitting in three pieces on the side of the freeway entrance.

The guy screamed the store manager, claiming I completely fucked up loading his car and he wants a new fridge. At this point Loss Prevention showed up; and explained to the manager; "it wasn't quite the way he is saying it. lazespud2 offered to secure it tightly with our approved, super strong twine, but the customer insisted that he use coaxial cable instead. Lazespud2 made it clear that he felt this would NOT secure the fridge and in fact called us up to document the situation. And here's the photos of what it looked like and what the customer said he approved."

The manager looked at the photo, rolled his eyes, and told the customer, "I'm sorry sir, this is completely on you." and then the manager walked away.

I was stunned; Sears honestly would take ANYTHING back, or refund anything, as long as you pushed it a bit. But I guess this situation was so clear cut to the manager that he wasn't gonna give an inch.

The guy sputtered that he was gonna sue us; and in the distance, without turning around, the manager just says "it's always your perogotive to throw away even more of your money."

He never sued.So I work at a school library, right?

We rent out chargers for phones and laptops upon request for a few hours, but they have relatively steep fines for being returned late. Usually I waive the fines, especially if it is returned less than an hour after it was due.

In comes one guy, let's call him H, who is a serial laptop-charger renter. Almost every day. Well, a few days ago, he accidentally brought the charger home with him. Now, our fines are $1.50 an hour, which was at about $20 total when he called in the next day.

He asked me if he would be fined. I knew him, so I was willing to waive his fine, but I couldn't tell him over the phone because he might come back at a time when I'M not working, and some of the other librarians are less lax about fines. So I tell him "Currently your fine is at $25, but if you bring it in, then we can discuss it further. I'm sure we can figure something out." He hangs up, and I assume he would be coming in.

Two days later, H comes waltzing up to my desk and sets a laptop charger down in front of me. There very same one he took home three days prior. I scanned it in, and told him:


Me: You have an $85 fine on your account.

H: What? It was $25 when I called!

Me: That was two days ago. The fine is by the hour.

H: You didn't tell me that!

Me: The fine info is taped to the side of the charger. Tell you what; I'll go ahead and waive everything but that first $25, alright? You'd just pay the fine you thought you'd pay.

H: But the guy on the phone told me he would waive it!


I didn't tell him that.


Me: I'm waiving $60. So you only have to pay $25.

H: I want to talk to your boss!


Now at this point I should mention that we aren't strictly *allowed* to waive fines, it's just that the library can't tell the difference between a fine waived by a manager or just an employee. I was being generous.


Me: If I bring my manager in here, you'll just have to pay the whole fine.

H: I want to talk to him.


So I bring in my manager. After hearing the situation, my manager bluntly says:


Manager: It's an $85 fine, will that be cash or card?


He stammered and walked out of the library.

It's okay though. He just can't check out books or graduate until the fine is paid. C'est la vie.



Edit: the charger is free for 5 hours. Most people don't pay anything. Also it says on the charger it's not allowed to leave the building. If they remember to turn it in before they leave, the maximum fine they could possibly get (if they rent the charger at the very beginning of the day and don't return it until close) is $16.

He took it home, kept it well past the 5 hour mark, hence the ridiculous fine cost. All library properties cap out at $100 or the price of the object (whichever is higher).

Also I feel like I didn't emphasize HOW rude he was. He was basically short of yelling at me, so hopefully that clears up some frequent questions :)Another tech story: I’m a contractor at a big bank in New York City. No benefits but I’m paid by the hour. I like the people I work for and while I realize I get paid well, I try to make sure they get their money’s worth.

On the Friday before last (start to the three-day weekend), I was told by one of the managers (mine is out on vacation) that one of “my”applications was malfunctioning in production and that it absolutely needed to be fixed pronto. This application was tested to a crazy degree, so the first thing I did was call up the server admin and ask what was different between our test and production systems. After some prodding, I figure out that the production system consists of two clustered servers whereas the test server is all on its own. On the theory that the data isn’t transferring between the paired servers fast enough for the next web page to be rendered (it’s a survey application where the answer to one question determines the next question to be asked), I suggest checking the “sticky bit” (which would ensure that when a person uses the application, they will “stick” to one server, to eliminate the data transfer problem.) 

The admin (who’s a friend of mine) tells me she can’t make that change without *her* department’s manager’s approval, a kind of know-it-all guy. 

Fine. I tell my substitute manager what I think the problem is (thinking he’ll go to bat for me) and instead, he tells me to “stay as long as it takes, including giving up my weekend to ensure it’s working” and he tells me I’ll have to work it out with the department manager for the server group.

Long story only slightly shorter, that guy proceeds to make my and his two employees’ lives miserable all weekend. I keep suggesting the sticky bit, he keeps telling me “there’s no way that’s it” and suggests dumb strategy after dumb strategy. I keep telling my substitute manager what’s happening, he keeps telling me to work it out...and stay as long as I need to.

Finally, late on Columbus Day, my admin friend says “I’m just going to try your idea without telling him.”

Fixes the problem...less than two minutes effort.

When my manager got back from vacation last week, he called me over to his desk. He had just gotten the bill from the contracting firm. He seemed pissed. I had billed for three extra 8 hour days.

Him: “I just have one question: where did you sleep?”

“On the couch in the waiting room.”

Him: “OK. Thanks.”

Earlier today, my manager came over with an envelope and when he handed it to me he said “I’d tell you to thank [substitute manager] and [server group manager] for this but since it came out of their budgets, maybe best not to. Don’t spend it all in one place.”

Check was for my regular pay plus, um, almost $18,000. My manager socked their budgets for time and a half from the end of business of Friday to open of business on Tuesday.

When I told him later that I felt bad, he said: “You shouldn’t, you taught them a very valuable lesson in server technology and business management that they obviously missed.”

Did I mention my boss used to be a programmer himself?

**Edit:** Gee, so this is transitory, temporary, low-level Reddit quasi-fame! ;-) I figure I’d get a few comments at most, really I just didn’t know who to tell besides my mom and all she kept saying was “good for you, honey!” Weird week all around. To wrap up my couple minutes of quasi-fame and week of self-indulgence, here’s the update:

My boss called me last night to say that his boss’ boss would like to have lunch with me. I didn’t think she knew my name but it’s not really about my long weekend...that just reminded her I exist. :-/ In any case, they’ve asked me to think seriously about coming on staff and they want me to create a position for myself. They’ve proposed coming on staff before but the create-a-job thing is new. Mostly I’ve resisted because the idea of managing others — and becoming one of *them* — makes my skin crawl. My manager said they’ve been talking about it for a while. News to me.

So, that happened. 

Also, apparently the “bonus” was my boss’ idea but his boss and his boss’ boss signed off on it because they didn’t think it was fair and because it was a way of rewarding me for “everything I’ve done” (been here 5 years.) It’s not the first favor they’ve done for me either. Two years ago, they were told to cut consultants and they classified me as “essential” (I’m really not, they just seem to like me) to keep me around until they could figure out how to keep me. So, anyway, I’m a bit more comfortable with how things went down.

I wasn’t really expecting advice from everyone but it did get me thinking and just to wrap up this horrifically self-indulgent story, I decided to start a “potential future offspring” investment account. My parents did a lot for me and if I have kids one day, I’d like for them to feel lucky in this world. If I never wind up having kids, I’ll gladly help someone else’s kids feel a little lucky. It’s not millions of dollars but it’s enough of an unexpected windfall to start saving for that off right.

Lastly (and I was planning to do this anyway, now I can do just a bit more), once the taxes are figured out, I figure I’ll give a generous but not crazy [donation](https://hispanicfederation.org/unidos/) to hurricane relief in P.R. bc it’ll make me feel better about how fortunate I am generally and bc they’re freaking Americans for God’s sake (...and not trying for applause or sainthood. In fact, I have given much less to charity than I could...and I’m superstitious enough to feel like after this week, I really have to avoid tempting the Fates.)

Thanks for sharing my weird week with me, Reddit. :-)

**TL;DR**: Was told to spend my weekend in the office arguing with an uncooperative manager. Made $18k courtesy of my pissed-off, ex-programmer boss.I have an older boss who leads our IT group. Recently, she has threatened to write me up due to speaking up in conference calls with our vendor(s). Speaking up consists of the vendor asking us to provide info, which I know we have readily available and state I can provide. Another example was clearly defining vendor responsibilities vs our companies responsibilities. After one of these times, she called me and said if one of these examples occur again she will write me up. We discussed how even though I was taking the correct action or providing the correct information, it is the principle of me doing it which she said is disrespecting her in front of her peers because it is not my place to make those decisions. I responded by acknowledging this fact and how I have failed her as a follower.

Since then I have remained ghost quiet on meetings and only speaking when spoken to. This has resulted in the vendor having to repeatedly ask for information across multiple days before my boss comes to me for help, which has delayed projects and pushed out deadlines. 

No fallout as of yet, but if things continue to run like this shit is gonna hit the fan to which I will post a pt. 2 of this story.

-EDIT-
Pt 2 - I left the company for a higher paying and more senior position.I had just signed up for a new AT&T TV subscription less than 13 days ago. They had just posted a new update yesterday informing all new subscribers can get HBO and HBO Max for free for a year.

I call AT&T and start talking to the representative explaining my situation. The rep unfortunately tells me that they are not able to add the package as it is only for accounts created AFTER April 3rd.

I then ask the representative if I'm still in my grace period for a full refund and no termination fee. She replies yes. So I tell her I would like to cancel my account. She replies "I am sorry to hear that. Why would you like to cancel your account today?"

I reply "I just told you but its the fact that I am not getting HBO for free" She replies "I understand, let's go ahead and cancel the account. You won't be charged a termination fee and will get a full refund of what you have paid so far."

After a few minutes she cancels the account and then asks "Is there anything else I can help you with today?" I say "Yes I would like to set up a new account for AT&T TV."

She then transfers me to another representative that can assist and I get a new account setup with the HBO and HBO Max free for year. I still have to send the box back with the old account AND they sent me a new box for the new account.

TLDR: Rep couldn't add the package to my  account created just 13 days ago because AT&T so I cancel the current account then immediately setup a new account to get the promotional offer of HBO and HBO Max for free for a year.

I know they have to follow certain steps but wouldn't it have just been easier for them to add the package to the existing account. Either way it gave me a good chuckle.Years ago, I was the CTO of a software company that was perhaps the worst run company I've ever seen. It was run by a "chairman" who used to be a flight engineer, and who had no experience at all in the software industry. One day, in his expansive wisdom, Mr. Chairman decided that we were going to give his friend (a local pastor) an office. I was ordered by Mr. Chairman to make it impossible for anybody ("Even you!!!") to access any of Mr. Pastor's files (because, y'know, privacy and stuff). I attempted to point out a couple of problems with that scenario, but was immediately shut down and ordered to do what I was told.

Now, this particular person had... well, let's call it a quirk. When anything went wrong with his computer, his solution was to format his C: drive. (Yeah, I know...) The inevitable happened, and Mr. Chairman ordered me to restore all of Mr. Pastor's files from the backup (which we normally did... ahem... religiously). I looked at him innocently and said "What backup?" It took possibly five seconds for steam to begin pouring from his ears, and for him to start screaming, "YOU MEAN YOU DIDN'T DO A BACKUP??? WHY YOU....!!!!" and so on. I waited for him to finish, and then asked him politely how he proposed that I do a backup of files that I'm not allowed to have any access to? The silence that followed was glorious.***THIS IS A LONG READ, BUT A CAREER HIGHLIGHT FOR ME***

So, I'm in my early 20s and work in a call centre for a gas company. This is my first malicious compliance post, but I had a customer today who reminded me of this one...

A few months ago, I had an angry customer (AC) call in.

Me: Hi, you're through to COMPANY I WORK FOR in CITY I WORK IN. My name is MY NAME. Can I take your name please?

AC: Well, "MY NAME", I've been waiting a full 20 minutes to speak to someone!

***20 minutes is quick for our office***

AC: I've called today becau...

Me: I'm sorry, I didn't catch your name? I need to confirm your account details so I can have a look at your account please.

AC: DO NOT INTERRUPT ME!!! I AM THE CUSTOMER AND THE CUSTOMER IS ALWAYS RIGHT. I PAY YOUR WAGES! Now listen here, young lad, I don't want to hear another word from you. Understood?

Me: *Stunned Silence*

AC: That's more like it. Now, I've called today because....

AC then told me all about the issues with her account. For about 40 minutes!

All the while, I had a first aider and two managers check if I was okay, as I'm not exactly the quiet type. I just sat there for 40 minutes with my headset muted, playing Atari Breakout on the Google Images page. 

After 40 minutes, she started to get to the end of her rant. I paused my game (I'd already beat my high score, and I wasn't willing to lose this progress), and unmuted my headset.

AC: So now I want you to tell me what you're going to do to fix RANDOM BILLING ISSUE.

Me: *Silence*

AC: Excuse me! Are you still there?

Me: Yep, I'm still here.

AC: Well? What are you planning on doing to fix this?

Me: Well, you've come through to the wrong department. I'm happy to get the number for you if you'd like?

AC: WELL WHY DIDN'T YOU THINK TO TELL ME THAT AT THE START OF THE CALL?

Me: I tried, but you told me to be quiet before I had even confirmed the account details.

AC: YOU'RE A FUCKNG IDIOT! YOUR ENTIRE COMPANY IS FULL OF RETARDS!

***FYI, I HATE that word***

Me: I don't appreciate being spoken to like that. If you swear at me again I will be forced to end the call.

AC: Fine, what's their number?

*I give AC the correct number*

AC: And do they have the same hours as your department? 8am to 10pm right?

Me: That team is only open 9am to 5pm on weekdays.

*AC realises it is now 5:05pm on Friday*

AC: WHAT THE FUCK!!! How dare y...

*Click*

Me to my team manager: Yeah, I've just hung up on her, I did warn her not to swear.This happened a couple of days ago in Hollywood, FL. I traded up my phone for the holidays on AT&T's website and arranged a pickup in my nearest store. The receipt I had for the pickup said that the phone was being held until Dec 30th, so I go in on the 29th to pick it up. I needed to get to work and I wasn't going to be available to leave work during business hours, so it had to be then. I was hoping the whole process would take 15 minutes. It didn't.

I get there and the individual, Alan, tells me that my phone wasn't available because I had waited too long and they had canceled my pickup, even though I had until the next day to do so. I show him the email that says that and he shrugs his shoulders and he says that they canceled the order because they counted the day I placed the order as one of the days towards cancellation, which is obviously stupid.

Then he offers to sell me the phone that I was trying to pick up because it's impossible for me to pick up the phone that was being held for me. I just want my goddamn phone so I agree to go through the purchase process, and as it turns out, I will have to pay for the phone again and let AT&T refund the funds for the original order. Major bullshit but again, this is all the time I have to pick up my phone. I asked him for the phone number for someone I can speak with about what is going on and he tells me I need to speak to customer retention and gives me a phone number he pulls off a list.

So he goes through the process and by then I'm late for work, and he tells me he's having problems selling me the last unit of the phone I wanted to purchase. He tries to upsell me. I tell him that I want the goddamn phone I ordered and tells me that he's having some trouble because the system is not letting him sell that unit. It's the last unit he has, so he needs to take extra steps to sell it to me. So now he goes on his phone and makes some phone calls to try and unlock this unit. Meanwhile, he leaves me alone long enough to find out that the phone number he gave me was bullshit. It led to a non-working extension for AT&T and it would just stay on hold. I went on google and discovered this by finding the \*actual\* customer retention phone number and calling it.

So now I'm speaking with a customer retention specialist and I explain to him what is happening over the phone. The retention specialist confirms that, yes, my phone is available for pickup and has NOT been canceled. MEANWHILE on his phone, I can hear Alan speaking with someone at AT&T and the person he's speaking with says over the speakerphone, "I can't allow you to sell that phone, it's being held until tomorrow for customer pickup."

So I asked the person on Alan's phone to repeat that and confirmed that yes, Alan was trying to sell me the phone that I had already purchased and was there to pick up. Then I ask the Customer Retention person I'm speaking with if he heard the other individual's comment. The customer retention rep confirms that he heard what the other AT&T rep has said, and the retention rep asks me to confirm the store number I'm located at and the name of the person I'm speaking with.

At that point, Alan, upon realizing I'm speaking with Customer Retention and Retention heard everything he's trying to do with \*my phone\* tells me to leave the store and tells me he's going to call the police if I don't. Customer retention rep on the phone hears him kick me out of the store.

So I didn't my phone that day, but I did have it delivered to my house next day UPS, which was nice, and I did get to have a conference call with a regional manager from AT&T, along with a supervisor at customer retention, and a manager for third-party dealer locations, while the customer retention specialist confirms everything I was telling them.

I didn't get my phone that day, but I did ruin someone else's, and that was waaaaay more satisfying.

<EDIT> Dispute over ownership of a property during a sale is NOT a police issue. If I had waited for them and refused to leave, they would NOT have taken my side, they would have arrested me. Ownership of a paid-for item *at worst* is a civil court issue and no cop is going to arrest some dude at an AT&T store for not giving me my phone unless he had lifted it out of my pocket. Please stop suggesting I should have waited for the police. I was already on the phone with corporate and late for work. The cast: (Names changed for anonymity)

Me - your storyteller of the moment.

Chad - Hiring CTO.

Richard - CEO, brother of Chad.

Big Bro - Engineer coworker

Eddie - IT and Desktop support guy.

This takes place near the very beginning of my software engineering career, back in '05 or '06.  I'd just been let go from my previous place of employment due to be being compliant with directives I'd been given (although not maliciously, so that story wouldn't be appropriate here, sadly), and thus working myself out of a job.  I was a young college dropout from a technical college that hadn't been federally accredited yet, and thus all my student loans were from banks and loan companies instead of from Uncle Sam, and debts were due.  I was also making payments on my very first car, even though it was a beater that the prior owners had already nearly driven into the ground (4 years old and nearly 200k miles on it when I bought it), and of course, rent and utitlities.  The job I'd just been let go from already had me working paycheck to paycheck as they paid far under average rate, but I was still new professional so I couldn't be very choosy.  I was living in Los Angeles county, so the cost of living was so bad, I was having to choose which bills were going to be late on a monthly basis.  Specifically, I was living in a town called San Pedro, a small town tucked fairly out of the way.

After blasting my resume to all the job boards, I get a call from a startup who seems interested in my resume and wants me to come in for a face-to-face interview (skipping the call-screen entirely).  In my desperation, I agree.  I'm given an address, which is all the way up in Woodland Hills.  I check the internet...  55 minute drive so long as there's no traffic.  With traffic it looks like the commute will be more like an hour and forty-five minutes... each way.  I'm desperate though, and literally nobody else has reached out to me about my resume or responded to my applications, so I go to the interview.  I arrive to an mostly empty office complex.  Maybe 6 or 7 other cars in a parking lot capable of holding at least 50.  I go into the building mentioned in the address, and call the phone number I was given to let them know I've arrived.  Enter Chad.  Chad comes to meet me, and seems excited that I've come!  He escorts me through the building to an office.  Mind you, as far as I can see, we're the only two humans in the building.  He gives me the pitch for the company, tells me he built the software being sold, but it's not scalable, and needs someone who can rewrite it.  After we go through the whole interview song and dance, he offers me the job on the spot.  The pay is marginally higher than the last gig, so I figure gas would be covered for the commute.  I agree, and we shake hands, as I'm going to be starting the next Monday.

Red flags start appearing from the very first minute I arrive on monday.  First, I'm given a tour, which consists of the 14x14 foot office I'm going to be sharing with Chad, as well as another engineer who's going to be starting the following monday.  I'm not a fan of having someone able to look over my shoulder, it makes me nervous.  I ask why each engineer's desk has two computers.  "Because the one you will be writing code on doesn't have internet access, for security purposes."  (Note:  this was pure paranoia.  There was nothing about this software that required such tight security, we weren't doing any gov't contracts or anything of the sort.)  Then, I'm escorted clear across the building, to meet with the CEO (Richard), the IT guy (Eddie), and the sales/support team.  I'm told that half of the team is supporting the existing version of the application, 2 people are selling the existing version to new clients (or trying to), and one person is explicitly tasked with selling the new version.  The one I haven't even started on yet.  I'm still young and dumb at this point, but even I know this means the salesperson is probably giving out a date when the customer should expect their purchase to be filled.  "It's a good thing you started when we did, we've been telling customers it'll be ready in June."  Did I mention all this was happening in February?  Apparently I've agreed to rewrite, test, and package an entire application I've never seen before in approximately four months.  So, tour being done, I sit down and get to work.  After jumping through a bunch of hoops of getting the software I prefer downloaded onto the actual work machine, as well as the code, I set about reviewing code so horrific I've not seen its like since, and there isn't a single comment in the entire thing.  Before I can ask a single question of the CTO however, he tells me he's headed to downtown LA to scalp his tickets to the Lakers game, and that he'll see me tomorrow.  So... now I'm alone in the office with this abomination, a machine that's been hamstrung to heck and back, and the only thing I've got to console me is the fact that at least I'm employed again.

Fast-forward a week, I've documented the bulk of the code (because there wasn't any), and the boss and I do not get along.  He's mad because I've not written any substantial code, and I'm frustrated because I'm trying to understand a lot of what specific code is trying to do and he's routinely leaving around noon to go sell his tickets for Laker's games, or just not in the office because he's chatting with someone else.   When he is in the office, I show him my documentation, and try to get him to verify it or describe the purpose of code where all I can say is "Wat?"  By the end of the week, I've covered about 30% of the project in a wiki-like document, and I've taken to leaving after sunset so I can a) get more done, b) have a shorter commute, and c) drive when my car isn't an oven (the ac didn't work).  I've barely managed to convince the CTO that what I'm doing is necessary so the engineer starting the next monday doesn't have to do anywhere near the same crap I've got, which would make us a more efficient team.

Monday arrives, and in comes Big Bro.  I call him this because he was a much more experienced engineer than I was.  We spend the first day with him getting set up, then us reviewing what I've documented.  He manages to answer some questions the CTO never did, just because he is that much better, and I start to feel more confident.   Over the next weeks, Big Bro took me under his wing as an engineer teaching me best practices, standards, and where my plans were good and where they could be better.  If it hadn't been for him, I'd have gone insane!  I end up joining him outside for smoke breaks even though I don't smoke, just so I can get a breath of non-office air.  He and I discuss the project, and we also make friends with Eddie, who makes us laugh by telling us horror stories about the CTO and CEO (apparently he was a school \*friend\* of theirs and basically worked with them because they paid him to do something he felt was super easy).

April rolls around.  I've got a special occasion I need the day off for, which happens to be a Wednesday that year.  I'd advised him when I first started and he'd been cool with it.  I remind him on April 2nd (since I had an irrational fear of policy decisions being made on April Fool's Day), and he loses it.  He goes off on a rant, and straight up informs me that he regrets hiring me, claiming I didn't have the skills I told him I did, and wasn't worth what I was being paid. We're definitely not half-way done (more like one third), and it's already been decided that June is a lost cause and that we're shooting for August now.  That habit I started before, of leaving after the sun went down?  Yeah, that never stopped.  I was arriving at 9am every day, and leaving around 10pm every night, trying my best.  Big bro was the same, and Eddie would stay late with us just because we liked hanging out together.  So, it should be understandable that I was very close to losing it right back at him.  In a strained, yet diplomatic voice, I told him that if he put in the same amount of work to help us as we put in to rewrite \*his\* code, we'd probably be a lot closer to done than we were, especially given the twelve hour days.  He was not a fan of that, and switched to straight up yelling, blaming us for the lost sales and refunds due to the delays, and that the only way he'd get off our backs was by getting the project done.  This entire time Big Bro is just sitting there, and says nothing to back me up.  Chad then left the office for a bit, and I just declared I was taking my lunch and would be back in an hour.  I felt frustrated by Chad and betrayed by Big Bro, who I felt (rightly or not) should have had my back since we were in the same boat.

When we were both back in the office, he apologized for yelling and told me that since he agreed when I was hired I could have my day off.  Cool.  I apologized too, although not for anything specific.  I just didn't want to talk to him anymore and figured that was the fastest way to end the conversation.

Fast forward to June, and the opportunity for Malicious Compliance.  Over the last two months, Chad has been getting worse and worse.  He's yelling nearly every day (and still leaving early too).  Big Bro and Eddie are also feeling the pain, nobody is safe from his ego.  The smoke breaks and afternoon/evening portion of our day are when we're most productive, as nobody can focus until Chad leaves.  The first monday in June rolls around and Chad invites me to go on a walk outside for a 1-on-1 meeting.  I figured I'm being fired (at this point we've had to refactor the rewrite almost entirely due to missing a critical chunk of functionality, and we're still only 60% done. August release is looking less and less sure).  Chad informs me that he's hired a 3rd engineer, but in order to stay in the budget to pay him, he's cutting my salary in half.  I stop on the spot and just give him a blank look.

"Are you serious?"  I ask.  "I'm barely able to pay for my bills and the gas required to commute here as it is. If you cut my salary at all, I won't be able to afford to live."  At this point the idea of cutting my productivity to help ramp up a new engineer so he can help us meet the deadline doesn't even occur to me, although in hindsight that would have also been a pretty major issue.

Chad brushes me off.  "That's not my problem.  The fact that you missed one deadline and look like you're gonna miss another is.  If you've got a problem with that, you're more than welcome to go find another job.  The new guy starts in two weeks."  And with that he walks inside.  I'd just been told that I had two weeks left of job at my current salary.  Cool.  So that day I do something I hadn't done since I first started.  I left while the sun was still up.  (Specifically, I left at 5pm).  I drive my oven-car (no working Air Conditioning in a car that had been left in the sun all day in Woodland Hills had me feeling like a baked potato) through traffic (hour and a half-commute home through LA heat), and updated my resume before reactivating my accounts on all the job sites.  I'm contacted the next day by a potential new employer, and I get an interview scheduled.  I decide to tell Big Bro about the new opportunity, and he hits me with news that lets me know just how small a world we live in.

Me: "Hey, Big Bro, just fyi I've started looking for a new job.  I've already got an interview lined up."

Big Bro: "Really?  Where?"

Me: "Over at <company>"

Big Bro:  "Wow!  That's where I worked before I came here!   That place is pretty awesome, and I left there on pretty good terms.  I know the CTO there, go ahead and use me as a reference!"

Me, skeptical: "Really?  Okay...."

Turns out Big Bro was true to his word, and the CTO and I even talked about Big Bro during the interview.  Apparently they'd already talked about me, and Big Bro had been the ultimate hype man, confirming everything I said about why I was looking for a new job and everything.  All goes well, and I'm electronically signing an offer-letter that Friday afternoon (Chad had already left for the day, so there was nobody to look over my shoulder as I used the work computer that \*had\* internet access to get this done).  At the new Job, the commute is cut by more than half, and comes with a pretty significant raise.  I tell Big Bro and Eddie on the last smoke break (I still don't smoke) that I'm done, and I've found something new.  Oddly enough, they both smile and just wish me luck.  "No hard feelings, hope we stay in touch!"  Odd, but I'd stopped really caring about anything related to that job, so I paid it no mind.  I went back inside, packed up my stuff into my backpack, and walked to the CEO's office.

Me: "Hey Richard, got a minute?"

Richard: "Hey OP, what's up?"

Me: "Just wanted to let you know I found a new job, so I'm moving on."

Richard: "Really, why? We need you!"

Me: "You guys decided it was cool to cut my salary to a point where I couldn't afford to live.  Chad said if I didn't like it, I should look for something new, so I did."

Richard, looking defeated: "Well, when's your last day?"

Me: "Today."

Richard, now pissed: "We need you here to train the new guy who starts soon!"

Me: "Hey, I had to train myself and to an extent, Big Bro when he first started.  The new guy should be able to as well."

And with that, I left for greener pastures.

The unexpectedly \*huge\* fallout:

Four months later, Big Bro texts me to ask me how things are going.  I tell him things  are great, and we schedule a lunchtime call because apparently things have gone sideways in a huge way.

Part 1)  Apparently Chad came in on Monday almost violently angry, and demands Eddie re-image my work machine first thing in the morning, which erases everything I'd left on there.Big Bro comes in an hour later, and he and Chad discuss the new timeline for the project.  Somewhere in there apparently Big Bro asks Chad to log into the admin account on my old work machine so he can pull the documents I'd accumulated about the planned architecture, the existing code, meeting notes, etc.  Chad answers by apparently punching a hole in the wall, and leaving for the day (probably to go to the hospital to deal with his hand), at 10:30 in the morning.  Big Bro then spends the rest of that week ostensibly working on recreating the documentation from scratch.

Part 2) When I asked how the new guy handled the new documentation, Big Bro laughed and told me there never was any documentation. Apparently he and Eddie had become really good friends in the months we worked there, to the point where they'd become roommates about a month before I left.  More than that though, they'd decided to start a freelance/consulting business together and only had to decide on when to make that their full time jobs.  Neither of them liked Chad much, and wanted to make their departure hurt as much as possible.  So, they decide to make Big Bro's last day the day before the new guy starts, and Eddie would quit shortly afterward, sticking around just long enough to watch the bomb go off.  Did I mention Big Bro never told Chad he was quitting?  Yeah.  He just didn't show up that Monday.  He had, however, emailed that 'documentation' he'd spent a week writing to Chad.  Turns out he wasn't documenting the code at all.  He'd spent a week writing a letter explaining in excruciating detail why Chad was such a bad boss, and he'd emailed it to everyone in the company.  I asked if he still had it so I could read it, and he sent it to me after the call.

Thankfully, like the big helper he was, Eddie had ensured that the new guy's email was set up and in the proper groups before the email was sent, so the guys first email in the company was a novella about the kind of person he' agreed to work for.  Apparently Chad thought it was appropriate to take his frustration out on the new guy, who'd already read a significant portion of the email before Chad shoved him away from his desk and deleted it.  Apparently new guy promptly decided (and rightfully so) that agreeing to work for Chad had been a mistake, packed up his things, and quit on the spot.

Part 3) With the new guy quitting, the August deadline was now little more than a dream within a dream, which according to Eddie doesn't stop Chad and Richard from trying to find that miracle rock star engineer who can save them from their own situation (which, given what they were offering as pay, didn't exist).  So time advances in its unstoppable way, August arrives, and customers find that they've paid for something that hasn't been delivered yet, and pretty much unanimously demand refunds, with a few customers bringing legal action against them.  With the amount they have to refund, and the money they now need for legal fees (because of they way they'd incorporated, they were personally liable), they could no longer afford to pay anyone, and were forced to shutter the business.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Final Note:   For my fellow software engineers out there who were wondering just how bad this application was, this "program" was a single php file with over 40k lines of code, running inside a \`while\` loop.  Any and all logic consisted of if/else trees, which then led to either more if/else trees or more loops.  No function calls, no external libraries included, just....  spaghetti of the worst kind.  Given the nature of the application, most critical logic had to be implemented in no less than seven places, depending on where the execution was when the logic was needed.  At worst the tab-depth was something like nineteen or twenty tabs deep.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Post upvote-splosion edit:

I wanted to write out my thanks, and to answer some of your questions, but it turned into another long wall of text.  So, instead I put it in a comment, which I'll link to here:

[https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/lb8evx/cut\_my\_salary\_in\_half\_kiss\_your\_business\_goodbye/glvy3kg/](https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/lb8evx/cut_my_salary_in_half_kiss_your_business_goodbye/glvy3kg/)Quite some time ago I used to work at Walmart and honestly it was by far the worst job I've ever had. I could go on for hours about all the horror stories I have from that place. One story in particular I feel is a good fit here.

You see, the store I worked in had a rule that if you see a spill, you are to guard the area to keep customers from slipping and falling. You were not to leave the spill for any reason while you flagged down another employee so that they could fetch cleaning supplies (only managers and the cleaning crew had radios). I understand the logic here as a lawsuit would certainly cost much more than an hourly employee's time standing next to a spill until it was cleaned up. However there are a few issues with this in practice.

I worked the evening shift in the Meat Department and most days I was the only person in my department. I was situated between Frozen Foods and Produce, which more often than not only had 1 person shifts as well but they also closed much earlier than my department. This meant that I was the only person in my corner of the store for about half of my shift. If I came across a spill there was no telling how long I would have to wait around for another employee to come by because there was literally nobody else working in or around my area. Also, being in the Meat Department, we had multiple cleaning stations all around. One was always a few steps away.

One day while working alone I noticed a small spill. So I stood next to it per procedure for about 10 minutes. In this time nobody, customer nor coworker, had even entered my view. I couldn't help but think how dumb this was as I could see a cleaning station just on the other side of a bunker. I decided to throw in the flag and just go get the cleaning supplies and take care of it myself because even if a customer did come around I could still see the spill and easily call out to them to watch their step. Unsurprisingly, I was able to make the round trip without any incidents. 

As I was cleaning it a manager came walking up and took notice of me.

Manager, "What happened here?"

Me, "Just a spill. I've got it all sorted."

Manager, "Did you just happen to have cleaning supplies on you?"

Me, "No, but they were just right there. I was able to fetch them without losing sight of the spill."

Manager, "That's not how we do things! Someone could have gotten hurt!"

Me, "No, as I could have called to anyone that came near it. I was never more than a few steps away."

Manager, "Doesn't matter. You should have stood next to the spill and waited for someone else to come by."

This when on for a few minutes but the manager was not budging so I conceded. That was not good enough for him as he then proceeded to write me up for "Negligence and unsafe work practices". I was livid, but I was also a college student and needed the job so I just kept quiet and returned to my shift.

A week or two later as I was once again the only person working in my corner of the store, I happened upon another spill. This time I shrugged and decided to guard it as if my job depended on it. I checked my watch and noticed that I had about 3 hours left on my shift and had a small laugh at the thought that I might be standing in that spot guarding a puddle instead of closing my department.

10 minutes passed.

30 minutes passed.

1 hour passed.

Around this time I was bored out of my mind, but then I heard a call over the intercom system that made it so much more worth it. "We need an associate from the Meat Department to the back for a truck." This was followed by a few other calls for other departments for their trucks arriving as well. I started laughing out loud at this because I knew that this meant that the very few people that were likely to come by my department were now at the loading dock unloading trucks while I stood guard over my puddle.

A few minutes passed before I heard the second call, "We need an associate from the Meat Department to the back for a truck". I just stood there counting the lights on the ceiling.

1 hour left on my shift and there still had not been a single fellow employee walk by. I assumed everyone was starting to finish up their own trucks by this point and would likely soon have to start unloading my truck as well. I was watching the minutes go by in anticipation trying to decide if someone would come find me before my shift ended or not.

I got my answer 15 minutes before the end of my shift as the very same manager from before came storming through the Meat Department furious. We made eye contact and he stormed over to me and started yelling about how they have been calling for me to unload the truck and how they are now behind schedule and so on. Once he took a breath long enough for me to speak I asked simply, “Can you go to a spill station and grab something to clean this up? I’ve been here a while now.” He glanced down at the puddle next to me and I thought he was going to explode. 

Manager, “You mean to tell me that you didn’t unload the truck because you were watching a spill?”

Me, “Yes.”

Manager, “Why didn’t you just clean it up?”

Me, “But leaving the spill would be unsafe for any customers. Besides, you wrote me up for doing that very thing recently, right?”

The manager tossed his hands up in defeat and walked the 15 steps away to the nearest spill station and returned with supplies, that he promptly gave me to clean the spill myself. 

Manager, “Once you are done go back to the loading dock and start on your truck.”

Me, “Sorry, I have only about 10 minutes left on my shift and as I’ve been standing here guarding the spill I never got my second break. So I’m going to the break room for a bit before clocking out. You’ll need to find someone to close down my department as well.”

At this the manager just stomped off in a rage. I cleaned up the spill, played on my phone in the breakroom for a bit, and clocked out with a smile on my face. I know that the manager just made someone else do all the work and wasn’t personally affected by this, but knowing that I could be a thorn in his side was enough for me.Call old guys, ask them about fishing, cars, military politics. Call old ladies, tell them you're considering kids with your husband/wife, ask them about their grand kids/kids. (NOT 'where's your grandkid live?' but 'you remind me of my grandma I bet you're the one your grandkids call when they're unsure of big choices like this). 

Source: Got pulled into a meeting to discuss the fact that despite murdering every other KPI including upsells NPS ( net promoter score, essentially how much they liked you and would recommend the company based on their experience) my avg talk time was lower than what they wanted. Got pulled into another meeting at the end of that shift to discuss my 6 hour call with a WWII vet, and told to not worry about talk time in future.




xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx


EDIT: Cheers for first gold!

To clarify some points on the 6 hour call with Arthur:

Wasn't my first long call, but definitely the longest by 4 and a bit hours. Sometimes when we'd already hit targets for the day and didnt want to lower our strike rate we'd ride out a call for 45 mins or so till the end of shift. Sometimes with genuine convo, more often we had to milk it.  

This call however took no work on my part I got really lucky, I felt like I was talking to a version of myself who was just born in the 1920s we had such similar takes on so many things. If I met this guy at a pub I woulda ended up talking to him for ages as well. 

About an hour and a half in he asked if I had to go and do some work since he wasn't buying or upgrading or anything, in my service voice I told him something along the lines of  'Here at (Giant Telco) every customer is invaluable so my job is to make sure you're getting the most out of your telephone and internet services, and we don't put a time limit on that process.' 
He definitely knew there was some shenanigans going on my part as we'd talked about corporate beurocracy (as well as everything else under the sun) 
I think he just assumed it was my last day or something. 

I managed to take multiple pee breaks (as did he, where I talked to his carer for a bit) and I even ducked down to grab some food (which I ate at my desk) just by asking him if it was alright if I popped him on hold for a couple minutes. 

I originally posted this as an answer for a ULPT request and had multiple suggestions to post it on here. Glad you guys liked it. Also glad I found this sub it's hilarious.This happened some years ago, I was reminded of it by reading stories on here.

I'd just moved to Sydney, and had been living in a sharehouse for a few months, that I found though a flat-share website. We got on ok, would go out to parties together etc. Most of the stuff in the house was theirs, I only brought my fridge, and they had just thrown theirs out, considering it replaced.

I'm about to get the week's groceries and ask my housemate if she wants anything, no she's good. I get lots of food to cook for the week and come home, to find her standing awkwardly with her boyfriend. She had "weird news." They had decided to move out together! How exciting! Ok, so I guess that means I take over the lease? Nope, they considered themselves the last in a long line of friends who'd leased the house, and being the last to go, thought it fitting to terminate the lease. They had notified the landlord prior to speaking to any of us. They figured I could stay with my sister, jack was only in the country another month, and Sarah was hardly here anyway.

Ok so I didn't have a leg to stand on, legally, I wasn't signed on the lease, so I had 3 weeks to vacate. Househunting is like a part time job, and I already had a full time job. No time to cook all that food I guess. Would have been good to know before the shop.

I got lucky and found a house just down the road on the same day. Nice people, good spot, and close enough that I could move my things in by hand, immediately if I like! I slept in my new house that night, but I always like to think you haven't really moved in until your fridge is in, and don't worry I had that sorted too.

The others in the house found new places quickly too, leaving the happy couple home alone.

I came back to pick up a couple of loose ends 3 weeks later and got to see their fridge workaround in all its slumly glory. An Esky full of food floating in melted ice. The revenge was petty and small, proportionate to their actions.I am a 22F. I live with my parents but I’m moving out in a couple weeks, so my mother and I have been bumping heads a lot. The biggest thing we fight about is my clothes and my sleep. 

Recently, it’s been more about my sleep than anything else. I go into work at 2pm everyday at my full time job, so I’m there relatively late. When I get home I like to decompress, play video games, watch tv, workout, and make something light to eat. I don’t always do all of these things in the same day but what I’m getting at is I stay up late. I get off around 11, home by 11:15, and I won’t go to sleep until around 3/4 morning. The latest being 4 if I’m with my boyfriend. 

She wakes me up EVERYDAY from between 6am-9am. But it’s never just once, she’ll do it 2-4 times in the morning until I can’t go back to sleep and I’m pissed. She doesn’t even wake me up for important shit. It’s either to bitch at me or make me do something for her. I’ve asked her time and time again to stop waking me up. “I have a hard time going back to sleep. Could you please just let me sleep until 11am and when I’m up I’ll do what you need me to do?” but she never listens. 

Well, currently, she’s been having work done on her house. The workers are in their final stages so they’re just painting the house. Well, once again she woke me up at 7:30am today by barging into my room to move her truck because the workers are here. I groan, get up, and throw on a nightgown she doesn’t like. We’ve had several fights about this nightgown because it’s short. Even though it’s long enough to cover everything it needs too. 

I looked at myself in the mirror and thought about changing but instead I smirked and thought to myself,”If you can’t respect my boundaries, why am I going to respect yours?” I keep the nightgown on. I walk out of my room, move the truck, and go back inside. As soon as she sees me while i’m walking back to my room she starts S C R E A M I N G. 

“CATWANGUTERUS YOU WENT OUTSIDE LIKE THAT? YOU’RE BASICALLY NAKED. WHY DO YOU HATE ME?” shes standing in front of me trying to block my way from going to my room. I duck underneath her arms and ignore her. My mother starts following me while yelling about me living with her and my father so I can’t be dressing like whore around their house. Especially when my father and working men are around. 

I get into my room, close the door, and take off the nightgown so I’m butt ass naked about to lay back down and she swings my door open still trying to argue with me. “I CANT BELIEVE YOU WOULD EMBARRASS ME LIKE THAT. PUT ON SOME FUCKING CLOTHES. WE’RE TALKING.” I laugh in her face and close the door on her. She attempts to REOPEN THE DOOR so I grab the handle. (I’m not allowed locks on my door.) 

“Dude, no. I’m naked. We’re not even talking. You’re just yelling. The truck is moved. Please, leave me alone.” She starts sobbing about how everyone is soooooooo mean to her. She hates her life and stomps off to call my dad to complain about me.

ETA: 1.) PLEASE STOP TELLING ME TO MOVE OUT AND PAY MY OWN BILLS. THAT’S LITERALLY THE WHOLE PLAN IN NEXT FEW WEEKS IF YALL COULD ACTUALLY READ THE FREAKING POST.

2.) “Well you can’t hate it that bad if you live there still since you’ve been over the age of 18 for four years!” Oh my god. I moved out when I was 19. My ex boyfriend was beating the shit out of me. The abusive relationship I was in fucked up a lot of things including my finances. I was 20 about to turn 21 lost and fucking confused. My parents let me move back in. I’ve been saving for a car of my own which my abusive ex ruined, to get my credit up so i can get a car loan, and to save up money so I can put a down payment on a car and also all the extra fees apartments charge when you get approved to move in. I haven’t just been sitting on my ass living with my parents. I’ve been getting my shit together and it’s taken time because I fucked up. I ruined my life because of a bad relationship I was in.

3.) “Youre obviously not grateful for your mother.” I LOVE my mom to death, but she can be toxic and abusive and manipulative. I didn’t leave one toxic relationship just to hop back into another one. I deserve respect and privacy. The very minimum. I love my mom but I’m allowed to vent. None of you know anything about me.

4.) THIS HOE BLEW UP LOL THANKS FOR ALL THE AWARDS! I APPRECIATE IT TO NO END!!!Back at the beginning of 2021, I worked at a small community health non profit with an insane CEO. She would constantly call team meetings to put down and belittle employees in front of the entire staff. Often, she would throw around some variation of "do I have to do everything around here?!" and call everyone on staff incompetent. When we did do something right, she never gave us credit and always took the credit for herself. She threatened firing everyone constantly and would randomly call us to gossip and make petty remarks about each other, pitting staff against each other. 

One day, the CEO called a team meeting. In a group text chat between some of the more chill employees, we immediately begin sending snake and eye roll emojis. Sure enough, we get on the call and she begins by bringing to our attention how "Louise" does not dress appropriately for work. Louise, who is also upper management (the COO), looks about ready to smack the CEO. The CEO viciously tears into Louise, commenting on everything from her hair style to her lipstick shade to how it's inappropriate for Louise to wear off the shoulder blouses that show her collar bone. She then tells everyone that we all had better start dressing more formally or there would be consequences. 

The next day, the CEO calls another meeting. We all join and Louise turns on her camera. I immediately had to turn off mine because I did not want to be caught laughing my ass off. Louise was dressed from head to toe in what looked like something someone would wear to prom. Her hair was immaculately styled into an elaborate updo, her makeup was professionally done with lash extensions and everything. She was dripping with (what I assume were) fake diamonds... tiara, earrings, necklace, bracelets, and rings. And she wore the most ridiculous navy blue satin and tulle formal gown with a faux fur shoulder shrug to cover her collar bone. My best guess is that it was an old bridesmaid dress, but she never did say where she got it. 

The CEO was immediately fuming. "Why are you dressed like that?!" she screeched.

"You told us to dress more formally. This is formal wear. Is something wrong?"

"That's not professional for work!"

"Oh, I'm sorry, I must have been confused! You said we needed us to dress formally, but I think what you meant to say was professionally." The CEO was livid, but Louise continued to rock the prom outfit all day, meeting with patients and clients and everything. 

Later that week, "Tina" texts our group chat and says the CEO is requiring her to submit and detailed time sheet with what she was doing and working on down to the minute for her entire day. She was going to bcc us on the email. Sure enough, it pops into our inboxes a few minutes later. 

Tina had literally detailed her entire past 24 hour day down to the minute. 6:45 AM, awoken by husband's flatulence. 7:00 AM, peed and changed menstrual pad. 7:02 AM, began bowel movement. 7:10 AM, completed bowel movement. 7:12 AM, turned on shower. 7:13 AM, tested water temperature with hand. You get the idea. Apparently the CEO called her on her cell phone and berated her for sending such a detailed timesheet. Tina reminded her that she had requested her entire day down to the minute, and didn't specify she meant her work day only. 

Finally, my turn. My job was in IT and most of my work was as a database administrator, but I often helped with other tech problems. One morning, the CEO called me repeatedly at 2 AM. My phone settings have it so that if I miss five calls in a row from the same person, the do not disturb mode is turned off and the phone rings. I see who it is, silence my phone, and refuse to answer. 

At 6 AM, she calls again. Again, I refuse to answer. 7 AM, refuse to answer. 8 AM, refuse to answer. Finally, at 9 AM, I call her back. She asks to hop on a video call. 

"I've been trying to get ahold of you all morning! Where have you been?!"

"*Loud sigh* Can I help with you something?" I asked, not even trying to hide my irritation. I literally rubbed my temples and slurped on my coffee loudly.

"You didn't answer my question"

"And I'm not going to. I was off the clock at the time you called"

"You're salaried, right? That means it doesn't matter if you work 100 hours or 1 hour, you get paid the same. So I expect you to be available when I need you"

"What do you need?" 

"I need you to reset all of our company usernames and passwords. We're letting someone go today and it's company policy to change all of that"

At the same time, Louise texts me that she is being let go. So I read the company handbook and make a copy of the page that says the IT person must update the usernames and passwords and give the information to the COO. I changed all of the usernames and passwords to everything, from social media accounts to bank accounts to QuickBooks and emails. I send the usernames and passwords in an encrypted email to Louise and then send the CEO my two week notice.

Two weeks go by. It's the last hour of my last day. So what do I do? Change all those usernames and passwords again and send them to Louise, who was also celebrating her last day. I log out of my email, put my company phone and laptop in the mail, and spend the evening cackling at my malicious compliance.

The very next day, on Saturday, the CEO calls me repeatedly. Finally, she leaves me a long and howling voicemail to say what I did was unprofessional and she would make sure my reputation suffered and I would never work in that industry again. I wait until Monday to call her back.

"Hey, CEO, I saw you called?"

"I need the usernames and passwords to everything!"

"I'm sorry, but I don't work there anymore. You will have to contact your IT person to help with that"

"You are the IT person!" 

"No, I was the IT person. Now I'm a private consultant and I would be happy to provide my services at a rate of $100 an hour"

"You changed all the usernames and passwords and didn't provide them to me!"

"Correct. Per company policy, when an employee leaves the organization, the IT person is supposed to update everything and send the new info to the COO. I was leaving, so I updated everything. I provided all the usernames and passwords to Louise"

"You knew she was quitting too! Why would you give them to her?"

"Because the company policy says to transfer the new username and passwords to the COO, not the CEO. Louise was the COO when I left"

Caught in her own bureaucracy, she then had to spend weeks trying to gain access to all of the company accounts.

On Louise's and my last day, Tina and another employee quit. Another person announced her retirement. Once the five of us were gone, we were followed by several other employees. In total, 11 people on the 14 person staff quit within a few weeks. The best part? I got a new job making the same amount I did at the shitty non profit, but part time in a government position and with full time benefits. So much for my reputation suffering! I stayed in touch with one of the employees who stayed behind (she's only three years away from retirement and is basically Stan from the office). She said they've hired at least a dozen people, all of them quit as soon as they could find another job. 

Anyway, I'm bored in the hospital and started going through old texts. Stumbled on our old group chat and had a good chuckle. Thought you all might find it humorous too. Names obviously changed.

Edit: I'm still new to Reddit, so I had to ask my husband about the awards. Thank you all, it's very sweet of you, but please don't spend your money on this. If you want to show solidarity, consider donating to The Crohn's & Colitis Foundation so we can find a cure.So a little short one, the problem of people taking smoke breaks during the work day, basically at my job on average the smokers take about 5-10, 5-15min (paid since they don't clock out) smoke breaks.

The non smokers which are surprisingly in the minority (7 out of 25) including me asked to take a break when the smokers do. Manager says that they are only for smokers and if everyone went on them then there would be too much of a lack in productivity and we would fall behind. 

As anyone can realize, that is bullshit. So I went online to Amazon and bought all of the non smokers "Herbal Smokes that are Tobacco, Nicotine and Additive free" basically just a cigarette filled with tea leaves. And we started going on smoke breaks but hanging out in our own corner to avoid the secondhand. 

The manager comes out and starts yelling asking what we were doing, he thought we didn't smoke, we should be working...to which we kindly pointed out that we had all decided to start smoking and that, well we were smoking along with everyone else there. 

This lasted 4 days before the manager set limits to how many and how long smoke breaks are, and let the non smokers take the same breaks too.

Also: I am not sure about the health affects of Herbal Smokes, but considering we just lit the ends on fire then stood against the wall like some guys outside a club from the 80's, so I think we're fine.

Edit: So it is an 8 hour shift. With two 15min breaks and a 30min lunch (but everyone including managers take an hour) so 1.5hrs of paid breaks. So of the 6.5hrs remaining people were taking 1-2hrs just to smoke.

Edit 2: I appreciate the responses, I try to read all the direct comments. To summarize, a couple people say I ruined it for the smokers. A couple people with manager point of views. A bunch of similar MC and taking breaks as well, and a very large amount of people starting smoking to take smoke breaks.I attended university about 10 years ago. As is pretty standard when one is a student, I dyed my hair funky colours.

When I returned home to my summer job I had short blue hair. 

My summer job was in retail, I worked on a checkout.
One day my manager pulled me aside and told me the uniform policy said I wasn't allowed to have the majority of my hair an unnatural colour.

I asked what "a majority" meant, and he said I'd be allowed streaks, but not my whole head.

So home I went with a box of brown dye.

The next day I turned up to work with the majority of my hair brown, but my fringe (bangs) and my undercut were still blue. Because of my hairstyle being short, from the front, where the customers were, all that could be seen was my blue fringe.

My manager told me it was unacceptable, even though I pointed out that more than 3/4 of my hair was now brown. He said I had to dye the fringe and undercut brown too, or he'd fire me.

I dyed them brown, and immediately started wearing clip in coloured hair pieces.

He let me keep those, but he was not happy.


I still don't know why my ability to serve people was affected by my hair colour.

Edit for formatting.Long time lurker, happy to have my own story to share. TLDR at bottom.

Bit of backstory: I work as a machine operator in a factory type setting. I'm responsible for 2 lines of moving product with the fairly simple job of keeping the machines running and basic quality control. I've held my current position for 3 years, and frankly most weeks I spend more time with these machines than my wife. I know when something isn't right. Our engineering department doesn't always agree. 

2 days ago one of my two machines begins making a clanking sound. I give it a quick once over, seems like 2 metal parts are slapping together, probably just a loose bolt. I grab a radio and call for an engineer. Oh great, its one of the newer ones fresh out of school. He listens to it run for a few minutes. ,

Him: "It's running fine. Why did you call me out here?" 
Me: "Don't you hear that noise?"
Him: "It's fine. It always sounds like that." 

He makes a note in his log and leaves. The machine is still operational and my shift ends in 20 minutes so I let it go. The next day I come in for my shift and it's still making the same noise. I ask the previous shift's operator about it. They repeat a similar story with the same engineer. 3 hours into my shift the noise has gone from occasional to near constant. I call for an engineer to come check it out again. Our newest engineer comes down.

Him: "What's wrong this time?"
Me: "You seriously don't hear that? Can you just give it a quick check?"
Him "You guys need to stop calling us down here for this. Look at it, it's running fine."

He makes another note in his log and walks off. 4 hours later the clanging has gotten louder and the machine is beginning to jostle with each impact. Concerned I again call for an engineer. This time he doesn't even bother inspecting the machine. 

Him: "Damnit Kingler, I told you, it's fine. Don't call us back down here unless it breaks." 

Cue compliance. I run it as is for the rest of my shift. The noise and movement of the machine growing worse the entire time. I check it every other hour, hasn't broken yet. I inform the relief shift of what's going on and go home. 

I come in today and the noise is nearly deafening and the entire product line is shaking with the strength of the impacts. The previous shift informs me that the engineering department still hasn't looked at it. I stop the machine and give it a quick look. Still not broken. I run it as is. 10 hours into my shift and we are suddenly bombarded by a symphony of metallic noises and screeches. Half of the machine is now on the floor, while the other half gyrates wildly as it attempts to continue. I press the emergency stop and make the call. He begins to complain before he even makes it to my lines.

Him: "Listen damnit I told you......... WHAT THE HELL DID YOU DO TO THE MACHINE KINGLER"
Me: "It broke." 

For the last 2 hours of my shift I enjoyed the luxury of only having to focus on one of my product lines and the blissful noises of our good friend being royally chewed by his boss as an entire engineer crew is now attempting to salvage the machine. When I clocked out it was still lying in ruins.

TLDR: Engineer refuses to inspect unusual sounds coming from machine. Machine eventually destroys itself in a marvelous way.

Edit: Wow this blew up. Currently reading comments, I'll try to address some of the more common questions in a comment below.

Edit 2: Thanks for the gold kind stranger!

Update: As expected there was no significant fallout. I came in this morning and the machine was operational again. According to the operator I relieved it was down for a total of 6 hours. No one lost their job and the company didn't lose any significant amount of money. (Probably. I don't actually know how expensive the replacement parts were but considering the speed they had it back up they likely had some on hand.)Sorry for formatting, I really don’t know what that means. So I’m now the owner of a landscaping business that my father started. He retired last year. He still checks in and helps a lot on the business end of things until I get my footing. We work in a city in south Florida, and about 95 percent of our customers are above the age of 60. My dad has 3 clients that we charge at a very low rate because they’ve used him since the start of the business. 2 out of the three are great. They understand that they’re being charged a low rate and love us for it. But we have one lady that is very hard to deal with. My dad refuses to let go of her contract without a legitimate reason, That’s just who my dad is. she has 2 daughters and they both own homes with their husbands. We get a call from this lady asking us to take on her daughters. I told her if she would like to give them our number I can talk with them and get it figured out. I was going this as a favor to my dad really because adding the two extra properties right now stretches us pretty thin and I’ll probably have to help out as well as my cousin who basically manages the crews. Anyone will tell you expanding with a landscaping company is not as easy as it seems and it’s bordering along the impossible without proper planning. So one of the two daughters call in and give me their details and I told them I could come out and meet them and give them an estimate as soon as possible. That was met with a few seconds of silence. And followed by 


Daughter:uh my mom had told me about the rate she paid, and we were under the assumption that we’d being paying those same rates. 
Me: unfortunately we won’t be able to do that ma’am. we give her a special discount for being with us for so long. 
Daughter: ma’am is my mom and I’m sure she won’t be happy to hear about this. 
Me:okie dokie 
Her: click! 
And after yelling click she hung up the phone. (Not seriously just a joke)
So I don’t think anything of it, tell my pops what happened. We had a laugh about it and how entitled the people where we live are. Late that night I get the call from the crazy lady.
Me: ellooo
Her: Let me explain something to you. We have a way of doing things in this town and you just broke rule one. The customer is always right. You told me you would take on my daughters and I expect you to do just that. 
Me: I told your daughters I could take them on but not at the same rate. I never said I would be charging the same rate. 
Her: yes you absolutely did and I expect you to hold to your word like your father would. He would be so disappointed in you right now. 
(I’m guessing she didn’t know my did still took part in the business because he avoids her at all costs) 
Me:ok ma’am I’ll see what I can do. 
Her: you better. This is just not how you do business
Me: ok 

I went to my dad and told him about it. He told me to end her contract. I told him i had a better idea. And he agreed to it. Now I say contract but it’s just a monthly billing for her contract. Due to it being so low. So I call her back the next day. 
Her: hello
Me:ellllooooo there mrs (insert old hags name) it’s me ____ your landscaping company calling you back. 
Her: I hope you have some good news because I still feel slighted.
Me: oh I have some news we will be giving your daughters the same rate as you as you insisted. 
Her: perfect. When can I tell them you’ll be over. 
Me: we’ll get to that but we have to discuss your new rates first. 
Her: what new rates? I didn’t agree to new rates. 
Me: oh well you requested to pay the same amount as your daughters so we’ve taken away the special discount we’ve given you and your new rate will be 800 a month. That will start in 2 months from now. 

What came after was incoherent screaming and her hanging up. She called back the next day but refused to talk with me. She tried talking with my cousin but he referred her to me. She tried getting ahold of my dad but he shut off his work cell long ago. She eventually calls back and tried to negotiate with me but I told her it was all at her request and too late to go back on it. She dropped us the next month. She had been a thorn in my dads side for so long. He was relieved when I told him about the call. He didn’t want me to have the extra stress of dealing with her anyway.


Edit: this is a little of topic but This is for those of you upcoming entrepreneurs out there. It’s very easy and satisfying to tell someone to go fuck themselves, but my dad lived by a set of business rules that his dad taught him. My mom saw “Dexter” now refers to him as  Dexter because of his fanatical obsession with these rules. 

Rule number 1 is very simple but huge. Don’t ever give someone a reason to hate you. It’ll serve to bolster your pride and can only hurt you in the future. 

And two: "Don't ever, for any reason, do anything, to anyone, for any reason, ever, no matter what, no matter where, or who, or who you are with, or where you are going, or where you've been, ever, for any reason whatsoever."I love to cook and my husband loves to eat. Win-win, right? Top it off with the fact that I like to serve him his meal while he gets to relax. It's just how I was raised so I'm fine with it.

Sooooo one day I make some homemade ice cream. I'm loving its texture, its flavor, its everything! Husband walks by and sees me eating, so he says, "I'll have some ice cream" then sits his ass down in the living room.

HE WAS RIGHT FUDGING THERE!!!

I was pissed!! He was so lazy he wanted me to serve him when he already has to walk past the kitchen, where I stood eating right out of the container like the fatass I am, to get to the living room.

Cue malicious compliance.

I grab a bowl and fill it up. I call out, "You want toppings?"

He yells back, "Hell yeah I want toppings!" (He's not being mean, he's just excited)

I'm preparing this bowl of ice cream with everything he loves: chocolate syrup, caramel drizzle, homemade whipped cream, maraschino cherry, crushed up peanuts, hell, even a sliced up banana to turn it into an amazing banana split!

After loading up the huge bowl of ice cream, I get two spoons and put one in the bowl. On the other one, I add a tiny piece of banana, tiny bit of ice cream and a touch of all the toppings (except the cherry).

I walk over to him and he's rearranging his gaming stuff, preparing to take the bowl from my hands. His eyes are glowing with joy at the sight of my beautiful creation and he's got a smile a mile long.

I sit in my chair, hug the bowl and pass him the spoon of ice cream.

The look on his face was well worth my efforts! He was so sad for like a second before he broke into a fit of laughter. He acknowledged he was being lazy, thanked me for making ice cream in the first place, then got up and fixed himself a bowl.

We still laugh about it months later and he goes out of his way to serve me more often now :)

&#x200B;

\*Edit\* Thanks so much for the support for my marriage! I'm really happy my story was so well received. Also, thank you to the kind strangers for the gold & silver!  


For those of you who asked, the ice cream I made was vanilla bean and I used the following recipe. I got the milk and cream from a local dairy, which might have made the flavors a bit more vibrant:  [https://www.thespruceeats.com/how-to-make-vanilla-ice-cream-1326477](https://www.thespruceeats.com/how-to-make-vanilla-ice-cream-1326477)   


As for those who believe I trained him to always be served then suddenly had a problem with it, the back story is simple: I serve him when he's already sitting down and relaxing. He gets his own the rest of the time, so it irked me that he suddenly felt so entitled.Update: I’m staying the night at my fiancé’s parents house tonight. They have been so supportive through everything and they really gave me a shoulder to vent and cry on tonight. A lots been going on with my parents even outside this post, so I really needed to get out and not be around it. Thank you so much to all of the amazing commenters and your incredible advice, it means so much to me. 


This malicious act of compliance is still ongoing. For some context, I’m a university student who’s living on my parents couch for the next 2 weeks before I move back into my school’s town. They are currently redoing their pool, with employees working M-F. I pay my own rent at a room near my university, so I signed up for a clinical trial to take off the added burden of paying for my expensive medicine while getting some grocery money at the same time. 


I had an appointment early this morning for the trial, and I told my mom about it last night. She immediately disapproved, stating that she didn’t want me to be a “guinea pig” for money. 

So she woke up before me and took my car out so I couldn’t drive it. The only other car in the driveway is her big ass truck, which I’m uncomfortable driving but will if I have to, so I called her and told her that because she took my car, I’ll be driving her truck to the appointment instead. 

She of course flipped her lid and screamed at me about being a sell out (y’all I’m just trying to get some grocery money here!!). My mom also made it clear that she has her own plans and won’t be back with my car until later today. She then ended the call saying that I am, in no circumstances, allowed to drive her car. 

Fine. Whatever. I rescheduled my appointment and went back to the couch to try to sleep, when the pool workers showed up. 

They have a huge concrete truck that can only be used when the driveway is empty, but my mom’s car is of course plopped in the middle of it. So they can’t start working until my mom’s truck is moved out of the driveway, and with no one else home this means that I’m the only one who can do it. 

Oh, except for the fact that I am in no circumstances allowed to drive her car. 

Whoops.

Edit: I’m a 21 year old femaleSo about 5 years ago I was working for a Cable/Home phone/ISP company in a support for frontline staff role. Part of this was faking being a supervisor so the actual supervisors don't have to be verbally abused. Garbage system I know but what can you do. 

Well I get a call from a front line person telling me this guy (Lets call him Kyle) has asked to speak to someone about his 3 rental properties. I take the call and get on the phone with the guy.

Me: "Hi there, thanks for choosing \*corporate drone speak intensifies\*"

Kyle: "yeah you said that I wouldn't have to pay for long distance on these 3 accounts."

Me: "Oh well let me go have a look at the notes on the accounts and..."

Kyle: "NO YOU WILL CANCEL MY SERVICES AT ALL THREE PLACES"

Me: "I just need to look at the notes written on your account to..."

Kyle: "NO YOU WON'T IF THIS IS THE SERVICE YOU ARE PROVIDING JUST CANCEL THEM ALL"

Begin Malicious compliance, I need to make sure he is in fact the guy who can cancel these services at all 3 accounts, I ask him when he would like the services to stop. 

Kyle: "WHY ARE YOU STILL ASKING ME THINGS, IMMEDIATELY"

Me: "Ok sir, I just want to make sure you are asking to me cancel all services, phone, cable, and internet?"

Kyle "\*series of swears\* YES ALL THREE SERVICES AT ALL THREE PLACES"

Now I should point out that it was pretty close to midnight, and these places being rental properties on a Friday night probably had people living there. Also it didn't seem that he lived at any one of them. So I went about going through each of the three accounts and shut down the services, the phone, the cable and the internet. 

Now before anyone says oh you took their phone away that's dangerous! Well you can plug a phone outlet into anywhere and even if it doesn't have service you can still call emergency services. 

I went through and told the system to shut everything down, it also gives us the option to immediately stop the services from working. So I told it yes. Now this meant that everything stops at the properties at once. 

Everything, immediately. Watching TV, not anymore, looking at memes? NOPE. Oh where you making a phone call? NOT ANYMORE.

I can only imagine the series of panicky texts and cell phone calls that guy had that evening because everything was shut off. 

The next time I was at work, I checked the notes on these closed accounts only to find that the tenants had called in and were told the services were cancelled. Followed by notes from an actual supervisor, because if you get loud enough the real supes have to do their job, that said after reviewing the call Kyle had with me they felt I did exactly what the customer had asked and there was nothing else we would do. Turns out Kyle was mad at me for following his directions and then got his tenants to call him enraged after midnight about how nothing they had was working.First time poster here, and my story happened bout 10 years ago. TL;DR at the end.

I work in an office and, at the time, I was the new guy who only worked part-time, taking shifts here and there when needed. I could do pretty much anything, and did it well, but often had to ask around for extra shifts to make ends meet.

One day, our supervisor went on short term disability leave after an accident, and an assistant, lets call her Brenda, took over the job, which included the scheduling duties. Brenda was easily overwhelmed, and we believe that she was too proud to admit that she needed help. She had to plan the schedule for 5 teams, and I'd often tell her that I'd be available for more shifts to cover X or Y, as the slots were clearly empty. She was always pretty dismissive, and most times I'd end up not working more. People tried to work around her mishaps, so there was never any direct impact on the overall production.

One time, I noticed that a lone position on the weekend (that nobody wants to do when that person lady was sick/away), was not being backfilled, even though it was essential to have someone in that chair. Hoping for extra shifts, I sent Brenda a casual email to bring to her attention the fact that the shift was not filled, and if she had plans for that yet. Her response was an extra long email on work ethics and respect for my colleagues' time, that I'm new here and I should learn my place, to stop begging for extra shifts all the time, and that she had nothing else for me that week. Duly noted, ma'am.

Cue MC: my last day at the office that week was Wednesday, and I knew that the shift had still not been filled. When I left, I wished everyone a nice weekend, including Brenda, "See you next week!". It's important to mention that I was on-call. They couldn't just put me on the schedule and expect me to show up. They'd have to confirm with me beforehand.

I got many many calls on Saturday, about 30 minutes after the beginning of that shift that was not being covered, asking where I was, why I wasn't in, that error alerts were being sent ALL OVER THE COUNTRY because nobody was there to do the job. I told the weekend manager that I was out of town, as I wasn't on the schedule when I left on Wednesday. They'd need to take it up with Brenda.

Monday morning, I was called in a senior manager's office. I was told that they were giving me a written warning, because I didn't show up to work that weekend and it caused a lot of trouble for other managers. I pulled the email thread, and was able to prove that I warned Brenda that a shift was not being filled, that I would be available if needed, but that Brenda made it clear she didn't need me. They then checked the log to see when the schedule was last changed, and yup, Friday afternoon, long after I was gone. I made it clear that she made no attempt to try to contact me. The senior manager apologised, and I was able to return to work.

I don't believe Brenda was specifically punished (as we're all allowed mistakes. It happens.) but she was eventually demoted. She retired probably a year after the incident. I ended up being promoted to full-time shortly after, and as it turns out, 10 years later, I'm now office supervisor, doing a much better job at managing schedules!

**TL;DR** A supervisor dismissed my warning that an essential shift on the weekend was not being covered, and scolded me for always begging for more shifts. I stopped asking, left for the weekend and let them deal with the shit show that would inevitably happen. And happen it did. Manager tried to pin it on me, but I had the emails to prove it.

Edit to add info I've mentioned in the comments: 

1. For the "On-call" portion. Our union works in a way that if you're not a permanent employee, they have to call and book you. The schedule is posted ten days in advance, and they let us know in advance the days they'd need us. Sure there were emergencies and sick days, but some of the part-time people have more than one job, and couldn't be expected to be available for a call 24/7. If they needed me, they had to notify me that I was being added to the schedule, otherwise I'd organise my time accordingly and they'd run the risk of me not being available. Which is pretty much what happened.
2. I don't know if Brenda was disciplined, those records are confidential. It's very possible, which might be why she ended up being demoted, but our union has very stiff rules about how to go about it. There's a process to "improve employee performance" if they're not good at their job. Only at the end of that process can people be demoted. I know now that it's a gruelling process that has to be thoroughly documented. Managers couldn't simply fire her.
3. I still believe that Brenda was not maliciously trying target me, but rather she was not competent enough to fulfil her new responsibilities, and got defensive when the new guy pointed out flaws in her work. She blew up at that, and forgot the valid point that I was trying to make. The way I see it, she realised too late that she messed up, and "fixed" it the way she knew how. After all, when she left, the schedule was clean, even if one crucial step was not completed. So yes, she was inefficient, and other colleagues regularly had to clean up her mess. That time it was me.Obligatory not my story, but a lifelong family friend who ran a special needs focused day care  out of her home. I believe this happened around 5 years ago. 

As mentioned, she ran a day care business out of her home, and since her child had autism, and she had all the skills an equipment to handle special needs children, she opened her home to other children with similar needs. As you can imagine, this service is incredibly hard for parents to find. 

Around five years ago, the state and local governments were on a bit of a kick to revamp the rules and regulations that affected in home day care providers. Most were innocuous and weren’t that big of a deal, like having a redundancy built into the HVAC system so that temps in the house could never drop below 63° and that water systems need to always be operable, and other such human needs based rules. But others were major issues that it seemed like like ‘common sense’ rules, but it was obviously not thought through past the initial feel good fuzzies they brought. 

This is were the MC begins. The county passed a new rule stating that in home daycare providers may not allow any person to enter their home that they themselves had not run a background check on. Again, sounds reasonable and was meant to protect the children. That is, until one day when the main toilet in their home started overflowing and needed immediate attention from a plumber to save the rest of the surrounding area from water damage. 

But remember those new regulations? She couldn’t turn off the water, because the new regulations that required at least one operating toilet (they were remodeling their second bathroom) so legally couldn’t turn it off. She called a plumber, but legally couldn’t allow him to enter the premise without running a background check herself. 

Obviously, she ignored these rules to save the kids and her home from damage. But word got back to to the regulatory body and she ended up with a “surprise inspection” later that week, where they wanted to inspect the bathroom and cite her for her violations. 

But when the county inspector showed up at the door and asked to come in to inspect the house. She stated that she would need to run a background check on the inspector prior to entry and closed the door in the inspectors face. 

The rules were amended later that month (edit:) to exempt the regulatory body from the background check requirements.

xpost from r/TalesFromYourServer 

&#x200B;

On mobile etc etc you know the drill. TLDR at the end

I work at a small Chinese restaurant that generally only has locals and regulars with the odd visit from out of the area. Because its so small on a normal day or night we will only have 1 waitress on a shift.

&#x200B;

We were having a relatively quiet night so I was sitting around pouring soy sauce into bottles and cleaning chili jars. This table of 4 people walk in and they're all relatively nice and I give em the good old casual greeting and seat them down. They do their stuff and order their meal and for drinks they only get table water which is normal. When I bring out their food the old man (hence forth OM) asked for a bottle of the red wine. Now we don't serve alcohol nor do we even have a byo. I'm not yet 18 so I can't even handle alcohol if we did. I told him we don't have any alcohol, and he goes on this rage pointing out a bottle that was on our shelf. 

&#x200B;

I knew what he was pointing to. It was our Chinese vinegar. Now these bottles look remarkably like Asian alcohol. They're green with red on it and all the writing is in Chinese. And I told him that, "sir that's vinegar not wine" He went on an alcoholic rage yelling about how I couldn't know what alcohol was cause I was underage and how I was hiding alcohol from him and he would make a complaint on our Facebook page. His children and wife look embarrassed and are trying to hide themselves, and his wife gives me a look that just says "do it and he'll regret it" 

&#x200B;

So I went and got a bottle of the vinegar and put it on the table. OM makes a really big deal out of it saying shit like "AH wasn't that EASY" "waitresses in MY DAY would have done it in 2 seconds" I walk away and when I turn around to check, he'd spat a mouthful of vinegar out and onto the plate and was trying to wash out the taste of CHINESE VINEGAR with water

To be fair the wife did come up to me later and apologise for his idiocy. They never made that Facebook post, and paid $20 for the bottle since we couldn't use it again. 

&#x200B;

TLDR; Most likely alcoholic old man demands a bottle of Chinese Vinegar thinking it's red wine. Instantly regrets decision upon trying to chug vinegar. Shoutout to best wife for co-conspiracy. So maybe 25ish years ago, my dad worked at a plant that manufacturers parts for the aerospace industry. Some of the jobs were very hot, not foundry hot, but hot. Company one day says that shorts are no longer considered proper work attire. Double standard time, women were allowed to continue wearing dresses. So....a group of dudes decided to protest, and because hot, they would start wearing dresses while at work. The company thinking said men were just being divas did nothing and called their bluff, assuming they would stop on their own. Because, what man is going to keep wearing a dress everyday?  

And for two years neither side blinked and dudes would randomly show up to work on hot days with a dress. Finally rather than reversing the policy, the company made pants mandatory for both sexes and it was ruined for everyone.This is my sister's story, but it's too good to not share. This was back when she was in second grade, and this girl was the perfect child. I wish I was kidding, but no. You know that ONE kid with the halo and the sweet smile, the manners to make a parent proud, and cutesy little voice? Yep, that's her. But, she DOES have a mean streak when you push her. You would think that ALL the teachers loved her, right? Nope, not her second grade teacher. This woman was hellfire personified, and she for some reason hated my little sister. More often that not, my little sister came out of that classroom trying to hold back tears. Two more very important things about my sister - she has always had lips that would get so chapped they would bleed, and she always carries around Carmex with her.

So, one day, she's sitting in class with Hell's favorite teacher when she pulls out her little tub of Carmex and the teacher immediately starts screeching at her to see her after class. End of class, and the teacher tells her that she MUST keep the Carmex with the school's office because it says "medicated", and back in the day you had to be literally dying just for the office to give you your things (no joke, I'm asthmatic and it took almost dying on the office floor for them to hand my inhaler over but that's another story). My sister tries to explain that without the Carmex her lips will bleed, but the woman does not care. Well, Hell hath no fury little a sweet baby scorned.

Very next morning, she doesn't use any in the morning, doesn't use any for the ride to school, doesn't use it before sister hands the little tub of Carmex over to the office lady (who looks at her very confused but just does not give a shit) and she heads off to class. She does her best to keep calm when she starts to feel her lips get chapped, keeping her lips as drawn in and neutral as she can. She spends most of the day with her head down and not speaking, until finally the teacher calls on her to answer a math question. Now, I should probably warn everyone this might get a little graphic. Sister lifts her head up, looks this woman right in the eyes and smiles as wide as she can. Tears are rolling down her cheeks as she can feel her lips splitting open so badly that they're not just bleeding a little. It's rolling down her chin, mixing with her tears, down her neck and onto the collar of her shirt. This woman screamed so loudly that us third graders across the hall could hear it. She ended up ripping her lips so badly they had to page little third grade me to call my mom to pick her up, and she had to stay home for a couple of days to recover.

When she came back, however, not only did the teacher personally hand her Carmex over, she had bought her a few more little tubs of the stuff for "just in case she ever ran out" and never bothered her again. I don't know if it was coincidence that year was the last year she taught, but a little part of me likes to think that she met her match in my little sister.

&#x200B;

EDIT: I really, REALLY didn't think I was going to have to add any of this, but here I am.

My sister has tried every lip balm under the sun, has seen a doctor, ect ect ect. All other lip balms either never work or she has an allergic reaction to them. All medications, all products react to people differently. What works for you does not always work for someone else. I'm finding some of these comments rude and snide, and it's really all unnecessary. There's trying to be helpful, and then there's trying to be right. Please stop.

The school itself didn't care that she had Carmax. Perhaps I should have elaborated on " hands the little tub of Carmex over to the office lady (who looks at her very confused but just does not give a shit) ". The school NEVER needed to hold onto the lip balm, this was purely the teacher - the HELL teacher that I keep referring to in a NEGATIVE and NASTY light to emphasis what kind of woman she was - on a power trip with my little sister.  The next person I see remotely begin to defend the teacher, you're an asshole.

EDIT 2: Against my sister's request, I removed the small hair color jokes . I'm tired of getting death threats - actual death threats! - in my direct messages and right fighters in my comments. Some parts copied from source: https://canoe.com/news/local-news/local-burger-joint-served-with-cease-and-desist-from-mcdonalds-2/wcm/67ddd1bd-7806-497d-bf2d-c666353082e1

>Paul Shufelt, the owner and chef behind the local Woodshed Burgers restaurant, wasn’t loving what he saw when he opened his email on Wednesday.

>In his inbox was a formal cease and desist from McDonald’s Restaurants of Canada over one of his restaurant’s burgers: the Effing Filet O’ Fish.

>In compliance with the cease and desist, Shufelt renamed his burger to the McEffing Fish Filet — his flippant way of complying with the massive company’s cease and desist.

Your turn, lawyers.I work for an embroidery company that embroiders logos onto uniform shirts. There is this one particular shirt we get all the time that has a diagonal closure, so the left side of the chest is essentially covered by a huge flap coming from the right side. There is such little room on the left side that any logo bigger than an inch looks like it’s going into the persons armpit. After a few complaints, we made it policy to only allow that shirt to put logos on the right.

A big company we work with likes to make massive orders with generalized embroidery placement (ex. 10 different types of garments, all embroidered with a logo on the left chest). Whenever I would see that this particular shirt was in the mix, I would reach out to them to let them know we needed to switch the logo to the right side.

One (difficult) manager from that company reached out to their client with my suggestion, and got an earful because the client insisted that their logo could ONLY be placed on the left, due to company policy. Instead of smoothing it over with her client, this rep took it out on me. She sent me a very aggressive email stating that we were perfectly capable of embroidering this shirt on the left side because we had done it in the past, and to STOP blowing up her inbox with our “suggestions for a better embroidery location.” From now on, whatever embroidery location the order requests is FINAL.

I saved the email and got my boss’s blessing to immediately stop all quality control emails for this company, “per *manager*”

One day a HUGE order comes in, ALL diagonal-closure shirts, ALL left side embroidery. I maliciously complied and sent the order on its way, with no hassle to the manager. 

A week later an executive from that company emails me, horrified. He forwarded photos of the clients shirts, all with the logos in the armpits. He said they were having to refund the client over 10k and that the client was in an uproar, never wanting to order shirts from them again! Why did we NOT tell them this was a bad location for the embroidery?!

I didn’t say a word, simply forwarded the email the manager sent me, telling me verbatim that I was to no longer waste the company’s time making useless suggestions  for those shirts :)

Editing to add fallout: It was confirmed they had to do a big fat refund and I did not see a re-order, so I suspect the client dismissed them as a vendor (was a huge client, think a very swanky hotel brand, we don’t usually get emails from the executives so I think they were really hoping for big bucks with these guys, oh well). As far as manager goes, I suspect she was demoted. They sent us a VERY polite, groveling email introducing a new manager, and requesting that we resume our quality control, emphasizing that we knew best!

One more edit to add photo, I can’t post the real one for privacy reasons but I found an example blouse that has a similar ratio as the mentioned shirt, so that you guys have an idea:
https://www.overstock.com/Clothing-Shoes/2019-New-Irregular-Diagonal-Collar-Long-Sleeve-Blouse-Shirt/31150817/product.html(Fixed due to Rule 8)

This happened about thirty odd years ago, and my mother recounted it recently during a family dinner.

So back in the 1990’s my mom worked for this big time company (we’ll call it Company W) as an accountant. Her boss, the Head of Finance was a sleazy guy, and despite being semi-wealthy (it was a BIG company) and married with kids, he always tried to pick up younger women in the office.

Eventually after a few years, my Mom, being the amazing accountant that she is, noticed small irregularities in several statements. I don’t know the technical terms, but Mom realized that someone was embezzling the company’s money for at least a couple decades. Concerned, she brought it up to the Head of Finance... who proceeded to demean her, call her names, botch her claim and basically threatened to fire her if she brought it up again.

My mother is not one to start crying, and instead sought to prove him wrong. However, a couple of months later Head of Finance brought in a new lady (young, she was legit blonde, fresh out of college) to train under Mom. My mother instantly knew what this was, and started putting out feelers for a new job. In the meanwhile she trained the younger lady, who, to quote my Mom, was “not the brightest bulb”.

Now, Company W had a policy when an employee was going to be fired. If the employee was being fired (for reasons other than rule breaking, violations, etc) they would be allowed to say that they ‘quit’ to be able to give their weeks notice and get pay. A fair policy.

So one day Mom was summoned by Head of Finance and told that he was firing her. She quickly counteracted and used the policy to her advantage, which angered Head of Finance but he had to comply.

The Malicious Compliance I know you’re waiting for?

Head of Finance told my mother in a, rather rude way, that since she was going about it that way, she might as well do an exit interview.
My mother literally had a lightbulb moment, and said to him that in that case, she would.

(To note: an exit interview is a formal way of leaving a job, akin to an interview for getting the job. It's a way for employees to share their experience, and why their leaving for records, including HR (Human Resources). You can see where this is going).

So, she was scheduled for the exit interview. When she went in, my mother had to, of course, bring in files relating to her work (I can’t recall the exact reason, other than it having to be relevant to her reason for leaving), and show it to the interviewer.

My Mom brought in three large boxes of files, each one containing evidence of the embezzlement. She then presented it to the interviewer, who my mother told me was rather stunned, and proceeded to hand over all the evidence and proceed with her exit. Including talking about the Head of Finance’s reaction and how not long after the new lady was brought in to replace her. Mom then left the company that day, got new employment, and moved on.

It was a decade later that she learned what happened. My Dad was a delivery driver at the time and actually made a delivery to Company W. While there he talked with an employee, mentioned my Mom had worked there and how she left, and the employee told him quite the juicy story....

In the year following my mother’s departure and interview, her evidence was brought to HR and the CEO, who ordered an internal investigation. Hidden cameras were placed in the accounting division, every file made was screened ave photocopied, tiny details scrutinized and bank records triple checked...

I think you can see where this is going. Yup, the Head of Finance was embezzling from Company W. But... it gets better. They got him, on camera, making out with the new lady inside the main office after hours. To add insult to injury, the cameras also caught him being cruel to those under him, touching other women, etc.
But the biggest thing was still the embezzlement. Head of Finance managed to, in over thirty years, steal over a *million dollars* in Company W’s earnings. From his days as a mere accountant and all through his promotions. Now the exact way he was able to get that much over time wasn’t told to my dad (I doubt the employee knew), but he did know the fallout.

Head of Finance was summoned to the Big Cheese’s office the day after the evidence was complied... and let’s just say Head of Finance wished he had simply been fired. He was arrested for the embezzlement, and for sexual misconduct (or something like that), as well as a few other things my mom can’t recall. The new lady who came in actually revealed that he had brought her in after starting to date her and even revealed to her what he was doing. Her job basically had been to help him cover it up so they could live the rich life. She didn’t even know what exactly accounting was, other than managing money. The perfect cover, so to speak.
And if the now ex-Head of Finance thought being arrested and charged was bad enough, when his wife found out...

The employee who told my dad this hadn’t been present when the wife had come in while the ex-Head of Finance had been led out, but a friend of his had seen what happened. She had just went up, smacked the now ex-Head of Finance, screamed obscenities at him, before saying she’ll be seeing him in court for a divorce.
While my dad couldn’t learn what exactly happened next, what was clear was that the guy’s life was ruined. And my mom, while not a vindictive person by any means, did feel somewhat joyful over the outcome.

Lesson to be learned here: *never* screw with an accountant who actually knows what they’re doing.

TL:DR My mother discovers signs of embezzlement, gets demeaned and then slowly replaced by her boss. He offhandedly ‘tells’ her she might as well do an exit interview while quitting. My mother does so, but shows evidence against him that ends up with him being changed for embezzlement and getting divorced by his wife for being with another woman.

Edit: Wow, this really blew up! I told my mom and she was in disbelief! Thanks everyone, you made her day!

To clarify, the malicious compliance is that at the exit interview, my mother *has* to submit paperwork relating to why she left. So when the Head of Finance sarcastically told her she might as well go for it, she did. And presented all those files of evidence against him, stating why she left (including what he had said to her). This is not revenge because my mother never intended it to be, she actually didn’t realize how deep it went or that he was such a scumbag. She simply did exactly as she was told!

Another thing to clarify: the CEO got involved because one; Head of Finance was leeching from their funds for a long time, and two; ...they *had* been friends according to mom. Yikes. Also please note she didn’t learn of the fallout until a decade later, and from my dad who was told by an employee from the company, and mom told me. If I did get something wrong, well... telephone effect anyone?

Wow! Just saw the notification about the gold! That’s insane! And that upvotes! You guys really made my mom’s day! Thanks all!This is going to be in the same vein as a lot of other posts here, but it still sucks that it happened to me. 


My vacation leave credits expire next month, so I requested 5 days off hoping to go home to my family and get some rest. Only 1 them got approved, and it's in the middle of the week. Reasoning being that we're short-staffed, as usual.


I suddenly had a very bad flare up of arthritis in the beginning of last week. I could barely sit up, and walking up the stairs to get to my workstation (I work at home) is out of the question. So I took a day off, and my boss said okay, that's fine, but we're going to have to cancel your vacation leave, since you're going to rest anyway.


It's not like I had any rest when I was writhing on my bed in pain. Spite empowered me and I managed to get to a hospital with the last of my strength (and my boyfriend's help) to get my fluids drained. I felt a lot better, but I was in so much pain in the beginning that my doctor seemed to take pity on me and gave me 5 days rest, and he told me to just contact him if I need more.


I was only planning to rest it out for a day or two more, but I ended up having a whole week (or more if I feel like it) to myself feeling much better. I was even able to go home. The best thing is that it's all paid since I also have plenty of sick leave credits left and there's nothing they can do about that.Back when I was in college, I lived in a 2-bedroom apartment with a nice German student. 

He was a nice guy, and he would often have his friends over. I didn’t mind it at all because I just moved to the are and needed new friends anyways. 

Our landlady though, she was a nightmare. She was this small grumpy lady who would complain over the smallest things. She doesn’t live with us, but tries to control everything - the color of our sheets, the scent of candles that we light, where we put our stuffs, etc. Needless to say, we hated her.

We pay for our electricity and water, so it doesn’t matter if we have our friends / family stay over once in a while because whatever they consumer more of we will foot the bill ourselves anyways. 

My sister visits me once a month for one night, just whenever she’s in town. One day, my landlord found out and got so mad she wanted to call the cops on us for not respecting the rule of “guests cannot spend the night” at her property. 

The only reason she does this is because she feels if a guest would stay a night they would have to pay her the full rent for the month. THE MONTH. 

But que malicious compliance...

When one of my German roommate’s friends was laid off from his main job, he was left homeless with only a grave shift part-time job. He asked if he could stay with us for about a week or two. I told him I didn’t mind but my landlady might mind. They told me not to worry. 

And she was fuming when she found out (easily, the day after he decided to stay with us because she checks on us unannounced every other day, and has security cameras outside our door). She threatened to call the cops on us again, and all my roommate said was:

“But you told us explicitly no one can spend the NIGHT at your property. He is never here at night because he’s working, so there’s no rule broken here.” 

She had nothing to say and left. We could hear her screaming from inside her car that was parked right outside.


Edit: I had to pull my copy of the contract out, and we didn’t have a specific clause on overnight guests, nor do we have a clause on visits. It did say at the end though that whatever isn’t explicitly stated, when questioned, will pivot on California state laws. So this was totally illegal. My roommate and I were just young, stupid international students who let her get away with it. But it definitely makes for a fun story though.Reposted from r/Entitledparents and slightly modified to include variations on the words 'malicious compliance'. 

A friend of mine, Richard, told me about something that happened to him yesterday, and knowing I'm on Reddit, gave me permission to share it.

Richard works at an outlet village - it's a shopping centre of sorts, lots of shops, with excellent parking - as a parking enforcement officer. He is a decent guy. Generally, if someone parks in the wrong place, he will give them a chance to move rather than ticketing them.

On to the story. Yesterday he's at work when this middle aged woman tears into the carpark really fast, and slams her car into a disabled parking bay. He approaches the car from the back, she, as the woman and her son are getting out, says to the woman that she can't park there as it is a disabled space. 

She replies, "We'll be five minutes. Deal with it." without even looking around to see or even acknowledge who spoke to her. 

So he maliciously complied by dealing with it with a ticket. £80 fine. He said it felt good.1st grade, I was feeling very sick. I went to the nurse, she took my temp, it was normal, she sent me back to class. I did this three times that day. The last time she and my teacher made a big fuss. Said I didn’t have a temperature and they wouldn’t call my parents and that if I left my desk again I’d be in trouble.... so first grader me starts feeling very nauseous. eventually I couldn’t hold it in anymore and I threw up onto my desk. it splashed back onto me and my fellow students on either side of me, both of them threw up out of disgust, along with 4 other students. 7 kids were sent home because they threw up when I threw up... my teacher asked why I didn’t go to a trash. I reminded her that I was forbidden from leaving my desk again.she said I should tell her 'I love you' sometimes. I replied 'i love you, sometimes.' 

I'm still paying for that one 2 weeks later.I used to work in a job that had me travelling by air across the country for about half the year each year. Corporate rule was that you had to book the lowest price flight. Now, that’s not an unreasonable rule on its own, unless you say there are **no exceptions**. **Lowest. Price. Flight. Period.**

It’s especially silly when the worker’s employment agreement mandates they’re **paid for every hour they’re in transit** (at the airport or on the plane). Every. Hour. Period.

*You see where this is going. Here were my flight options:*

1. **$600 cheap non-direct flight:**  
3 hour connecting flight to hub airport  
\+ 1½ hour layover in that airport  
\+ 5 hour flight back to correct city
2. **$620 direct flight:**  
2 hour direct flight

I asked our finance department if there were any exceptions. “No exceptions.” So, to save $20, I was required to book the non-direct flight at 9½ hours including layover, rather than the 2 hour direct flight. While getting paid $25.00/hr…

1. **$600 cheap flight:**  
\+9½ hours x $25 = $237.50  
*...Oops, and overtime pay after 8 hours!…*  
\+1½ hrs x $12.50 OT premium = $18.75   
**=$600.00 + $237.50 + $18.75 = $856.25**
2. **$620 direct flight:**  
\+2 hrs x $25 = $50.00  
**=$620.00 + $50.00 = $670.00**

So, congratulations corporate penny-pinchers who saved a whopping negative $186 of company money to save $20! Malicious compliance was delicious compliance.When I was a kid, my dad could really be a dick sometimes. He broke rules all his life but would swiftly and gleefully punish me if I didn’t do exactly what he wanted without question.  

Well one Christmas season we went out shopping for my mom and spent the whole day crawling the mall. When we got back home, he told me that I would be wrapping all the presents myself.  

“You’re not going to help me?”  

“No, I paid for them, you can wrap them.”  

I was 12 years old, was I expected to buy presents? I knew better than to fight with him though so I did exactly what he asked.   

And when it came time to sign the “From:” line on each present’s tag, I wrote my name and my name alone. After all, if he was here, he could sign it. Heck, if he checked the presents before Christmas he could sign them.  

But of course, he didn’t.   

And when we unwrapped presents my mom wondered out loud why every gift to her was from me.  

He got so mad and tried to make me feel bad about it. But when I explained it in front of both of them, he got quiet and stopped.  

From that point on, I had help wrapping each year.  

Edit: thank you all for sharing your own holiday wrapping and family stories, it’s been a blast to read through them. And yes, I do enjoy wrapping presents nowadays!This happened around two years ago at my old job, and shocker, it’s the main reason I quit recently. 

My job basically was a very easy warehousing job, I basically only pulled orders at this point. Later on there I would be trained on everything else, from shipping, kitting, put away, everything. But I was a perfect fit for that since I LOVED driving order picker. I was especially good at it. 

The bare minimum you had to hit in an 8 hour shift was around 230 boxes pulled, or 230 labels if you want to be precise. Since organization was a strong suit, after a few weeks I was consistently able to hit over 350, then 400, topping out around 425. I always worked and with other people quitting, within a year I was one of the most experienced people in my area. With training new employees, helping on certification of vehicles, and coming in on weekends when work needs to be finished I felt like an asset to the team.

Being one of the most experienced people over there, I was offered a raise to keep my numbers over 400 daily. Sure, it’s a college job, but if I’m able to get more money by doing my job as well as I usually do it sure! I accept and they said my wage was updated and approved so I got right to work and pulled my end of the deal. A week went by, same paycheck. Another week, same paycheck. Huh? What? I go into my managers office and tell him calmly that my raise didn’t get put into my paycheck. I get told “We thought about it, and we feel as if it’s within your job responsibilities to be doing what you’re doing, so we will not be giving you a monetary increase.” 

“...we feel it’s within your job responsibilities to be doing what you’re doing...”

So in order to get back, I realize that if they don’t think I deserve a raise then why should I do all of the extra stuff around my work place? Suddenly I dropped my daily quota to the bare minimum. You need me to stay over to help complete orders? Nah I’m going home, my shift ended five minutes ago. Shelves started to become disorganized because I didn’t fix them as I went. Anything small that I would do to help out I stopped doing. Little by little complaints started to file in. From the lowest on the totem pole, working it’s way up slowly.

With in two weeks I got called back in and was told that i was given the raise and it would be in this weeks paycheck. 

EDIT: I QUIT 5 MONTHS AGO, IM
NOT GETTING BACK PAY

Double edit: About the disorganized shelves. As people pull parts stuff gets a little disorganized. We had cubbies, technically it was put-aways job to reorganize the shelves but I did it as I went. They never did it cause nobody ever would correct them. I did it cause it made every ones job a little bit easier and it looked better.My mom was charged $1000 for a loan despite having paid it off due to hidden fees which they lied about. This was before internet, mind you. It was also when it was legal to pay in pennies. (You know where this is going.)

My mom collected coins and still does to this day. She had barrel full of pennies. According to Google, that was around $3000 worth. With the help of my dad and a dolly, she went to the loan office to pay the fee. There was no coin counting machines, so they they had to count by hand. They couldn't leave until they counted 100,000 pennies per company policy. My mom made small talk with the woman counting the money on occasion making her miss count. Several hours after the office closed and having to recount over and over again, the lady gave up and waived her fee. 

I wouldn't be surprised if my mom was the reason you can't pay in only pennies now. 

Sorry about the lack of detail. My mom told me this story a couple years ago before I knew about this subreddit. I don't know if this is a true story or not because I wasn't even alive at the time, but according to my mom, it actually happened.

Edit: turns out this story is not true and doesn't hold up to scrutiny as some of the comments pointed out. It's something I could easily see my mom doing, but it couldn't have happened.Longtime lurker, so I thought I’d share my favorite story from my time in foodservice, years and years ago. 

I was a shy, quiet 15-year-old when I first started working at a certain fast food restaurant in my small town. Then I encountered the general public. 

Many of the morning rush customers were super kind regulars who I got to know and liked. But then there was Penny Guy. 

Penny Guy was not a regular. He placed his order with no initial sign of anything out of the ordinary. His change came to twenty-nine cents. “No pennies,” he said gruffly. 

“You don’t want your pennies, sir?” I confirmed. This was not unusual. We had a charity donation box right by the cash register where customers often left unwanted change, or had us deposit it. 

“Don’t give me any damn pennies.” The guy was glowering at me now. 

“Of course, sir.” I handed him his quarter. I dropped the pennies in the charity box. 

And then he exploded. 

“What the F— is this F—ING QUARTER? I WANT THIRTY CENTS! HOW F—ING HARD IS IT TO ROUND THE HELL UP?!”

I was caught off guard. “I’m sorry sir, but I can’t give back extra change. We donate what customers don’t want, and it all goes to Charity. I apologize for the confusion.” My drawer had to be correct at the end of the day, so this was absolutely true. 

Well, that was not all right. He went on a very loud tirade about how cheap our restaurant was and how ridiculous it was to round down. He called me a cheap-ass bitch. Then he demanded his pennies back. “YOU WON’T RIP ME OFF LIKE THIS!! GIVE ME MY TWENTY-NINE F-CKING CENTS!”

At this point, I could have given him a nickel from the drawer and replaced it later from my own pocket. If he’d been speaking to me like I was a person and not a corporate punching bag, I would gladly have done so. But that’s not what he was asking me to do. 

I put on my sweetest smile. “Only the store manager has the keys to the donation box. Give me just a minute and I’ll go get her.”

At this point, one of the regulars behind Penny Guy speaks up. “Don’t make her do that. Here’s your pennies.” He offers PG some pennies from his own pocket. 

Penny Guy’s face flushes and he mumbled about it being the principle of the thing. 

My coworker was managing the line so I decided that this man was going to get his pennies. 

It took a minute to explain what was happening to the manager. She laughed and said she’d be there in a second. It took her a suspiciously long minute to retrieve the key and get to the front. Meanwhile Penny Guy mumbled and glowered and for some reason stuck around for those four pennies. It was a PRINCIPLE apparently, and it meant he waited a good ten minutes while his to-go bag cooled on the counter. 

Every now and then, when a new customer came to the till, I’d look over at Penny Guy and assure him, “Don’t worry sir, the manager will be here shortly to return your four pennies from the donation box.” This earned him a few looks while he waited. 

When my manager finally came to the front, we opened the donation box while the busy store watched. We counted out four pennies and handed them back over to a now very red-faced and much quieter man. 

“I’m so sorry for the confusion,” I told him. “Here is the rest of your change.”

He took the pennies and left, still mumbling about what a rip off the whole thing was. On the bright side, a larger-than-normal percentage of customers decided to donate their change to the charity after watching his tirade. 

I took some pleasure in the thought that even at minimum wage, my time was worth more than twenty-four cents an hour.

Edit: Thank you all for the awards and comments! And my first gold ever— thank you, kind stranger!  WHAAAT platinum?! Ahhh you guys are too kind!This is going to be short and brief, I work at a very popular pizza chain well call pizza stuff. Well today my manager told me that instead of not answering the phone due to us not being open. I now have to answer it and put their order in as a timed order. Along with not telling them that it wouldn't be ready for pickup until 11, I guess he's after more sales, I don't know. Cue malicious compliance, and this morning we happened to get a lot of calls. By the time it was about 10:45, I had 10 orders in, along with that's when the first customer arrived. Well see the issue was that by company policy and rules, we cannot unlock the doors until 11, or when we're supposed to be open. We can send deliveries out early, yet we cannot open carryout early. Well as you can imagine the customer became pissed when I told them they have to wait until 11 before I can serve them due to policy. With the cherry on top being my manager heard the commotion, and decided to forgo the rule. Well in walks in his essential boss, he trains managers and employees mainly. In which he sees what he's doing, and promptly gets in trouble as a result. After his boss talked to him for a bit, my manager pulled me aside and said we're no longer taking orders early, nor are we allowing customers to enter the store early.

TL;DR: manager told me to take orders before we're open, customer got mad as a result as they couldn't get thier food when they got here. Manager then allowed customer in early, in which his boss happened to show up. Got in trouble and the rule has been revoked.I work as a cashier at a Commissary, a military grocery store. The way we handle proof of membership is by scanning the customer's I.D. card at the cash register. We have the ability to bypass this for workers who aren't in the military, but only for items that will be consumed on site. Now that the background is out of the way, on to the story.

One slow day, I decided to go on my scheduled break a few minutes late, as we had most of our cashiers out on break already. As soon as we had enough back that my coworkers wouldn't be unduly burdened by my absence, I close up and turn in my till.

Apparently, the cash office disliked this as she started to mutter about us taking breaks whenever we liked. Now I'd like to point out that not only did we have 6 cashiers just come back from break, we only had 3 customers in the past hour. Additionally, if we didn't handle breaks ourselves we would have to leave work early or accrue overtime, and Lord help you if you got so much as a minute of OT.

Now being the nice guy I am, I ask if she wants me to open back up. She then spends the next 5 minutes ranting about how we just come to work to take breaks and we don't follow directions. Finally, she takes my till and I go on my break, but she'd really pissed me off due to some accusations of lying during her rant. Still, there isn't much I can do, or so I thought.

Come the end of my shift, who should I see but that same cash office teller with a cart full of groceries in my line. I wait for her to unload all of her groceries before I ask for her I.D., she says she left it in her car and I should just bypass it. Since I had just been ranted at about my work ethic, I stand firm. I never would have expected what happened next, but the memory still warms my shriveled heart.

She starts going through the 5 stages of grief! I've chosen a few lines from each stage, but they lasted an average of 4 minutes each. 

- First stage is denial, "oh, you don't really need my I.D. do you? Stop playing."

- Second stage, anger, "my husband served in the military, of course I have my I.D.! Who do you think I am!"

- Third stage is bargaining, "please, I know you do this for other workers, just do it this once."

- The fourth stage is depression, "do I really have to walk all the way to my car to get my I.D.?"

- And finally, after 20 minutes of alternatively ignoring her and citing policy, she reaches the last stage, acceptance, and begins loading her groceries back in her cart.

TL;DR teller rants about workers not following directions, unable to buy groceries because she can't either.

Edit: So I got front page, didn't expect that. Thanks everyone.20 years ago my brother lived by himself about an hour away from where my mum & I lived (I'm much younger than my Bro, so was still a child while he was a late-teen). We lived in a rural area, while my Bro was in the nearest city. Whenever my mum had need to go into the city, she would pick him up and they'd just spend time together. 

He had a really bad habit on these occasions, to wait until she was already there and then get out of bed, shower, get dressed and then meet her outside for them to go do whatever they were doing that day, either errands or shopping etc. This process would take anywhere from 10 minutes to half an hour, which would eat into the time mum was willing to spend in the city. 

One day mum arranged to see him, and he just said 'okay just text me when you're here.'

The next day, she texted him 'I'm here' as she was leaving her house - an hour away from my Bro.

So my Bro got up, got showered & dressed and went to stand outside, looking for her car. After waiting for about 15minutes or so, he finally rang her to find out where she was parked.

> Mum: "Parked? I'm not parked anywhere. I'm still driving."
> Bro: "But you texted me you're here." 
> Mum: "I am here. You're there. I will be there in about 15mins. Are you ready?" 
> Bro: "Yes, I've been ready for 15minutes and waiting outside for you!" 
> Mum: "Oh good. I won't have to wait this time. See you in a moment!"

On that occasion mum was able to get on with her day immediately. In the future, my Bro did end up being dressed in time for mum getting there, but he is still perpetually and habitually late to this day 20yrs later. We still talk about this text every time Bro is late tho.

Super late edit: I'm getting the same comments/questions over again, though I wasn't expecting this to gain so much traction (who does?) Just wanted to address these specific repeated comments:

"Your brother might have ADHD/Time blindness." He's capable of being on time for things that have a time limit (like work, appointments etc) but when it comes to social engagements where time is just a concept not a set thing, he's terrible at. We've just learned to live with it over the years. Thankfully he was on time for his own wedding, though that was mostly to do with his groomsmen more than anything tbh. Also, ironically I am the one who is currently being tested for ADHD so maybe he does and it's a family thing? Idk.

"Texting wasn't a thing 20 years ago." First of all, yes it was. Lots of Americans are coming on here and saying it wasn't in the USA, which I wasn't aware of. I was given my first phone in 2001, and it had been used by my mum for 2 years prior to that, and I had it for another two to three years afterward too (yay Nokia!). Besides - not expecting people to be so exacting, I was intentionally inaccurate with the time. This incidenet happened at the very least 17 years ago - which would've been 2004ish. I'm pretty sure this happened around 2001-2002 sort of time, just going by where my brother was living at at the time.

"This isn't malicious/This isn't compliance." Mum followed my brother's instructions ('text when you're here'), without following what he meant ('text when you're geographically close to my location'), with the intention it would inconvenience him in the same manner he'd been continually inconveniencing her (making him wait while she was 'ready' to begin their excursion). I'm pretty sure that is both malicious and compliance. Thanks!

Hope this clears some things up, and thank you to those people who've given awards to this small story. I appreciate it!A bit of background. I worked for a really small company straight out of undergrad with about 3 employees and the owner. My degree was in engineering, but I wound up doing procurement, fabrication, welding, machining, shop management, site management, safety, etc on top of my engineering duties. Overworked and undervalued. I will say that it was good experience for the rest of my career. Side note to you prospective engineers: an engineering degree is among the few where grades in college do matter and significantly affect your prospects for your first job. I chose to not focus entirely on my studies and paid the price with this shitty job for 3 years. 

Onto the compliance. A big part of this job would be that I was out of town on a job site anywhere from 2-4 weeks a few times a year. Toward the end of my time with this company, the fact that I knew I was leaving soon (got a business graduate degree now) really empowered me to not back down on a lot of things. Around this time, my 1st child was on the way and sure enough, a job was scheduled near the due date. The owner, while he had a lot of shortcomings, understood when I told him I would not be going. However, he refused to keep me on my regular salary while they were gone. There was plenty of work to be done so it wouldn’t have been a vacation. He instead insisted he would pay me on how many units of a certain part I produced while they were gone. Inventory was low and we actually did need the parts. Fine by me if that’s how you want to play it. For the 2 weeks they were gone, I only came in about 4 hours a day 4 days a week and busted out a ton of these parts. Ended up costing him a substantial bit more to pay me his way and a lot of other things that I did for the company were put on hold during those weeks. Should have paid me my salary, dude.

Edit: For everyone asking, no the owner/boss was not trying to give a baby bonus. He was hoping to pay me less. I was there.

Also, my statements about GPA speak in general terms of what students in similar situations will experience on average, not individual paths. I’ll leave it at that. I stand by what I said. Thankfully GPA drops off immediately after the 1st job. It’s a great way to redeem a lackluster college effort if you put in the work. 

Thanks to everyone for the awards and comments! Very interesting to read everyone’s experiences.Not my story but a friend's.

He had a Professor in college  who would occasionally go on a rant about how some of the items from Taco Bell "don't even technically classify as food by some standards"

Though not often, it was a passionate rant.

The day after one of his rants, a student brought in a bag of food from taco bell.

The professor objected "There is no food allowed in my classroom"

The student held up the bag to show the logo  and said "Don't worry it's not food." and took a bite of a taco, whilst maintaining eye contact.

After a moment of surprise, the teacher admitted defeat with a polite but disgusted nod.

The next day he directed the students attention to a revised syllabus. specifically the new rule "No food or Taco Bell allowed at any time in the classroom"

Given that the class was "Introduction to Law"  the teacher gave him extra credit.

&#x200B;If your family and/or friends have pressured you into a gender reveal that you really don't have the time or energy to pull together try this. My wife and I cut pieces of blue and pink paper into a mason jar and then removed one blue piece so there was exactly one more piece of pink than blue.  All the family had to do was simply determine which color had more pieces. We presented it to my family and sat back as we watched them sort them all. Great fun. Word of caution: the number of pieces add up fast.  I used three 8.5"x11" pieces of pink and blue paper each. Cut into roughly 1/2" squares added up to 2,244 pieces!   Took 4 people about 30 minutes to get thru it all. Dramatic build up was real. Enjoy! 😀So this just happened today at school, so it’s still fresh in my mind. We were in algebra and we were taking a test. The teacher was out of the classroom for a bit, and someone asked me for the answers. Now I had secretly hated this kid for almost a year because he had destroyed my $210 phone and only payed me back $20 and said “hopefully this will be enough for a screen protector”.So anyways it turned out he had skipped a question, so he accidentally had about 75% of the questions answered in the wrong box, making them all wrong.  He asked me to erase them for him so he could copy my answers because his arm hurt. I was just about done with mine, so I finished it and erased his, but instead of giving him my answers, I turned my paper in. He now had 5-10 minutes to answer about 30 questions. The teacher then walked back in while he was pleading with me and asked what was going on. I told him that David was trying to copy my answers. No regrets.

EDIT: getting a lot of comments about how he broke my phone, so here’s the story, I’ll try to keep it brief.
We were at a youth group that our church does (I’m catholic) and I was scrolling through all my photos to show one to my friend. I scroll past one of David looking very.. less than good. Friend starts laughing and tells me to go back to that picture, so I do, and he starts dying laughing. a few more people came over to see what was happening, and one of them was David. He sees the picture and just snatches my phone out of my hand and runs into the bathroom. I’m banging on the bathroom door, and telling him 
To give me my phone back. He runs out of the bathroom while i’m screaming at him and holding  onto his arm. Then he just slams my phone into the ground. The [screen](https://imgur.com/gallery/eDX5sJT)  was completely shattered and the home button didn’t work.

EDIT 2: people are now calling me a bully, but I have a few more things to say about David. He’s a stereotypical rich kid who doesn’t understand how people have to pay for stuff with their own money, he also broke my laptop 2 years before, and my dad had to buy me a new hard drive. He also broke my cousins lamp twice, and his parents buy him everything he wants.Mid 2010s I was on a hunt for a place while crashing on a friend's couch. I was checking out a place for 40% of monthly minimum wage and having arrived at the agreed upon time found an obese middle aged lady telling an agitated nephew that he can't freeload in his room anymore. So I talk to her and always the marketer offer to do some free digital marketing tips (basic stuff that people just ignore) before checking out the rooms, it never hurts to offer something valuable and low-cost for free before negotiations.

I found an amazing room that made me feel like a vampire count with thick ornate columns, high ceilings, velvet drapes, with the only light coming from the glass wall on one side that casted my silhouette towards the entrance and kept my face obscure sitting behind the desk. But I should scope out the place right? So the landlord tells me she was bad knees and asks the nephew she just kicked out to show me around and upstairs, specifically to the room that just freed up (his).

*Um what? That's not wise*...

Not surprisingly he showed me the place flippantly, occasionally bad mouthing it, and let me know that there's rats.

*Okay nope!* I said my thanks, left the lying landlord. That should've been the end of it.

Two days later, the landlord calls me in the middle of work and asks if I made a decision on the room and if I could show her the digital marketing tricks to which I gave her the benefit of the doubt and refused sternly. That should've been the end of it.

Yet she kept on calling, even when I blocked her she found other numbers to call from over the next two weeks. One day I was in a foul mood so I finally agreed if only to get her out of my life, except she then directs me to the nephew she's kicking out (as soon as his room is rented) because she's not good with tech. *Um what? That's not wise, but meh its what she wanted.* 

It turns out the freeloading nephew was a natural and he managed to rank landlord's apartment on the top 10 search results complete with dead rats, dangerous fire escapes, fire hazards and all. The landlord was found in violation of numerous codes and I now had a capable and admiring digital marketer who eventually helped me get employed after CoVid layoffs.I believe there are two types of middle school teachers in the world: those who teach because they love children, and those who teach because they positively loathe them.  

Ms G was definitively the latter-- she held her students in contempt and I returned the sentiment in spades.  She made my fifth grade English and Composition class a misery for me and many others.  She was mistrustful (when she assigned us all an Agatha Christie she tore the last chapter out of every single school copy of the book she issued to ensure we wouldn't read ahead-- I was appalled), condescending (in spite of it being an honors class she would speak down to us in a provokingly sing-song, syrupy voice), and, as you might imagine, a real stickler for the rules.

Come December she had a special assignment for us: write a letter to Santa Claus. I took issue with this because:

1. I was one of two Jewish kids in my middle school. 
2. I was not six years old.

Normally I kept my head down, but this, I mean come on. I approached her as the class ended.  It was an exercise in practicing letter-writing composition, yeah, I got that.  Couldn't I write a letter to someone else? Anyone else? Please?

"Ah ah aaaaah, Queenie, the assignment is to write a letter to Saaanta Claus!  That is who you will be writing to! No ifs, ands, or buts!"    

Alright Lady, Santa Claus it is.

This is the letter I handed in:

"Santa:

I have Rudolph. If you ever want to see him alive again, bring 2 bags full of unmarked toys to the corner of Main and Fairmount at midnight on New Year's Eve. No cops. No elves.  Deliver the goods at midnight or I'll be eating venison through the new year.

Sincerely,
X"

Ms. G was furious at the urgent parent/teacher conference that was called the following day.  My father's reaction didn't help.  When the Vice Principal handed him the letter he instantly burst out laughing.  

Ms. G was angry ugly crying when she demanded that I either needed to go to therapy or the Girl Scouts.  To this day I have zero idea why those were the two options.

Between the cookies and being booted out of honors English, I regret nothing.  

TL;DR: In fifth grade I was forced to write a letter to Santa Claus, and in the process, made my English teacher's naughty list.Back in the days before fruit phones and robot phones, I worked in IT at a local council.  There were 12 members of our team, 7 of whom drank hot drinks during the day (tea / coffee).  We had a kettle and a small fridge that we had each paid for in the corner of the office, and took it in turns to make tea and coffee for all in the team.  The system worked perfectly, until...

Health & Safety came and said we can't have electrical appliances in the office as they need to be tested.

We got them tested and they passed.

Health & Safety came back and said that the kettle was too dangerous (it was tall and thin and could tip over).

We replaced it with a wide-bottomed kettle that wasn't as easy to tip over.

Health & Safety came back and said that having a hot water source that close to staff could burn them.  Kettle had to be removed within a week.  Our reply was that there were no burns since we had the kettle, and the nearest kitchen with hot water was 2 floors up and the other side of the building, and that it used a water boiler.  It would take extra time to make drinks and then have to carry them down the stairs where accidents could easily happen.

Health and safety said that it was their way or not at all.

We relented, and the kettle disappeared.  My boss said that it was only a matter of time until someone trips or slips on the stairs carrying a tray of hot drinks.

Day 3 after the kettle went (AK).  New girl slipped on the stairs and caused damage to a light when her tea soaked it.  H&S needed to fill out a 7 page report and the light had to be replaced at a cost of £150.

Day 9 AK: One of the team called Victor (not real name) slipped on wet stairs and his hot tea caused burns to the person coming up.  Other person off work for 2 weeks and H&S needed to fill in a different (12 page) report.

Day 22 AK: I slipped on wet stairs with a tray of drinks.  2nd degree burns to my chest and arms.  Off for 2 weeks on full pay.  Another 12 page report.

Day 23AK: Kettle is returned.

tl:dr; Health and safety take kettle away, results in more people being burned by hot water.Short and sweet.

I was working 50+ hours weekly for a huge corporate bank on salary. My apartment was one mile to my office and both had rental bike stations I used regularly. My boss at the time was a time cruncher and regularly disregarded the overtime I was working to point out a few minutes here and there. 

One day I went home for lunch, walked my dog, got on my bike, and within 30 seconds was hit by a car. EMTs were called to the scene but nothing was broken. Clothes were ripped and I had road rash/blood. Called my boss to let her know I’d be back a little late due to the crash and she told me lunch was to be 60 minutes only and I would face repercussions if late.

So I didn’t go home and change, went right back to work where the head of the department immediately called me in seeing my ripped/bloody attire. Explained what happened and told them I would not take more than 60 minutes ever again, regardless of circumstances. My boss was pleased but I was sent home to change. 

A few weeks later they asked me why I stopped working 50 hour weeks. Well if lunch is only 60 minutes, then work is only 8 hours. And I haven’t worked overtime since.This one happened a few years ago when I worked in corporate for a large sub chain that has currently seen better days. 
They had purchased a taco concept and part of my job consisted of going around the country to help open up these new restaurants. 
Now, this sub chain is not known for corporate luxuries, so I didn't bat an eye at the daily food expense allowance when traveling, which was $42 per day, broken out by meal. 

Breakfast: $8

Lunch: $14

Dinner: $20

So you couldn't even scrimp on breakfast and lunch to get yourself an alright meal.  But ok, I usually stayed in hotels that had a complimentary breakfast buffet and I often skip lunch and work straight through the day so my expenses we regularly less that $20 per day.  Now the problem comes, when during one of these trips my dinner came out to be $20.05 (before a cash tip mind you that I paid out of my own pocket and didn't expense). I didn't think much of it because hey, it's a nickel and I didn't go over my daily spending allotment. 
Cut to the end of the month after submitting my expense report, I get a call from accounting that went like this:
Accountant: I'm looking at your July expenses. How did you want to handle this?

Me: Umm..I did handle it, I submitted. 

Accountant: No, you went over on one of your dinners. Would you like to send payment in or have it taken from your payroll?

Me: I'm sorry... what total are we talking about?

Accountant: You spent $20.05 on dinner xyz, which is a 5 cent overage. 

Silence....

Me: Ok, so I owe 5 cents?

Accountant: Yes.

Me: You can take that out of my payroll,  but please do it over the next 5 pay periods.  I'd like to split up the payments for budgeting purposes. 

Accountant: Are you serious?

Me: Are you?

Following her true nature, she took a penny out of the next 5 checks.. and I made a point of spending as close to $42 a day as humanely possible for every other trip I ever took with that company.

Edited: formattingI work for a medium-size development company in a mid-size City. The company has about ten employees, and we collectively manage a little under 50 million dollars worth of residential and commercial real estate.  We are definitely understaffed. The person who owns the company has a temper and, as employees, a lot of what we do is to manage what information she knows about the company to keep her temper in check.

Our longest term employee is our amazing head of facilities who has been with the company for about 8 years and he knows/does EVERYTHING and we are always SOL without him, because he is pretty amazing at his job. He can’t even really take a day off without receiving at least a few phone calls from staff, even on his sick days, we just need him that badly. And, being a great human, he is always there for us.

Well, he made a pretty big mistake on Friday, because he is human, and it really isn’t that a huge deal in that it didn’t cost our company any money, we apologized, and everything is basically fine, however, the woman who owns our company accidentally saw an email about it on someone else’s computer and she lost her shit and he received a one-week suspension....as he has around weeks worth of built up PTO, and even the woman who does HR/payroll thinks the suspension is unjust, it will be paid.

Annnd we are completely falling apart without him. I finally broke down and texted him for help, and he said, “sorry! I’m suspended! Can’t help! Lol” 

The woman who owns our company was even asking where he was earlier when she couldn’t find something. It’s already epic, and we’re only one day in. The employee in me is panicking, and the human in me is rubbing hands together in glee.

TL;DR head of facilities is getting his first real vacation without getting bugged by us in 7 years, but only because he fucked up. We have really only punished ourselves. He’s learning the wrong lesson, and I adore him even more!

EDIT:::: Update - 
So I caught a cold and I’m pretty sick, but I know y’all are asking for updates... please forgive all cold-related typos...
He definitely caved pretty hard, and tried to come back to work, however, caring coworkers wouldn’t let him (the man really needed a vacation). I’m sorry to disappoint you reddit. FWIW, I’m also disappointed in him.

Two highlights of our struggles though—
The weather turned super cold, and our offices got super freezing. Everyone complained a bunch. I was proactive, found the thermostat, realized the AC was still on, and switched it to heat triumphantly. Everyone congratulated me, and then we stayed cold. In fact, we got colder. Next day, I realized I had turned another part of our building to heat, and not our offices. It was 64* in our office. Well, fuck. I figured it out, and our offices got warm...and warmer....and then hot. By Friday morning, it was almost 80*. We just ended up propping the fire escape door open as the heat ran all day Friday, and it was in the 40*s outside.  He really enjoyed that story when I told him about it this morning. We both laughed pretty hard.

The other thing—we needed a large heavy item removed from a parking garage, and the guy removing it asked if he could do it at 5:30pm on a weekday. I agreed bc why would I care when as long as it’s gone? ....Suspended coworker saw my email about this (on a distribution email list) and immediately texted me about rush hour and traffic patterns... I just didn’t think about how the road that this garage opens up on feeds an entire (primarily residential) neighborhood of our city...annnnd I told him I was going to ignore his same advice to bc he wasn’t supposed to be working annnnd it ended up being a total shitshow, creating massive traffic  backups and couldn’t be completed as scheduled. It was a triumphant failure.So I started a new job about two years ago & finally found a job I'm naturally good at which has been amazing as my performance have been top notch, no disciplinary actions and even a few awards.

So I started helping out my fellow co-workers when they were struggling & especially helping out the newbies who just got off training. Which is garbage generic training for 3 weeks which has literally nothing to do with our sector & we're literally told to forget everything we learned because it does not apply to us.. So naturally the newbies struggle a lot at the start & that tanks the performance for the entire team.

So I wanted to be a good team player now that I finally felt like I knew what I was doing, apparently that was a mistake on my part. After 3 months of helping my team I was called into a meeting with our coach to discuss my "behaviour." And I was told that I was not allowed to help my co-workers because I am not trained in that field, and only the higher ups are supposed answer questions & make decisions within our job. Which would be fine and understandable if the coach was available for the entire 8h shift to answer questions and help people, which they are not. I pointed this out along with some statistics that since I started helping out answering questions our performance has gone up each month & it helps the newbies feel welcomed as they have a non superior they can ask stupid questions too without worry. 

Another mistake on my part, our coach got really really angry and I was basically told that this is how it is, and if I'm caught giving "UNSANCTIONED HELP" again I will receive disciplinary action.

Okay fine, have it your way then you sad pathetic excuse of a human. I screenshotted the conversation, dug up performance reports prior to me helping, during me helping & for the next 3 months without me helping. And wow shocker we started tanking in our performance! *Gasp* how could this have happened??? 

So the entire team got called into a big meeting with the higher higher ups, our manager and coach to discuss wtf is going on and why we're doing so shit. I let everyone speak and say their piece and at the end of the meeting I just asked if I could have 5 minutes  of one of the big chiefs time as I think I might have a solution to help improve our performance! And he was actually surprisingly interested so he called me up after the meeting to hear me out & I told him about the whole situation, showed screenshots, performance results, the whole 9 yards! 

My dude was visibly shook, a bit lost for words tbh, but said he really appreciated the input and would look into fixing this 'internally' and that was that! 

3 days later our coach 
'resigned in search for greener pastures' 

hahahahahahahahahahahah
Hahahahahahahah
Hahahahahaha
HAHAHAHAHAHAHA 
Fuck you.

TL;DR: Coach couldn't let thier ego go and didn't allow me to help our team because I wasnt trained to help, our performance tanked and they got sacked within 3 days of me speaking up.

Edit: 
Jaysus this got so much more attention then I thought it would, thank you all for the kind words! Glad my story could bring some satisfaction to you wonderful ppl!


Edit 2: 
I'll answer some of the most common questions asked!

I did get offered the coach positioned but I declined as I love my current position and flexibility!

It's not a toxic environment, was just a bad apple!

I did not get a pay increase :cI used to work at a food service place in Canada, think coffee; my location had this rule that you would absolutely get written up if you were late over two minutes, but you would NOT get in any form of trouble if you called out. This is especially important because I lived an hour each way from where I worked, and the roads could be treacherous in the winter. One occasion, it was especially bad, and I was exactly 5 minutes late. I didn’t even get to clock in before I was in the office getting reamed out for my terrible insubordination. I confirmed the policy, and refused to sign the write up.

About two months later, the same situation comes back around. I arrive in the parking lot, and I look around to see the absolute demonic blizzard taking place, the clock showed me I had 2 minutes until shift started. Since they wanted to play that game, I called from the parking lot to tell them I wouldn’t be in, the roads were just too bad. I didn’t get in an amoeba of trouble for it. Soon, everyone learned the same thing as I did, and call outs were frequent. Nobody in management has ever figured out why...This happened fairly recently. My work is fairly small and situated in a mall, we have a small locker room but it's unisex so no one gets fully dressed there, but many people will change their tops. 

Most days I work two shifts, an early morning maintenance shift with a midday lunch shift starting straight after I've finished the maintenance. 

My managers are really stingy with breaks, absolute legal minimum, clocked to the second. They'll also try and schedule you for just under the hour requirement to avoid giving another break. IE, if you're due another break if you work 8 hours they'll schedule you for 7 hours and 45 minutes.

As a maintenance worker I have a maintenance shirt which I switch to a general uniform top whenever I come off maintenance. Since I'm female presenting I wear a light shirt underneath for decency. 

Normally it would only take me a few seconds to switch tops and jump back on floor for my second shift, but a few weeks ago my boss pulled me aside and told me that they didn't want me changing in the locker room anymore for 'hygiene reasons'. Notably they didn't tell any of my male coworkers who had been doing the same thing for years.

Now I have to walk to the nearest bathroom (approx five minutes away) to get changed.

Here's where the compliance comes in. There was an unspoken expectation that I would have to get changed during my break, but given how stringent my managers are, I really didn't want to gouge a large chunk out of my limited free time.

Instead every day I deliberately leave a small amount of maintenance work left undone, maybe ten, fifteen minutes worth before my break so I'd have to keep my maintenance shirt on to complete that work. Once that's done I take a leisurely stroll to the nearest bathroom while on clock to get changed. 

This is generally one of the busiest periods, early lunch rush, so my managers often have to stop sitting and chatting in the office and cover me until I get back.I work in a grocery store that includes a post office station. It's in the middle of a community and a lot of our customers are regulars. 

It was a day just like any other and I was serving on the store side of things when the last customers in store came up; a woman and her granddaughter. 

We were chatting away, granddaughter was showing me her most recent toy and grandmother was telling me what they were off to do that afternoon. As I was giving the change over a woman stormed past towards post office. Grandmother noticed, at this point, that we had some nice deals on an end facing the tills so she grabbed a pack quickly before they left (bearing in mind that I still hadn't said goodbye yet). 

I proceed to scan the item through for her when this other woman at the post office pipes up "Excuse me!" She exclaimed in a very rude tone "I was here before them". I responded that I'd be with her in a minute and that these customers were here before she came into the store. 

I was particularly pissed at the woman's attitude given the fact that she'd behaved in such a way, without real reason, I'm front of a sweet little 2 year old girl who is very impressionable at that age. Anyway, I scanned them through and said my goodbyes, waving and smiling as I always do. 

I then made my way to the post office where this woman, with a face like fizz, hit me with the line "Customer service dictates that you serve me first if I'm here before them". 

I calmly smiled and told her "customer service also dictates that I can reserve the right to refuse service to anyone". 

Her face dropped, still furious, she asks "are you refusing to serve me, then?"

I looked her right in the eyes and said "certainly seems that way". 

Genuinely one of my favourite interactions with a rude customer to date.So for a little bit of pre context, I used to go to the Mormon church every Sunday. My mom is super religious, while I am not. This happened a few months ago. For whatever reason, Mormon church makes teenagers attend "seminary" and "young men's". Seminary is an hour lesson every morning before school (which is stupid) and young men's is an event every Wednesday night (or other day depending on the activity).

Basically, I had to go to most seminary and young men events because of my mom. There's a bunch of things I disagree with what the church does, and I am mentally not in the church anymore. Quick example is that they take 10% of income as "tithing" which is, again stupid. Point is they also take up a lot of your free time, demanding you contribute and invading your personal space if you refuse.

I was tasked with a project in seminary and organizing 3 events for young men's. Honestly, I planning a hiking trip and cross country skiing and whatnot. When I got really busy with school, I stopped going to seminary (as I wanted an extra hour of sleep). Guess what? The church pestered me and harassed me for not going to seminary.
"Oh it's sooo important!"
My ass it's important.

Blah blah blah, I didn't go to seminary and they continued to harass me. Come time, they start encouraging us to use our "agency". They made a whole 3 hour long service talking about Agency, and the importance of it. Agency, to my understanding, is the ability for an individual to make ones own decision to find out the truth. They started saying this as a motivator to be MORE active in church, and find stories that prove the church to be true, but I did the opposite.

Cue, malicious compliance.

So instead of researching about why the church is true, I found out about why it's a whole god damn corporate lie for money (basically). I used my "agency" to find the real truth about the church.

For my seminary project, I made a whole presentation about the negative aspects of the church, and why we need to be more careful with what's happening (r/exmormon I thank you) I talked about Joseph Smith and his 30 something wives (10 of which were underage), the hypocrisy in the church, and the the amount of suicides and whatnot that came of the church.

Then, I left.

They didn't have anything else planned for Young Men's.

They invaded my house to try and get me to go back. They gave me calls to bring me back. It was pretty simple what I would say.

"I'm utilizing my agency. Please respect that."

They didn't have young men's for a month, because I wasn't there to organize anything else. Not only that, my presentation also encouraged other people (some of my acquaintances) to stop going to church too.

It may not seem like a big deal, but this is a big church and bringing it down as much as I can brings me joy, especially after all the pain it's caused me.

I'm glad to say that I've gotten my hour of sleep back, and now my Sunday is free for watching Endgame.

Ed: thank you for the gold and silver!

Ed2: For clarification, Joseph Smith did NOT have 30 teenage wives. He only had 10 teenage wives, and a number of other wives, many already married to other men. (Thank you u/ajaxfetish for pointing this out

Link to "plural marriage" from the LDS site itself:

https://www.lds.org/study/history/topics/joseph-smith-and-plural-marriage?lang=eng

Link to list of Joseph Smith's wives (may not be reliable):

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Joseph_Smith%27s_wivesI used to work for a small, fee-for-service non-profit. The average number of clients served was/is around 250. The average caseload is 12 but can range from 10-20 per person (and may exceed 20 depending on circumstance). Non-management staff hover around 18-20 people. New staff aren’t really able to effectively use client authorized hours until several months in, so the org is reliant on senior staff to keep projected income up. This is relevant later. 

Keeping it as understandable as possible, one of the “perks” of being a senior staff member was receiving a personalized, facilitated plan for your goals. Once the plans were done individually, everyone who received one from all regions of the org came together as a group to discuss. This was meant to be an opportunity to share, support each other, and figure out next steps. Since our plans were mostly done around our goals at the company, we had an honest conversation about what we need to be successful. It wasn’t inappropriate in any way and many of the needs we brought up were already being met; it was honestly just a facilitated discussion around how to keep focused on advancing our career there. 

Well, one person from another region with more “weight” didn’t like how the day went so they complained to their manager (who is also a personal friend). That manager worked herself up about it, created a new story, and went straight to the assistant director. The assistant director is a VERY reactionary person and isn’t very well liked; most just avoid or placate her. 

Everyone in my region at the group meeting gets an email from AD saying we need to cancel all appointments and be in her office at a specified time the next day. Remember, we’re senior staff. That means five of us cancelled our client-based appointments to go into this mystery meeting, losing the company money. 

Meeting comes. We are sat down in front of all of the managers in our region and the AD. She launches into us with the following highlights: “how dare you use group time to provide feedback about the organization”, she’s so ashamed and doesn’t trust us to represent the company, informs us that we wasted $7,000 of the companies’ money, and that her toddlers behave better than us. She ends this five minute rant by saying that every one of us is replaceable, and they’d be happy if we left. We five sit in stunned silence before the meeting is “concluded” and we all walk out. 

Turns out the AD never spoke to the facilitator, didn’t consult any other attendees from other regions, in fact, didn’t bother getting any additional information at all. To add insult to injury, my boss (one of the managers in the room) told me the point of that meeting was to “make us feel shitty” when I asked what follow-up was needed from me. 

I found a job within two weeks and left. Two other people in that meeting quit within a month. A fourth is halfway out the door. Others found out about the meeting and so far four additional staff have left. All seven of us who quit (so far) had been there three years or more and our departures were no more than two months apart. Our total caseloads numbered roughly 120 clients, meaning that almost half of the organizations’ clients are without staff to support them and there are now five new hires without mentors. One of the new hires quit because of this, making 8 people gone in two months. This turnover has never happened before. 

I left behind three years of stellar client relationships and high performance/outcomes and took with me the knowledge on everything from mandatory trainings to the billing protocol. Yup, that’s right. I developed the billing protocol for the new database and no one had stepped up to learn it prior. Sucks to be you I guess.

Moral of the story: if you tell staff they are replaceable, their answer will be so are you.This is from 2011. A bar owner in Brazil, after his city created a new ordinance mandating all bars to close at 2AM, began kicking all the customers out at 1:59 and reopening five minutes later.

When the cops arrived, he argued that he obeyed the ordinance by closing at the mandated time, but since the law says nothing about opening hours, from now on he opens at 2:05

December 24 and 31 has always been a non-working day in our country but just this year our president announced that it will be a “special working holiday” so it is still up to the company if they will have work on that day or not.

 

When our company announced that we will have a full day of work on the 24th  the employees weren’t happy. We didn’t have work on that day even before the oldest employee in the company have started working (working for the company for 40+ years already) and most employees already had plans set up for that day.

 

After back and forth meetings with the union, the company finally gave in and agreed to have only a half day of work on the 24th. Employees are still not happy but we took that as a win.

 

Now to the malicious compliance. Each department in our company can choose any day in December to celebrate their Christmas party. The party can last half a work day and the employees will still be compensated as long as the party is held in the office. So today is December 24 and we will all have our Christmas party. As agreed, department Christmas parties are company time so it will still be credited as us going to “work”. Merry Christmas!


Edit: someone suggested I add this. Some of you have said that this is still a win for the company. I don't think it is because in the prior years most departments will not use the allowed half day Christmas party and would just do it after work or on weekends because parties here tend to be super loud (karaoke!!) but since we are forced to work this morning we all just decided to have a party now. Someone brought a portable karaoke and it is loud!


Another edit: the president I was talking about in the first paragraph is the president of the country. November 2, December 24 and 31 used to be a "special non-working holiday" meaning companies don't have work that day. For those who need to work that day they are entitled to an additional 30% of their basic rate. He suddenly changed it this year to a "special working holiday" so it's still a holiday but we need to go to work and we don't get the additional 30% pay just the basic rate. Pretty stupid if you ask me. Meanwhile the president I was talking about in the comments who joined our party is the president of our company, sorry for the confusion.TL;DR at the end. I work in sales. I spend time in my actual office and on the road making cold calls. The small company I work for uses a call-logging software that plans my trips to customers. A typical logged call would look like this: Called X customer > time spent in call> call notes. 

About a year ago the owner of the company asked me to create a customer called “office work” to ping on the software to let him know I was in my office and not out seeing customers. In the call notes I would write a short general description on what I did in my time in office. 

A month ago the owner decided his fresh out of college 22 year old son was fit to be the manager of all salespersons. His son has commenced to micromanage my daily call reports to the fullest extent. He has to write a report to his father what each salesperson does every day. I get texts or emails almost daily asking what “exact times” I did what in my office or on the road. This culminated to the owners son demanding I log each individual task such as driving to a customer, working on a spreadsheet, or even warming up my vehicle. 

The example he gave me: 7:30AM-7:49AM checked and responded to email, 7:52AM-8:00AM warmed up truck. Etc. Each entry takes about a minute to create and log. 

He wanted to know what I was doing every minute of the entire workday. 

Fine. I can play ball. 

For the past week and a half I have been scrutinizing every single second of the day to ludicrous extent. I timed five minutes and counted the number of breaths I took to get an average amount of breathing per minute. About 18 breaths per minute. Better log that. 

I began timing my bathroom breaks and logging it. My fastest bladder draining is 48 seconds including washing hands!

I timed how long it took to fill up my water and logged it, 29 seconds from start to back at my desk. 

I timed how long to tie my boots and logged that, 4 seconds each boot. 

Sitting at a stoplight? Logged. 

He now knows I can knock on a customers door 10 times in 3 seconds. 

For about a week I logged everything I did every waking moment of the workday including the bites of my salad for lunch. Hell I even got the other salespersons to join in the malicious compliance. He was inundated in hundreds of reports each day he had to comb through. 

Today he sent an email to the sales force that we are no longer required to give specific times for tasks but rather a general description would suffice. Just like it was before he took over. 

TL;DR- Bossman’s son micromanaged so I nano-managed to get back to being macro-managed.Back when I was working at a small company, the company didn't really have a ton of support staff so I'd take a break from the various programming tasks I was doing and would help out.

The "manager" of the support team was completely unqualified and basically got the job because he was also the head of sales and it was a customer facing team.

He was also a lazy luddite who refused to learn how things worked and generally made our lives more difficult.

One day I was covering on the support desk because they were short staffed and got a call from him that he needed his password changed. I was confused at first and started to walk him through the steps to change it himself. And he shouted angrily, "No goddammit, just change it, write it down on a Post-It and give it to me." And hung up.

So I sat there for a minute and remembered I don't report to him at all. So I changed his password for him.

I made it 18 characters long and it was a combination of I, l, 1, ! and | .

He was not happy. Especially after he mistyped enough times to lock his computer and he couldn't log in the rest of day. Because the support guy who had the access to do a hard password reset was out for the day.This wasn't me doing the malicious compliance, nor the request, but the middle man who witnessed this gloriousness. I worked for a movie theatre company in a state that snows every winter. We had a contract with a snow shoveling company but my boss refused to use it because the costs of each removal had a possiblity of hurting his yearly bonus by a couple percent points (like $300 max out of $20,000). "Only if it snows more than six inches" he would say every time.

Unfortunately this meant that one of the ushers would have to shovel snow on the sidewalk. Since it's a safety hazard to block the emergency exit doors of a theatre it meant you had to shovel a path around the entire building and for each exit door. Ultimately due to the size it's about a quarter mile around the building. No one likes doing it because it's cold and shoveling a simple one shovel-length path can take two hours.

During a snowy Christmas week (the busiest week for movie theaters of the year, imagine Black Friday shopping for two weeks straight) it had snowed just under six inches. We were extremely busy and my boss demanded to take one of our much needed ushers to go shovel snow (I was an assistant manager). When we asked if the company could come out instead of us doing it we were told no, to which one of my co-workers (we'll call him Dan) said he would do it. An hour later after he had gone outside one by one my boss pulled each usher in and wrote them up for "refusing to shovel snow". When Dan came back in the other ushers complained to him about it. Dan asked our boss why and our boss said that it was because no one wanted to shovel all of the snow, and if Dan didn't shovel all of the snow he would get written up as well. This all happened at the beginning of my shift, around 5pm.

Cue the malicious compliance. What my boss didn't realize was that it was the last day of the payroll period. Being Christmas week Dan had already accumulated 40 hours of work earlier in the day. My boss left right after telling Dan to make sure ALL of the snow was removed. We worked the rest of the shift and everyone assumed Dan had finished and left.

It's 3am now and we go to punch out for the week but can't because there is a shift that hasn't been approved yet. Someone is still working and is at 12 hours of overtime. It's Dan. I go out to investigate since it should only be myself and my manager. As I walk outside I see Dan coming back in, smiling the biggest grin on his face, and the most dry, un-snowed path I've ever seen in my life. It looked like two pictures cut together; there was not a spec or snow on the entire front path of the theatre. Dan spent ten hours outside making. Sure that he removed ALL the snow from the walkway. We had a good laugh, clocked off and left.

We didn't hear anything until later that week when I was called into the office and had to write out a statement to why I let Dan work twelve hours of overtime. He had this smug look on his face like he had "beaten" us. He was not too pleased when he found out that all of our statements included him saying the phrase "remove all the snow" and that he refused to call the snow plow company. My boss was transferred to another theatre soon after.When I worked for Radio Shack my manager would schedule me for 2 hour lunches but expect me to only take 30 minute lunches and work the other hour and a half.

Doing that helped boost the stores $/hour sales rate, but it meant that I wasn't making the 40hr requirement to be considered full time. 

So I started taking the two hour lunches I was scheduled for, he got mad but there was nothing he could do because he made the schedules. He stopped doing it after a week of arguing with me. He eventually got fired for doing other shady stuff.LTL, FTP, TL;DR at the bottom...

In my previous job, I reported directly into one of the company “directors” who generally trusted me to get on with the job, and manage myself. This included setting my own work hours, which varied week to week due to company needs, and also my own...

Anyway, I (**Me**) got a new manager (**NM**) that was in between me and the director/now former manager (**FM)** I reported to. They were the sort of person that felt the need to micromanage and be in control of everything, despite having little to no understanding of what I do, and why my hours need to be flexible.

Now, **NM** was purely office based, so setting regular hours that they worked each week was easy. As such they expected the same as me, and know exactly the hours I’d be working each and every day.

>**Me -** "Okay, seems reasonable, I’ll let you know at the end of each week, what hours I’ll be working the next week..."  
>  
>**NM -** “Not good enough, you should work the same hours each week to make it simpler”.

I voiced my concerns, and that I change my hours based on the needs of the business.

>**NM -** “Well that can be discussed on a case by case basis”. 

Alright, we’ll see how that goes...

A few weeks later...

>**Me -** "**NM**, I will be leaving early next Friday evening, as I’m going to my parents house for the weekend to celebrate my father’s birthday, I’ve already arranged cover and you don’t need to worry about anything"  
>  
>**NM -** “Unacceptable, that’s inside your scheduled work hours”  
>  
>**Me -** “That’s unreasonable, it is no inconvenience to you and I’m giving you plenty of notice”  
>  
>**NM -** “ If you want to leave early, you’ll have to book the entire day off as holiday”

Now I don’t want to use an entire days holiday when I only need to finish a couple of hours early - and I see the case-by-case basis we talked about was only ever to benefit the company - but I also see the opportunity for some malicious compliance (one of many I had with **NM**)...

>**Me -** “Okay, fair enough, but I think we need a written agreement of these work hours so we have something to reference in situations like this”  
>  
>**NM -** “Absolutely, seems like a great idea”

A few weeks later, **NM** emails me...

>**NM -** “Hi **PhillipeFlop,** now I know you don’t work Thursdays, but there is an important meeting I need you attend. You can take this as time in lieu at a later date, just get my approval first”  
>  
>**Me -** “Sorry **NM,** no can do. That’s not inside my scheduled work hours we agreed upon. Please see your prior email \[...\]”  
>  
>**NM -** “This isn’t negotiable, you must attend. If you refuse I will have to inform **FM** that you refuse, and I will have to start disciplinary action.”  
>  
>**Me -** “I’m sorry, it’s not within my scheduled hours, and I have plans \[*I don't\]*. If you need to inform **FM**, then unfortunately you will have to do so”

Anyway, having worked under **FM** for a couple of years, I know exactly what's going to happen next... **FM** gives me a call, asks why I am refusing. I explain the situation and he says he will talk to **NM**. **FM** obviously gives **NM** a bit of a bollocking and the next day **NM** pulls me to the side and says they're happy to go back to the previous arrangement I had with **FM**, provided I attend the meeting.

>**Me -** “Not a problem, on that note, I’ll be leaving early Friday!”

I walked away, **NM** looked furious, but knew they couldn’t do anything about it! I had nowhere to be, just wanted to make a point!

&#x200B;

TL;DR - get a new manager, new manager demands I set regular working hours, I comply and refuse to attend an important meeting outside those hours. New manager gets frustrated at this and goes to their boss (my former boss). My former boss gives them a bollocking and tells them to go back to the former arrangement.

&#x200B;

EDIT 1 - formattingI worked for a prestigious Millwork we made cabinets and custom moldings etcetera. Very very high-end working with companies on tight schedules. I was the only truck driver. Company was owned by a husband and wife and the wife did not like me. They had implemented mandatory lunches for everyone in the shop and building etcetera. But due to the uniqueness of my position I usually didn't have to adhere 2 Stupid rules like that. And I knew it was just a way for them to screw the workers because a lot of guys were dedicated and would work through lunch. She finally caught up to me one day and was reviewing my time card and was angry and said I don't care you don't have any excuse you must take a lunch and I argued the point said that some of the materials I was picking up with critical she said I don't care. I think now is when I enter into the malicious part of this. So I would go pick up zebrawood that they needed right away at noon and after the load was loaded I pulled into Burger King and ignored any phone calls that my manager sent and got back to the shop 2 hours later and he was livid because he had three very expensive people standing around waiting for me. Needless to say I never had to take a lunch againSo this was well before Covid, so I might be fuzzy on the details, as this was back when I worked at a burger joint in the middle of a small city. A small one, but it gave me a chuckle, and I was reminded of it after reading an earlier post about someone falsely claiming a salt-free diet for a party.

Some dude walks in, with the *most condescending* look on his face as he looks around our establishment. We advertised as a place which catered to dietary needs, including vegetarian, vegan, organic, and religious diets, and this dude at least doesn't look like the type such a place caters to, but I don't get paid to judge. He orders a typical burger (the joint's default), but with no salt on the patties. Not a problem, people have done this before, we easily prepare an unsalted double patty burger.

This time, however, when he bites it his face is a look of disgust.

Me: Is something wrong, sir?

Customer: There's way too much salt on this burger!

Me: That's strange, we didn't put any salt on your burger, as you asked.

Customer: As if! When I say no salt, I MEAN IT! I am on a no salt diet as per my doctor's orders!

Me: Oh really? Well why didn't you say that to begin with? Let me just make a new burger for you.

&#x200B;

Cue MC. Our place had special policies the moment a medical history or specific diet was mentioned.

(4 minutes later, handing him a lettuce wrapped double patty with no pickles or bacon)

&#x200B;

Customer: The fuck is this shit? This isn't a burger!

Me: Actually sir, it is a *properly* salt-free burger, as you requested.

Customer: But there's not even a bun!

Me: Our burger buns are made with salt.

Customer (now studying the burger closely): Where are the toppings I asked for?!

Me: Our bacon and pickles are both heavily salted. Since your salt-free request is a result of a dietary restriction, not just a request, we are obligated to remove any instances of the ingredient in question. Don't worry, we didn't charge you for the bacon.

&#x200B;

The customer then bit into the burger, stating that it was terrible. Not just that the lettuce wrap was far inferior, but that the meat was tasteless. Well I'm sorry sir, but not only did *you ask* for no salt (hence the tasteless), you triggered our establishment's dietary policy by making your request based on a medical need.

My manager had to explain to him that if he wanted a new burger, he would have to pay for it.

(Edit: clarifications)

Edit 2: To clarify, yes we took dietary restrictions seriously, it wasn't just some bullshit for marketing. That's why we had to change the order so drastically, otherwise I wouldn't have bothered. Yes we were aware that salt dietary restrictions are very serious for some people, that's why as I stated in a comment when someone did mention it as being a dietary restriction, we typically asked for more details, like if bread was still okay. Some people even switched to vegetarian or vegan burgers. I usually tried to warn them when that happened, because our veggie burgers weren't impossible burgers or anything, they were literal vegetable patties and they weren't that good imo. However, we'd dealt with enough malingerers (people making up diagnoses for attention) that we were pretty sure about this guy.

No we did not normally treat customers like this, people were generally much nicer than this, and those that weren't were usually easily spotted & caught malingerers. We'd comp'd or remade meals for people plenty of times because we screwed up the dietary needs on their order.

No I do not think this particular customer really had the restriction because 1. he was surprised to hear that bacon and pickles were super salty, and 2. he got angry with *us* for trying to adhere to his restriction.

If he really did, I wish him the best in that endeavor, and I hope we didn't turn him away from adhering to the restriction, but don't be a dick to the people trying to help you. This wasn't a malicious confrontation until he started getting angry because of the taste of the first burger.

No you cannot visit (or boycott) the place now, because both locations in my state already went bankrupt months before the pandemic in the US. Turns out the places had never made a cent in profit in the 6 years they were open, because advertising a $7 burger primarily to people who don't want to eat at other burger places is a *terrible business model*. There's other locations open, but only a couple in California and like a dozen in the Middle East. I can't speak for them.

No I did not edit and repost someone else's story for Karma, the story that reminded me of this was of someone going to a party at a house and very strictly demanding no salt in any of their food. This was a customer at a restaurant I worked for, not a guest at a dinner party.

Edit 3: Thank you kind strangers for the awards and gold! Never thought this post would be this popularA million years ago I worked for a leasing company. We leased anything from manufacturing equipment to jets, but our bread and butter was computers.

One fine day a customer calls in to find their salesman is on vacation. They don't like that, not one bit, and after being told that no, they will not be getting the number to his hotel in Aruba, they're passed on to Tommy. 

Tommy was the fucking new guy, but in a good way. A customer would ask for something and he'd spend two days reading white papers, benchmarks, and calling vendors to find the answer himself when there was a guy fully conversant in that technology two cubes away. 

Anyway, the customer wants sixteen workstations in a hurry. SGI Octane, dual-processor, with 128MB video cards, 4GB of memory, and monitors.

They don't care how much it costs, but they need them as soon as possible. 

Tommy tells them he'll call back in a hour, he needs to speak to the vendors. 

<Vendor1> will take three weeks at least, they're out of stock.
<Vendor2> will take two weeks, and cost 20% more since they'll have to upgrade existing systems.
SGI themselves quote three weeks. 

Tommy, for the first time in his life, remembers we had a former executive from SGI on staff, and calls him, begging for a contact that might make it faster.

>Exec: How about today? We have 20 of them in the warehouse. Sure, they're supposed to go to <customer>, but that won't be for another two months. We can play some games with serial numbers on the lease after the replacements come in.

Tommy thanked him and called the customer back.

>Customer: It's been almost two hours. Next time don't promise a deadline you can't meet. 

>Tommy: Yeah, I know, and I'm sorry. I had to work pretty hard to track down what you need, and well, I've got some good news and some bad news. 

>Customer: You called <Vendor1>? 

>Tommy: Yep, they can't have 'em to you for three weeks.

>Customer: You call any other vendors? 

>Tommy: <Vendor2>, they want a markup but can have it in two weeks. I also spoke with.. 

>Customer: What about the manufacturer? 

>Tommy: I called them too, they also want three weeks. But we have.. 

>Customer: How much of a markup does <Vendor2> want? 

>Tommy: 20%, but that doesn't matter because.. 

>Customer: Go ahead and order them. 

>Tommy: You haven't even heard the.. 

>Customer: If I never hear another fucking word out of your mouth it will be too soon. Just get it ordered, and I expect paperwork by 8am tomorrow. 

The customer paid an extra quarter million dollars, plus interest and fees, and the guys in Services got an extra two months to play Doom.

With the reship delays on the order, they didn't get their machines for four weeks.So this happened at least 30 years ago.... so the wording isn't exact.  Cast is Dad - my Dad, Sister - my older by 3 years sister and myself.  I would guess I was about 12 or 13....so my sister was about 15 or 16.  Names have been changed because honestly I don't remember all the names.

My friends and I were trying to plan a day/night out.  We were going to go to a movie and as this was before cell phones and 3 way calling it involved a lot of phone calls between a group of preteens.... and a lot of changing circumstances.  

I went to the living room where my Dad was sitting reading a book....

Me : Dad, Katie, Becky & I want to go see Random Movie Title tonight.  Is that ok?

Dad : Yes. (goes back to reading his book) I go call a friend and tell them.  About 10 minutes later....

Me : Katie's Mom can take us, can you pick us up?

Dad : Yes. (goes back to reading his book) I go call a friend and tell them.  About 10 minutes later....

Me : Becky's mom said she can pick us up, if you or mom can take us since Katie's mom need to take Katie's sister to her friend's house now. Is that ok?

Dad : Yes. (goes back to reading his book) I go call a friend and tell them.  About 10 minutes later....

Me : Ok, so now Jill wants to go to.  Can we pick her up too?  (My sister walks up to ask about going out with her friends)

Dad : (in a slightly frustrated but still teasing tone) Yes, but the next question someone asks me the answer is No.  I am tired of saying Yes.  

Sister - (thinks for a minute) Dad, would you mind if I go over to Susie's house? (big grin)

Dad : (starts laughing) No.

&#x200B;

Dad says the next answer is no.... Sister words her question so that the no is a yes.  ;)Months ago, I was in charge of overseeing a transfer of ownership for a bakery.  My primary duties were teaching the new staff how to use the equipment.  Reason being is because the equipment used analog dials and old school switches.  Everything goes well for the most part, the new owners were all receptive and willing to learn.   Then one day during the two week training session the newly hired pastry chef comes in and I was asked to train him.  This is where the fun begins.

Me: So let me show you how to use the oven, it is imported and can be temperamental.

Pastry Chef: I graduated from Le Cordon Bleu, I don’t need your help.  Have you had formal training in baking?

M: No, I have not and I have no doubt you're capable.  However the oven can be temperamental.  I’m just here to give you tips. 

PC: I don't need your help, I've been trained to bake on many types of ovens.  This is no different, I'll be fine.

M: Ok, I understand.  However the owners have asked for a demonstration.  They would like to see a batch of cookies and croissants.  The ingredients are over there.

New Owner: have you taught the new guy how to use the oven?

M: I tried to, he said he’s fine and doesn't need my help.

NO: Ok, lets see how he does.


A few hours go by and we come back to two batches of charcoal.

NO: what happened to the croissants and cookies?

PC: I don’t know, I followed my recipe exactly.  It must be the oven.

NO: I don’t think so, the oven has been repaired and maintained.  There nothing wrong with it.  Did you follow the pointers that he gave you?

PC: of course I did.

M: No, you didn't.  If you hadn't brushed me off so quickly I would have told you that the oven is imported and uses Celsius not Fahrenheit.  Also, the bottom burner runs a few degrees hotter than the top so you need to either use a baking sheet or double pan the pastries to avoid this (pointing to the pieces of charcoal).

I swear… the absolute arrogance…


Edit: Initialstl;dr - Admin says I have to refill her candy jar.  I did, and the office looked like they'd been eating popsicles.

I worked in a low key office with a great set of coworkers.  The managers were a mixed lot but had a great admin who was the heart of the place.  She was very outgoing and liked to joke with us.

She kept a glass jar of candy on her desk, and we helped ourselves as we chatted with her.  One day, I walked up and took the last piece of candy.  "Hey", she said in mock anger, "What are you doing, taking all my candy!  You'd better be planning on replacing it!"  I laughed. "Sure will.  But we warned you if you kept food at your desk, it would attract pests!"

That night, I had an errand and saw a candy store.  I went in, looking for something unusual.  I found it - some obscure gumballs for kids.  The gum was designed to *dye your mouth* as you chewed it!  There were warnings on the bag, but not on the individual pieces.  I bought enough to fill the jar.

After the next few weeks, it was common to go into a meeting and see a normally staid engineer with a purple tongue or a green smile.  No one seems to have made the connection with the candy jar - or if they did, they didn't want to be the one who spoiled the joke.Disclaimer: This story may qualify as Pro Revenge but I feel my hand in it was MC.

My first part-time job was in a cafe, starting when I was 16. As jobs go, it was pretty good. It was minimum wage of course but the owner was flexible with schedules, we got discounted food and my coworkers were generally lovely people. 

The only issue I had occurred when I turned 18. In  my country (UK), minimum wage is set at one level for 16-17 years but then rises by around 30% for 18+. 

We'd always been paid cash in hand weekly so I knew things were not exactly koshier but when my first pay envelope after my 18th birthday came, I was still surprised not to see my pay bump. 

Thinking it was just an oversight, I informed the owner that I hadn't received my pay increase but they waved their hand and said "Oh no, minimum wage is discretionary" in a matter of fact way. I laughed at this and they acted like I was naive and said "Trust me, it is. I can't pay you any more but you're free to try your luck elsewhere". So that's exactly what I did. My colleague who had also just turned 18 and I had both found a new place paying more than double our current wage within a few weeks.

The only issue was that I was asked to start with only  a few days notice, on a weekend I was scheduled to work. I called the owner to let them know I had found a new role and could work my other shifts but not at the weekend and they told me my notice period was two weeks, to which I responded, "Oh no, my notice period is discretionary." They didn't like that and told me not to bother coming back. 

That was the last I had heard of them until a few months later when I received a letter informing me the government was investigating them on my behalf for unpaid wages. It turns out a colleague I had enlightened about minimum wage of course not being discretionary had also left and contacted HMRC. 

A couple of weeks after, I received my cheque from the owner in the post and I found out that within a few months the cafe had to close and let their staff go because of unpaid taxes. 

All because they didn't want to pay us £4 83 per hour. (Edit: I had said £5.80, looked at the wrong figure).So I work for a maintenance and renovation company in Finland. My work consist mainly of customer service, answering the phone and talking to customers in person in the rare case that they show up to our office. Maybe 70&#37; of all the calls we get come from the same few people, who are impossible to please and usually very rude.

The woman in this story was one of the worst people I have ever had the pleasure to deal with, she wasn't reasonable in any way whatsoever and usually just resorted to shouting at me or my coworkers. What made the matter worse is that she was the chairman of the board of her condominium, which is in no way impressive, since usually no one wants to do the job (it doesn't pay anything and the board consists just of the more active residents). For some unknown reason it still boosts the ego of some people so much that they think everyone is beneath them :D (go figure).

This brings us to the MC itself. The apartment building she lives in has a big garage, and it says in our contract that we must wash it once every year (its a big job that lasts for about 10 hours if 2 people are on it), still our company has washed it twice every year because the garages near this one need to be washed twice a year, and no one ever remembers that this garage is only once a year. About a month had passed since the last wash and then this phone call happened:

>**Me**: Hey \*company\* customer service, this is u/JJnnYY how may I help?  
>  
>**Colossal Bitch**: What the HELL is going on here??!?!  
>  
>**Me**: Im not exactly sure what you are talking about m'am?  
>  
>**CB**: THE FUCKING GARAGE YOU IDIOT, ITS DIRTY AND MAKING MY CAR DIRTY  
>  
>**ME:** The contract says that we need to wash the garage once a year and...  
>  
>**CB:** I DON'T FUCKING CARE ABOUT YOUR BULLSHIT EXCUSES IT NEEDS TO BE WASHED TWICE A MONTH IF YOU IDIOTS CAN MANAGE IT (*this is absolutely Idiotic*)  
>  
>**Me**: But m'am its gonna cost a...  
>  
>**CB:** I dont fucking care JUST GET IT DONE \*hangs up\*

Since she had the authority to make this kind of call I decided to take her request seriously. I know that it was absolutely ridiculous and would 100&#37; bite her in the ass at some point. I talked to my boss and he gave me the green light, I confirmed her request via email, because I wanted to cover my ass and have the order in writing. Now, washing a garage this size costs usually about a 1000-1500€ when embedded in to a bigger contract. But since this was extra work it cost a lot more. So every month we billed them for about 5000€ more than usual.

I still don't know how, but it took them 3 months to notice that their costs had dramatically increased. Obviously many of the other residents of the building had asked us why are we washing the garage twice a month now (its a big inconvenience, since they need to move their cars). We just answered that it's a new policy of the chairman of the board.  When the board finally noticed, they contacted our CEO and me. We explained the situation and. CB tried to cause a big fuss calling us liars and such. I wish I could've seen her face when I sent her and the whole board a copy of the email in which she had with quite *colorful* wording demanded us to wash the garage twice a month writing: *"I don't care about the costs try to fucking understand".*

She was replaced in the board and no longer has any say about the buildings affairs. Most of the other people in the apartment building know she's a colossal cunt. Me and my coworkers absolutely love it :D we have a statement ready for every time she calls about something other than her own apartment:

>*Sorry m'am we have been informed that you no longer have any say in regarding the business of the apartment building, if however you have a problem regarding your own apartment feel free to contact us again!*

This drives her absolutely insane. I'm pretty sure she's gonna murder one of us :D *But its so worth it.*

TL;DR  Lady wanted me to have a big ass garage washed twice every month. I did as she wanted even though i knew it                         was idiotic and expensive. She got sacked because of it and we got our oh-so-sweet revenge.

EDIT:

I might have used a wrong word for the garage. Not sure what the correct word would be in this case but its basically a big parking garage with over 150 parking spots in it.

Also, during a year big garages like this one tend to collect a lot of road dust and gravel. This dust then rises in the air when cars drive around the garage, getting the other cars dirty and causing problems with the ventilation systems. Thats why they need to be washed at least once a year.

Also wanted to clear something up about the condominium stuff. ~~No, its not like a HOA from what I've read.~~ Basically in Finland every one of these big apartment complexes is their own "company" called "asunto-osake yhtiö". The companies shareholders are the people who own aparments in the complex. They pay a certain fee, a "maintenance charge". Which is used by the board for renevations and maintenace. The laws around these "companies" are a lot looser,  and their goal is not to profit, but better the quality of the complex and the aparments in it. The board in these "companies" doesnt work normally :D

Edit 2: Grammar

Edit 3: Okay so apparently the HOA in the states is a broader term, and exactly the same thing as the Finnish As Oy (Asunto-osake yhtiö). TIL :D. Also unfortunately the woman in this story did not have to pay for the extra costs. Its a really big apartment complex, so the extra amount wasn't that big of a deal and they didn't have the energy to start fighting with her, so they took the high road and just fired her from the position.This happened a few years ago. I was the junior person in an office of mainly people older than me. As such, I was the geeky type person and the go-to guy for people to get advice on technical stuff. One day I found a great deal on laptops in Costco. They were selling some really nice Sony Vaios for a really cheap price. I bought one and would have bought more to sell on but I didn’t really have the cash. My irksome team leader overheard me telling this at lunchtime in the office and then immediately went to Costco and bought about 5 laptops and immediately put them up for sale on places like craigslist, Ebay and gumtree (a UK second hand selling site), all the while crowing that today’s youth liked to waste their money whilst the canny older generations saved their money for lucrative investments. 


He sold one immediately for almost double the price he paid in Costco. This emboldened him to put the rest at 2.5 times the price he paid for in Costco. For about a week there was no update and then one day there was a cornucopia of excitement from where he sat. He had arranged to sell them all to someone in Amsterdam for the inflated asking price. He talked about what an absolute wheeler dealer he was and kept on telling people what profit he was making and what he was going to do with it.


I told him that it was quite sketchy to ship goods privately abroad and it would be difficult to get any recourse if things went south even if it went to places in Western Europe. Of course, this was me “being jealous” of such a big shot and that I knew nothing and I should keep my mouth shut as I had no idea what I was talking about. I tried to warn him again but then I was called into the Assclown manager’s office about “prying” into other people’s financial affairs and that I was not to talk about anything that wasn’t work related with this guy, as he had obviously complained about me. I received a verbal warning and warned that if I did it again then I would receive a written warning despite my protestations that I was merely reacting to what this guy was saying and I was trying to help him.


Of course the buyer at the last minute changed the shipping details to Lagos, Nigeria and the irksome team leader started to show everyone the paypal email confirmation that he had received of the money. I should have told him to log into paypal to check that the money had arrived and it wasn’t just a fake email. But I would have received a written warning. So I didn’t. He packs up the laptops and sends them airfreight to Lagos. 


Next day the teamleader wasn’t quite so full of bombast as he had been previously. It took a few other people to pry the story about how he had been completely ripped off and had received nothing via paypal. I was exerting a herculean effort to keep the tiniest of smirks from appearing on my face but my efforts were in vain. “YOU FUCKING KNEW WHY DIDN’T YOU TELL ME!” he screamed into my face. 


But I carried on with my work and didn’t say a word. 



Edit: Quite a few questions in the comments so let me clear up a few. 

* Yes, it was a very toxic machismo workplace with lots of shouting around sales guys trying to outdo each other. 
* Assclown manager and Irksome Teamleader were very good personal friends. 
* Assclown manager was the local HR in effect. Everything had to go by him and the physical HR department was a tiny place very far away with only a few staff. 
* I had already made up my mind to leave well before this and was looking for new jobs. I didn't want to get fired even for spurious reasons without another job. 
* I didn't retort to Irksome at the end as no matter what I would have said he would have gotten Assclown to write me up. It was a small office and no one would have stood up for me as a witness as Irksome was the alpha male and most senior in the open plan area. 
* No, this isn't bullshit.  
Not sure what my wife was reading but it reminded her of an incident that she told me to share.

I was a Captain at the time and had been assigned as chief of security for an Army hospital. So, as the lingo goes when the calls came down I was Dr. Strong. I was in my office though when a LTC/Lieutenant Colonel came in.

"Hey there Captain, need you to take care of an issue for me."

"Oh course sir. If it is within my area and power I'll see what I can do."

"Well the general's driver's wife is in the maternity ward having just had her baby and she has a problematic room mate. Always closing the curtain and blocking her line of sight to the window. Also messing with the tv. I need this woman moved to another room."

"Uummm, that's definitely outside my area of control sir. I don't oversee or control anything with patients unless it is an issue of security, safety or"

"Yes yes I know but you know everyone and the doctors and nurses will listen to you more than me. You are one of them now and they rely on you."

"Sir really"

"I know I know no promises. This would really make the general happy though. His driver is like a second son to him so I would really owe you. It's room number XYA. Just give it your best for a fellow Infantryman okay?"

(breath deep, wait a minute) "What room number again sir?" He smiled.

"XYA."

"Roger sir. I'll look into it and do my best. I've got a couple favors I might be able to use."

"OUTSTANDING! Thanks." and he left.

So on up I went to maternity to find the head nurse. She was not pleased as apparently the LTC had been up there earlier trying to sling his weight around and came to find me when it had no effect. I pointed out the room though and she smiled. We both chuckled a little bit and I asked "So, can you help me out with making this all be good? Please."

Giving me a big friendly smile "Well, the corner room is open. We could move the bothersome lady in there though she will likely have a new room mate later today. Then again once the bed is clean and reset we will likely be putting another lady in with the driver's wife too. Matter of fact" she paused looking over files. "It will probably be Mrs. Hispanic lady having her fourth kid. She was likely to be going in the corner room but with the move, she would have to go in with the driver's wife."

Me- "Well if that's how it has to be. As long as we can accommodate the LTC's request."

Head nurse "Okay but you are helping move the lady out of the room."

Me- "Yes ma'am, of course."

The lady who had been causing SUCH disturbances for the driver's wife was quite calm and gave no issues with the move nor even asked any questions. I called the LTC once it was done and made sure to tell him I had no concrete knowledge if or when a new room mate might be moved into the room but that the staff was really not happy with the move and extra work. He thanked me and I never heard anything of it again.

The entertaining part of the whole thing? The bothersome lady who got the room with the better view, the woman who had kept closing the curtain for some privacy and turning down the loud crap the driver's wife kept putting on the tv, was my wife who had just had our first kid.

&#x200B;

edit: Okay wow.  I did not expect this to blow up like this.  Work nights and went to bed only to return and find it had exploded.  Thank you all so much.  I'm glad so many of you enjoyed and I will try to respond as much as I can but there are over 200 comments so if I miss yours I'm sorry.

&#x200B;

2nd edit, from my wife:  I have been instructed to stop trying to apologize and explain things to the folks calling out the term "Hispanic" as racist.  My wife is from "Little Havana" in Florida.  She said "If the \*deleted\* think it is racist then they probably have some bigoted and racist issues of their own to deal with and need to go to confession and deal with their shit."  So, from now on all such posts will receive a "go see edit 2" response if I run across them.  I might also let you know this is here just to give you the additional information if you don't fit the afore mentioned category.   
 Anyone else is also free to give such posts the same response/reply.  That being said, and this may get me in trouble, what was meant was that she had a large and supportive family who were all present and would bring hell down on little miss princess especially with all the bored kids running around.&#x200B;

A  little over a decade ago I worked for the local hardware outfit as the  storeman/stores manager. I took the job because it was local, paid ok  and was supposed to be relatively stress free.

Unfortunately  the reality of it was that the assistant manager, Collin, was a  dickhead with an inferiority complex who had it in for me because I was  more qualified than he was (although I had absolutely no interest in  climbing the corporate ladder or taking his job), the job itself was  over tasked and understaffed and things were only getting busier as  there was a building boom happening in the area at the time.

As  a result I quickly ended up being run off my feet every day trying to  keep up with the constant influx of goods and outgoing orders. To make  matters worse the overall manager, John, decided to reassign my two  offsiders as delivery staff leaving me on my own. When I protested I was  told to "solve my own problems".

I  somehow kept up with the workload, just, but knowing this was not going  to work in the long run I continued in my attempts to get more staff in  my area. Even just one offsider would have made a huge difference. I  tried reasoning with John saying "what if I get sick or injured, How  will you get the orders done then?" His solution was that he would have  some of the casual staff from the front retail area fill in if that  happened. I laughed in his face and suggested that they could not find  their own arses using both hands. Probably not the best way to handle  things. Once again I was told to "solve my own problems".

Ok  then, fine I will do just that. The situation continued becoming more  difficult each week. The incoming goods were increasing in volume to  keep up with demand (think two semi trailers per day) and as outgoing  orders were to take priority the incoming goods began piling up. Collin  decided to rear his ugly head and make a fuss about stock not being  checked in and stored on time and in one of our more robust discussions I  seriously considered rearranging his face and told him so. He decided  to go on an early lunch (run away) and hid from me in his office for the  rest of the week. That was the day I realized I need to get out of this  place.

As for solving my  problems, well obviously I was looking for a new job. I answered an Ad  for Correctional officers and attended a meeting for applicants, then  sat the psych tests, interviews and was finally accepted for the  training to begin in one month. Perfect timing.

The  next Monday I walked into Johns office and gave two weeks notice. John  was absolutely appalled that I would consider leaving such a "good job".  He tried offering me a raise of $1000 per year, I laughed and said my  starting pay was already $15000 more than I was getting here and walked  out.

Now you would think a smart  manager would immediately take steps to cover my position and begin  training a replacement. Nope. Nothing happened for the next week and a  half until on my last Thursday John finally showed up with a  replacement, some entirely forgettable teenager who plainly had no  chance of keeping up. I trained him as best I could and the next day  said my goodbyes.

Two months later  I walked in as a customer, flush with my new job money. The place was  an utter mess! There was shit everywhere, unprocessed goods still in  sealed boxes, pallets of sheeting just dumped in the truck yard and no  one could find anything. The original guy I trained was no where to be  seen and four new young guys with haunted looking faces were madly  scrambling about trying to sort their shit out. No one knew where  anything was, where anything goes or even how to do a basic invoice  check. Total disaster which brought a warm glow to my evil black "told  you so" heart.

Upon seeing me John  quickly pulled me aside and asked if I can help out and show the new  guys what to do. I took great pleasure in reminding him that I had  repeatedly warned him this could happen and than not only did I no  longer work here but that he will have to, and I quote, "solve your own  problems".I was working security inside a club last night and I see a guy stumbling around. I go up to him and tell him I want to see him drink some water before I see him drinking any more alcohol.

About 5 mins later he walks up to me and shows me a glass of water, takes one sip, puts the glass down and proceeds to start drinking a pint he must have bought when he went to the bar to get the water.

I couldn't help but chuckle.This just happened today. A little back story, I work at a... Ahem, particularly _green_ craft and fabric store. Every Thursday, we receive a truck. Truck day consists of unloading and organizing everything on the truck by hand, pushed down to us on a large roller ramp. The team I work with is wonderful, but the head manager of the store I’m at is a piece of work. During truck days she tends to just stand there and watch us all unload while yelling about how we’re doing it all wrong (we are in fact following all the company procedures, so... Not wrong.)

Another thing to note is that corporate controls our air conditioning. I live in Maine, so it's always between 70-100% humidity all the time which makes it feel a lot worse than it is. Corporate still hasn't kicked on our air yet, despite it almost July.

 Our back room was almost 100ºf (~97º but the thermometer is a bit hard to read), 100% humidity. I was unloading the truck with three other people, and my boss was standing there yelling as usual. I started to feel symptoms of heat exhaustion and asked my boss if I could quickly get a drink of water. She told me I couldn't until the truck was completely unloaded, which was another half hour or so. She said something to me thirty seconds later, and I perfectly-timed projectile vomited all over her. She started yelling at me and the rest of the team because we weren't helping her get cleaned up, to which they all responded along the lines of "well, you told her she couldn't go!"

You won't let me go get water even though I'm having heat exhaustion?  That's cool, I'll just puke on you, instead! (:


Edit: Since everyone keeps commenting on how I should report her in one way or another, I'm already on it!


Edit 2: I’m tryin to keep up with replies and questions, but if I miss your comment, terribly sorry!!My buddy from work got laid off for three weeks yesterday. He tried to tell HR and leadership it was a really bad idea because he was also in charge of a high-volume 3PL (third-party logistics) facility. Well, they did it anyway and gave him the choice of filing for unemployment or using vacation time. He decided to use vacation time.

Fast forward to today. Customer Service calls our offices saying that nothing is shipping from the aforementioned 3PL and it’s going to shut down at least 8 different customers. My boss informs them that the person handling the 3PL is laid off, and, sorry we don’t have access to that facility in our ERP to help them (for checks and balances reasons). Vice Prez hears about it. Then my boss’s boss. Then HR.

My boss’s boss comes in my office today to ask me to take over the 3PL for a few weeks, and I lay out why I can’t realistically do it on top of my normal job. I ask him why we can’t just bring back the guy who did it in the first place, because this sounded really important.

His shoulders slump, and with a dead-pan expression he tells me...

He won’t do it. He’s on vacation.

TL;DR Don’t lay off critical employees just to save labor.

Edit: Removed some specifics.TL/DR at the bottom.

Once upon a time, there was an evil witch...

This all happened my senior year of college, spanning about 6 months.

I lived in a duplex where the main floor and second floor were occupied by myself and friends. Often times, we’d throw parties in our incredibly large attic. One of these times, we got a noise complaint. Everyone was very respectful when the cop asked us to shut things down, and left no problem. All residents were 21/22, and we were the only ones asked to ID ourselves. Had a fine conversation with the officer, and he went on his way. Probably one of the easier incidents in a college town.

While we lived off campus, any incident like this does get reported to the school. All 6 of us received a letter stating we had to go to a class about drugs and alcohol because we “threw a party where drugs and alcohol were supplied to minors”. We could of course appeal this, and we did. The school only needs 51% certainty that the event occurred how they thought it did. Seeing as everyone ID’d was 21 and there had been no drugs, we thought we had a strong case.

This meant all 6 of us had to meet with the ass. Dean individually to go through the events of the evening so she could ascertain what really happened. First 4 went fine, my female roommate was 5th, and I went last. 

She came home in tears. The ass. Dean apparently tried to rip her to pieces, said she had awful friends, why not just admit we had drugs and given alcohol to minors. 
She stuck to her guns but it sounded awful.

I can handle that stuff, but I HATE seeing people I care about go through situations like that. I went in prepared to my meeting, already hating this woman. I even had my phone recording the conversation in my shirt pocket. (Single party consent state in terms of audio recording) the conversation ended with her saying “why can’t you just follow the rules and act like a grown up”.

A few weeks later, we all received another letter. They had dropped the drugs alcohol bit due to lack of evidence, but had decided we had “created an unsafe environment with only one exit”. There were a few lines in the letter where “student X said in the event of a fire, guests would’ve been asked to jump out of the rear window” and other completely fabricated statements. Sure, there was only one flight of stairs up to the attic. But unbeknownst to the assistant dean, we had one of those fire escape ladder window things. 

We appealed yet again. But the second time around, you meet with a board of peers (teachers, students, assistant dean, and the police officer that had responded to the complaint) 

Being a law nerd, I volunteered to go on behalf of my friends. That being said, we were allowed one person as council that couldn’t say anything to the board, but could write things down to pass on to me.

Cue MC and “following the rules” just like the ass. Dean had asked.  

I showed up early, as did the officer. He was totally chill, and was getting paid OT to show up to a meeting to do nothing instead of the usual route.

Everyone shows up, and the ass. Dean immediately questions why I have someone with me. “Well per school code 14 subsection B etc. I am allowed to. This is my friend X, who has a law degree. Just following the rules.” We get into semantics and how dangerous our party could’ve been blah blah. I get to speak last, without any interruptions, until I yield. 

Time to drop bombs.

I pull out printed sheets for everyone in the room of my Amazon account showing I had purchased the fire escape ladder thing months before the party had happened, proving we had indeed had multiple exits. 

I then passed out copies of the letter we had received written by the ass. Dean, and had highlighted all of the fabrications and lies about the previous conversation I’d had with her. 

“I recorded our entire meeting. I’d like to take time for you all to hear that.”

At this point she’s FUMING and blurts out that what I did is illegal. The cop butts in and just gives that a big ol’ NOPE. Single party consent for audio recording.

We all listen to the full 15-20 minutes. 

“So as you can see, all rules were followed by myself and my peers, and nothing unlawful happened. Not one of the highlighted sections was actually said. The only thing that worries me is how the ass. Dean openly lied as well as brought my roommate to tears. I’d ask that all charges be dropped at this time against us” 

She then tried to backtrack saying she had made “grammatical errors in the letter”, but everyone was smart enough to see the difference between the wrong form of Your and telling people to jump out of a window. 

A few weeks later we all received another letter stating that we were good, and no further action would be taken. 

I then went out of my way almost daily to walk through the admin offices where the ass. Dean’s office was to give her a wave and a smile. 

TL/DR: Threw a party, got in trouble. Appealed the ruling, ass. Dean made my friend cry and I took it personally. Followed all rules and made her look like an absolute fool during the hearing.This happened to me when I was a field tech for a commercial restaurant repair company.  The company charged $110 hr. port to port. meaning from the time I left the shop till I returned. Being from the Southwest I resemble much of the BOH staff and working on ovens, I was usually dirty as well. On this particular day, the Chef had called in a service call for a convection oven that wasn't working and I had just finished ordering the parts when some top brass from the front office came in the kitchen to harass the BOH staff I suppose. One dude in a pair of khakis and a button-up asked me why the ovens were as dirty as they were, and I said, got no idea." Well, you need to get them cleaned up!" Now usually I would have told him to kiss my ass and walk out but this particular day I decided to help him out, so I stayed a couple of hours and cleaned up his oven... At $110 dollars an hour. Of course, he disputed the invoice and threatened not to pay, but I had parts on order for another piece of equipment and if you don't pay, I don't come back and put your shit back together, so yeah, he paid.Some background: 
In high school, I went to an academic magnet school. Essentially it was a public school ran like a private school. You had to have certain test scores to get, no bus transportation (since it was for the whole county), way stricter dress code than all the other schools on the district, and they were able to have a ton of extra rules because it was a "choice school."

Now I was the first graduating class; I was there the first year it opened. At that time it was 5th-9th grade, and I startoed as a freshman. The second year they had completed the elementary wing, and so it was K-10. They added grades until my senior year when it was finally K-12.

As the school grew, it continued to add more policies. My sophomore year (the school's second year of being open), they began a new policy where ALL students 7th grade and above had to be on a sports team everywhere.

I thought this was really, really stupid. I hated it. I'm not an athlete; I was in other clubs, and I was getting increasingly involved with my church. Being the mature 16 year old I was, my initial plan was to join a team and have a bad attitude. Like an awful, evangelistically bad attitude so that no one would have any fun, and this would prove to the school how awful this rule was.

Instead, for all the lazy kids like me, they started a school walking team. It wasn't power walking - just regular walking. We just had to walk around the neighborhood for about 45 minutes 3x a week after school.

I was fine with this; I didn't mind walking around. Of course there was an adult 'coach', but since the whole thing was ridiculous anyways, my friend and I declared ourselves co-captains. This mostly consisted in telling the middle schoolers to walk faster. No one else considered us co-captains, but we did, and that's all that mattered to us since it was all a joke anyways.

I did that my sophomore and junior years, but fast forward to my senior year. I was 18, working part time about 15-20 hours a week, I was super involved in my church, and my family was a chaotic mess of dysfunction that traumatized me in numerous ways. 

They finally enforced the state law that everyone on a sports team has to have an annual physical on file. I didn't really bother with this since it wasn't a real sport anyways. Eventually, they came to me and said that it was so late in the season that even if I got a physical, I would need to pick a different sport in the winter or spring (walking team was a fall sport). 

I was essentially just "screw this"; I had enough other things in my life to deal with, and I didn't want to put up with this crap anymore. I decided to do exactly what they say and get the physical; i also decided I would do my best to fail it.

So eventually I went and saw a doctor. It's important to note that I didn't have a primary care doctor at the time; that's why I didn't get a physical before then. So I just went to some little walk-in clinic, and I tell them I need a sports physical. I didn't tell them what the sport was.

Now as I was filling out the patient history form, I answered truthfully; I did not lie, but I didn't provide any context. So I checked yes to a history of asthma (mostly from when I was a kid), severe seasonal allergies, AND a history of seizures.

See when I was 13 I had a couple dozen seizures in a day or two; no one knew what was going on, and eventually I was diagnosed with epilepsy specifically having 'absence seizures.' Since then, I 
had been taking anti-convulsants every day. As far as I am aware - even 20 years after that initial episode, I'm not sure I've had a full blown seizure since then. It's literally the mildest case of epilepsy I've ever heard of.

The doctor does a quick physical exam - mostly vitals and similar things. As she looks at my patient history form, she asks about the seizures, I explain that I was diagnosed with epilepsy, I take anti-convulsants, and I have a neurologist I see about once or twice a year. She says "well i can't pass you until I hear from your neurologist." 

I basically hopped out of the chair, happily said "thank you" and walked out. I never did contact the neurologist; instead, i just gave the paperwork to the school.

And that's how I (a relatively healthy 18 year old) got medically disqualified from the school walking team.

[Edit: Fixed some typos]Some States in the US are making people vote in person during the Pandemic. Some States also allow you to vote by mail for religious holidays. So someone started a religion that believes all US voting days are religious holidays, legally allowing all members to vote by mail or get off work to vote. 

Website:

https://www.universalsuffragechurch.org/

Subreddit: 

https://www.reddit.com/r/ChurchOfSuffrageSo, I’m in a college communications class of 50 people, not including our teacher. For our midterm, we were to “become the US senate”. The class would vote on several classroom measures, with the goal being to “communicate professionally whilst demonstrating competent debate strategies.” My teacher often sticks to his word, and we really did make a cool little senate- complete with dress codes, a candy desk, a gavel, and a flag. This is important to note because the teacher wanted our senate to be *as accurate as possible*. 

We were debating several measures, all created by us, the students:

1. Hats should only be allowed in the classroom if they are cowboy hats (passed, 39-11)

2. We should be able to wear pajamas to class (passed, 48-2)

And finally:

3. Fidget/stim toys should not be allowed in the classroom (you’ll find out how that went)

I use fidget toys because I have ADHD, they’re all pretty silent and the person who wrote this “bill” has it out for me because I get accommodations like extra time and earphones that no one else does. Since we are allowed to talk as long as we desire about any measure, I get comfortable in my seat (since we are all remote) and begin to talk.

5 minutes pass. Then 10. Then 20, and my professor interrupts. 

“Theverylastbraincell, you’ve talked too long. Give someone else a turn.”

I look him dead in the eye. 

“No.”

The *look* on his *face*. I politely explained that, since this was a senate, I was allowed to filibuster- as in, delay a vote simply by talking us out of time. The other classmates looked at him. He turned red and spluttered, but allowed me to proceed. Grades are based on individual performance, so I knew I wasn’t harming anyone but myself- everyone else had already spoken enough. So, my ADHD ass, the one *always scolded for talking too much* successfully filibustered the remaining hour and 36 minutes of our midterm. As for the fallout, my classmate’s bill died on delivery and I got a B+ 😎

Edit: wow, this blew up. Thank you so much for all the awards!! Here’s to answer a few questions:

1. There were only three bills, we had decided on them two weeks ago so we could debate them.

2. The professor blocked out 4 hours of the midterm, which is why I was able to filibuster for the remaining 90+ minutes. Everyone else had already spoken a lot because they cared about the other bills but not many people were gonna contest the one that would affect me. 

3. I will not be contesting the grade as I’m happy with it, and the satisfaction of the look on my teacher’s face was worth it to me. 

4. I filibustered on about what my ADHD accommodations are, why I need them, the fidgets I use, my favorite books, and what majors I’m thinking about.

5. I use headphones in a remote setting because my dog barks a lot. When we take tests, our cameras are on, but we’re muted, so no one else can hear the dog but me. I got my headphones approved by showing the box they came in and I have to show the teacher I’m not wearing any earbuds when I put them on. They’re not headphones in the sense that you can listen to anything with them- they’re headphones as in the ear protection like you would use in a construction site.Fresh out of college, I lived with two roommates in a townhouse. For the most part, I was the "designated" roommate to call or email our landlord every time there was an issue... And there were a *lot* of issues.

One day, something broke in the whiny roommate's bathroom that was totally irrelevant to me and the other roommate. I offered to call the landlord about it, but Whiny Roommate insists she wants to deal with it because she wants to tell off our landlord.

Day after day, Whiny Roommate complains about the issue.

Day after day, Whiny Roommate tells us how she's going to rip a strip off the landlord about this.

Day after day, Whiny Roommate does not contact the landlord about it.

Day after day, other roommate and I maliciously comply with her refusal of help.

Weeks go by with Whiny Roommate is getting madder and madder, but will not contact the landlord about the issue. Something else breaks in the house and I call the landlord about that specific thing and only that one thing. Landlord comes, fixes the specific thing, leaves. Whiny Roommate **FREAKED OUT**, full-on screaming tantrum lost her mind on me, locked herself in her room, and did not talk to us for days.

After that, we never again heard about Whiny Roommate's issue, which she never did contact the landlord about.

\_\_\_\_\_  
tl;dr: MC by complying with prissy roommate's request to be ignored, causing her to freak out and have a meltown.  


\-------------------------  
*EDIT: Thank you for all the upvotes and awards, everyone. I feel like the Meryl Streep of* r/maliciouscompliance*. You are lovely human beings.* This story happened on Monday and I heard this part from my mother. A famous food truck in our city that is a part of a chain restaurant set up shop next to a pharmacy store to sell food for the day. There is a fast food restaurant across from the pharmacy that was not happy with the arrangement, so they called OSHA. OSHA could not allow them to sell the food, so the truck had to stop all sales.

However, the truck couldn't take all the food back to the restaurant, so they had a dilemma. It just so happened that day some university students were at the pharmacy giving out shirts and checking people's blood pressure and blood glucose for free. The food truck had the idea to give all it's food away for free to anyone until all their stock was gone because giving away food is not selling it. Word spread around and most people came to the food truck and the restaurants parking lot was pretty empty. 

I got three plates for my sister and me to share.

Tell me if it doesn't belong here and I'll remove it.

Edit: I'm sorry for the misinformation. It probably wasn't OSHA, I forgot which one my mom said and OSHA was the first that popped into my mind.Ive been lurking and loving this sub for quite a while now and it reminded me of an innocent bit malicious compliance i did when i was a kid. 

This happened when i was about 7-10 years old i think, i dont remember that well. My parents were always fairly strict, in a way good parents are. My dad used to be an athlete and my mom is really into cooking so health and healty eating has always been heavily emphasized in our home. This included eating a lot of veggies, me (being a 8 y/o brat) of course didnt like vegetables as i was a pretty picky eater. I would always struggle to finish my plate of vegetables after i always immediatly had eaten all the meat. 

So my parents implemented the rule, "you have to eat whats on your plate, if you dont, we will put even more veggies on your plate." The threat of having to eat even more veggies always worked wonders.

There was however always one exception to all the healthy eating, once a year we would go to mcDonalds on the way back from vacation. Me and my sister always reaallly looked forward to it, my dad thought it was horrible. This is where the MC comes in. 

When we were on our yearly mcDonalds visit, i just suddenly stopped eating my fries. My parents looked kinda suprised because normally i'd eat them as if my life depended on them. "Why arent you eating your fries" me: "fries are vegetables right?" Dad:"well technically yes"  me: "well the rule says if i dont eat my vegetables i get more" my parents then start laughing and my dad went on to get more fries while shaking his head.My husband is middle management in a factory. His company keeps getting new upper management every few months, each one more of an idiot than the last. My husband had been doing at least one day of overtime, sometimes two, each week because the machines go down a lot, and he's a pro at fixing them. Apparently, what's basically the equivalent of throwing some duct tape on it is less expensive than actually sending a machine out to get fixed, but that's another story. Anyway, new boss has been there a month, decides that overtime is no longer allowed, to "save money". Husband is pissed, because that overtime had slowly, but surely, been getting us out of debt. Well, last week, they call him on his day off, a main machine has gone down fairly early into the shift.

"Sorry, can't come in, I'm not allowed overtime anymore." Machine stays down all night. These machines produce a butt ton of product per hour. They lost more money by not running the machine than they would have spent paying my husband to come in.

This Monday, overtime is now approved again.This is a story from a year ayo involving my neighbors, thought it was worth a share. My neighbors were selling their house and had been screwed left-and-right by the buyers.

For background, neighbor learned he was being relocated to another city. Partner and him started working out the details, and their house went on the market and was quickly closed with a deal pending. If you've never bought a house before, closing can take between 45 and 60 days with things like inspections, necessary repairs, etc. So they started down that process.

Their buyers came off sweet but quickly turned sour. The people they hired to inspect my neighbors' house were family members, and they came away with a huge sheet of things to be repaired or to knock down the price. Many of those repairs they demanded be fixed at my neighbors' expense by a different contractor (despite the fact that my neighbor IS a contractor himself).

Then, they started sending people to house unannounced (TOTALLY illegal) and showing up to the property on their own (trespassing). The nail in the coffin was that my neighbors had been strung along for a full 10 days longer than they should've been because the buyers kept threatening to back out of the sale, despite having already signed paperwork without their knowledge. All very muddy.

As part of the contract, the buyers said that needed to take "all personal property and all debris", claiming a financial penalty for cleanup if there was anything on the property that the buyers thought counted. So my neighbors had spent a lot of time cleaning out yard debris, multiple dump runs, etc. But as the purchase was almost finalized and all this shitty stuff was happening, they had an idea. While one is a contractor, the other works in legal and has for 10 years. She took to the contract and local home purchase regulations for the definition of "personal property". Turns out that besides the obvious, light bulbs also count.

They went through and removed every light bulb they could find, except ones that were installed as part of fixtures. The sellers had to purchase nearly $200 worth of lightbulbs as part of their move-in, which they did not discover until they showed up with moving trucks.This happened a few years ago when working for a well known UK retailer (not just any retailer, if you know what I mean?!). 

I was working on the store operations team at the time, meaning I was responsible for opening or closing the store, dealing with contractors, taking deliveries, supporting the shop floor staff by picking orders to fill the shelves etc. When on the early shift, 3 or 4 of us would open the store at 5am. We'd do our safety checks and start taking the clothing and food deliveries. We'd also segregate the deliveries (put all produce together, all desserts together etc) ready for the shop floor staff starting at 7 so they could fill the shelves easier. We'd then be sending stock up to the shop floor, one or two of us would be on the shop floor clearing empty trays, tidying up packaging, bringing up and sending down stock etc, with another one or 2 downstairs sorting the stock that came back, putting it in the cold room, sorting the dates etc. Busy mornings. 

We were told we couldn't go for a break whilst this was going on as it was all hands on deck, and we also couldn't all go for our breaks together afterwards as someone had to be available for anything that came up. Fine, but it would sometimes be maybe half 10 or 11 by the time we got for our break, 5 - 6 hours after starting the shift. Add into this that we'd been working in a cold room (a walk in fridge) it really would have been nice to have a sit down with a hot drink. Company policy was to give a break at least every 4 hours, which obviously we weren't getting. However we didn't mind this too much, we understood that we needed to be more flexible. But some mornings, if a delivery was running late, or if we got the first one (clothing) done early, say by 5.45 and the next one (food) wasn't due til 6, we'd pop to the canteen for a quick coffee, or chill out on the loading bay chatting and waiting for the next delivery.

One morning, we all got called up to the manager's office. Someone had complained that we were taking unauthorised breaks. I explained (I was on a staff panel at the time, kind of like an internal union) about how we were being flexible when not getting a break for 5/6 hours when everyone else in the shop got one every 3/4 hours, but it fell on deaf ears - we were given a written warning and told that we must not take unauthorised breaks, and if we did have some downtime, we had to fill it by starting to stock shelves ourselves. 

So we decided to make sure none of us went over the 4 hour threshold for breaks. That meant us taking our breaks from around 8am - right in the middle of when we were needed most. Staff complained that they couldn't get their stock quick enough, or that the shop floor was a mess - that we shouldn't be taking breaks so early. But was starting at 5am and taking a break at 8 and different from them starting at 7 and getting their break at 10?

Suffice to say, after a few days of this we went back to normal, and no one complained about us grabbing a quick coffee again.

Edit: spellingWhen I was in 8th grade, my dad got my midterm report that said I had an F in math class. Dad told me I was grounded until the end of the month.

"So, no phone, no tv, no computer?"

"Thats right."

"Until the end of the month?"

"Exactly."

"Okay."

The next day my dad found me on the computer playing games.

"What the hell are you doing? Didnt I say you were grounded?"

I smiled, and nodded. "Yeah. Until the end of the month. End of the month was yesterday. Todays the 1st."

Dad called me a smart ass, and threatened to ground me longer. In the end, I spent a week reading books and listening to music, and my punishment was forgotten about.

Edit: Thank you for the awards kind strangers!

Edit 2: This happened in the early 2000s, Im no longer in the 8th grade, my comprehension of algebra might be, but I, myself, am not.

Edit 3: I actually did try in my class, I did every assignment, and asked for help. Didnt make a difference. I ended up being put into a lower level math class.I oversee a team of a dozen folks when its fully staffed. We had a fellow move out of state for school, a lady retire to care for her grandkids when her daughter got sick, then 3 people promote up within the organization all within 4 weeks time, so almost 1/2 the team suddenly became unavailable. While I'm involved in the recruiting/on-boarding process, management up to 3 levels above me tends to be a bottle neck. Each time someone let me know they were moving on, I informed management, and gave them a running total; " We're at 84% staffing", "We're at 66% staffing...." etc. Ads were placed, 1st round interviews conducted (by me and a team lead), 2nd interviews recommended to the next level of management, and that's where the process suddenly stopped.  For a week, then 2, then 3. It commonly takes 2-3 weeks after hire to bring a new person up to speed to start being productive, and perhaps 8 weeks for a new person to reach 90-95% of median productivity goals.

The existing team was ready to 'pull together' and 'work harder!' to keep up with the work, but I took each one aside and coached them that the heavy workload they were under was NOT their problem to solve; YES, customers were complaining, YES, other groups in the organization were getting frustrated that our team wasn't getting things done in a timely fashion. I encouraged them to work efficiently, and well, but to NOT put in extra unpaid time or contribute their own resources to projects. And, if anyone was insistent in their complaints regarding the teams productivity, send them to me and I would explain the situation.

Middle and upper manglement across the organization started vocalizing about how little work was getting done. When I played the Uno Reverse card that "Hey, all we need is adequate, well trained staff and we'll be able to keep up, and Managers 1, 2, & probably Exec 1 ALL have potential interviewees on their desk for almost a month, now...", I started getting the Stink-Eye from those folks.

I found out later that one or a couple of those folks that I report to (and were also the next rungs in the hiring ladder) had proposed the idea that this team could run just as well a little leaner, so they arranged to find out. Oppsie-Daisy!! Metrics indicated that organizational goals weren't met because of their decision, but I was able to provide the stats that proved that the teams Individual goals WERE met, and that in many respects per person efficiencies were improved! My Team Members got their bonus, Middle Managlement Failed to Achieve; so no bonus for them that year.  


TL;DR - Middle manglement tries to dump the workload of 12 on 7, loses bonus' when we don't break ourselves to meet their unreasonable demand.At work, we had an outgoing mail box that handled postal mail as well as internal. You just dropped your envelope in there, the mail room picked it up when they collected mail every afternoon, and everything was fine. Everyone did this; I used it for my Menard's rebates, people used it for greeting cards, bills, anything you still needed to send by mail. My landlady, although very kind, is about a thousand years old. Because of that, she doesn't have a website or even a paypal account, and requires us to mail her a check for rent every month.

Enter Busybody. Busybody apparently had too much time and too little sense, and liked to harass anyone she had authority over at any opportunity. One month she saw me drop my rent check in the outgoing mail bin, and was at my desk faster than I thought a 300lb lady could even move. "The rules say the mailbox is only for work-related mail - why are you sending this letter to someone in (next suburb over)?"

"Um... Because I always do? Because I have for a year and a half now, and no one's said anything?"

"Well it's against the rules. No personal mail."

"Show me that rule."

So she waddled me over to her desk, where she already had the internal company website pulled up to the page on the mail room. Sure enough - no personal mail.

"Well thank you for letting me know, Busybody. Could you send me the link to this page?"

"Gladly!"

It was sitting in my inbox by the time I got back. Link to the webpage, "this constitutes a written warning," and threat of a writeup if I was caught breaking company policy again.

It was obvious what I had to do.

From then on, I watched that mailbox like a hawk. Anytime I saw a personal letter in there, I pulled it out and placed it on the sender's desk, along with a copy of Busybody's email - with her name and company email splashed across the header. In fact, I was so worried about this flagrant violation of the rules that after a couple of days I decided to start checking the mailboxes in other departments, and then on the other floors. I wouldn't want anyone else to make such an embarrassing mistake after all!

About a week later, the company's website was updated to clarify that personal mail was allowed if under blah blah size and weight. No one said a word to me, but I'm told Busybody got a talking to; all I know is she gave me the stink eye every time she saw me until she transferred out of the department.A number of years ago I worked for a recruiting company that serviced a major automotive plant in the US. This was the first of its kind built in the US and had just recently opened. 

Now, typically for my company, a business manager/owner/administrator would give us hiring orders for new employees. Usually, it's someone in charge who decides to hire new people. With this company, the administration handed the hiring decision to the new hire trainers, then those trainers would give us the order.

I loved these trainers. They were deeply religious, family-orientated guys. Both of them adopted children from rough homes while I knew them. Both were extremely kind and welcoming to my new hires I was sending in (which can be rare in an automotive plant). They'd go on missions with their church to help in struggling areas. While I am not religious at all myself, I loved how passionate these guys were. And how it reflected in working alongside them.

The plant lowered production and our orders for new hires slowed. My managers started getting on my ass. "Hey, go ask Bill and Ted if there is any new hires they need. Take them to dinner and see if you can talk them into more employees."

I explained repeatedly to my boss that Bill and Ted do not make hiring decisions. Those decisions come way over their head, and they just relay it. I was told I am new to this business and don't understand how networking works. Finally my boss' boss got on my ass when he was in the region for a meeting. I needed to push these guys to make new orders. 

So I checked my limits for how much I could spend schmoozing clients. And then I took these guys all around town for months. A new steakhouse opened you guys want to try? Bring your wives and let's go. Do you guys want to hit the billiards club for lunch? The whole ticket is on me. Office want breakfast burritos and coffee delivered? Send your orders in and I'll bring it on my way. 

At some point, I figured there would be some backlash over the money I was spending. I even found the max I was allowed to tip and was maxing it out every time to give out more money to the waitresses. I was wrong. The plant cycled up again and I think my managers believed those new orders came from the money I was spending, and not just typical ebbs and flows of auto manufacturing. 

Eventually, I left the industry and these guys moved on to other jobs. we had a blast on the company dime while it lasted.
I didn't know where should I head after grammar school, so, being avid fan of the military, I enlisted.

At that time, I was in the Artillery branch, and came daily into contact with out battery commander, Captain OK.

OK was perhaps even too lax and easygoing, for a commander, but obviously we did not mind; he was quite capable at the same time.

But then he got promoted and pulled to the headquarters, and we received a new battery commander, Captain A-H.

A-H was strict in the bad way. Discipline is an inherent military requirement, but A-H seemed that he likes the power; he would bend the rules when it suited him, and demand adherence to them from his minions.

The battery had no choice but to suffer - except me. I always tended to be vocal and to test boundaries, balancing on the edge of what is still acceptable. I was also trying to arrange to get pulled elsewhere (more about that later), so I gave him as much trouble as I could.


One beautiful morning, we were told to complete an individual course - basically to go for a walk of slightly over 20 kilometres (12.4 miles), while carrying a ruck weighting 10 kilograms (22 pounds).

I was in a good mood and it was really a beautiful day, so I enjoyed the hike.
However, as I returned to the base, Cpt. A-H was waiting there with a weight scale.

He seemed happy that he finally caught me - I finished the course quite quickly, so I obviously did not carry the 10kg, my ruck was also small size, so he told me:
"Sir corporal, throw your ruck on the weight scales."

I had no choice but to obey, so I threw my ruck on the weight scales.




Now, a bit of back-story: as I mentioned, I was trying to arrange to get pulled into an another unit.
Our nation's army Special Forces.
I already knew the date of the assesment and selection course, and I trained; hard.

So when I had the option to enjoy the beautiful walk, why not combine it with a lil bit of training?
Therefore I went to the gym and borrowed 50kg (110 pounds) weights.

But like I said: I had no choice but to obey, so I threw my ruck on the weight scales.
So I did...

The impact broke them into three pieces.

I immediatelly stood attention, saluted, and quoted "The Good Soldier Schweik" (war/antiwar comedy) - "Sir Captain, I dutifully report successfull completion of the task!", with a terrible smirk on my face.




Cpt. A-H soon brought me two levels up with complaint about my misconduct and disobedience; after I explained my side to the Colonel, he chuckled and reprimanded A-H for not appreciating how I voluntarily train harder, and for wasting his time with such petty thing.

Needless to say, I had to perform "some" extra cleaning duties from then on, but oh my, was it worth it...



TL;DR: After a training course, I was told to throw my heavy ruck onto scale weights, so I did - and destroyed them.


EDIT: I respect you disliking with what I did.
However, the struggle with Cpt. A-H was, to an extent (obviously, this not this specific act), justified; the whole backstory does not probably belong here, but I might add something to /r/prorevenge and/or /r/pettyrevenge
Before I was a lawyer, I had an internship and was supervised under a man named Bob, who resented my continued existence in his department and saw me as dead weight. This is largely true of legal interns, who tend to create work rather than solve problems. However, Bob would give me half of an assignment, refuse to clarify his instructions, and then sigh in exasperation when I wasn't able to literally read his mind or solve the issue. If I suggested another or different way to do something, he would dig his heels in just for the sake of doing so, even on things where taking a hard stance made no sense. 

&nbsp;

One day I was assigned to send a large volume of files to the company's outside lawyers. After gathering documents from various company representatives, I realized that they were too voluminous to email. When I told Bob that I needed to put them on a flash drive, he snapped that they "must be submitted via email, today." I knew that our company would accept emails up to 30mb from internal sources, but the server would reject anything external over 15mb and I suspected the law firm's servers were set up the same way. Bob wouldn't hear it. "What are you talking about? I send huge files all the time, just *do* it." 

&nbsp;

Sure thing, Bob. I confirmed the email size limit with the law firm, then lovingly, painstakingly parsed out the files for individual emails. I waited until Bob was in a meeting and started shotgunning "Privileged/Confidential - Email 1 of 47" messages to the firm and copying Bob. They emailed me in a panic, begging me to stop, and telling me that a flash drive would be great. I told them that, per Bob, the messages "must be emailed." Bob eventually sent a very terse reply, instructing the firm to send a courier over so that the flash drive could be picked up.

&nbsp;

**ETA:** Thank you all for the upvotes, and I appreciate the gold and silver! A couple of things: I'm female (a lot of people have called me a guy, so I thought I'd mention it) and file share sites were prohibited by this company, unfortunately. I did also try zipping the files but there was just way too much data.TL/DR at bottom

Years ago I worked at a certain big box pet store with employees in blue shirts and poorly maintained fish tanks. Back then employees were required to tuck their uniform shirts into their khakis, with an exemption for pregnant female employees (which I was at the time of this occurrence).

I worked the registers with my untucked shirt with no issues for months while I was preggo. When I was about 8 months pregnant and just a few weeks shy of going on maternity leave we got a new manager that was painfully clueless and stupid (isn’t that always the way?). 

So one day, this manager calls myself and the other main cashier (who was ALSO just as preggo as I was) into the office (with another manager as a witness) to tell us that we are fine cashiers, but our uniforms are lacking. The other cashier and myself are just “????”, because we both had our khakis, uniform shirts and black sneakers. Everything was neat and clean, so we both had no clue what he was talking about. I ask him what he is referring to, he replies that our shirts have to be tucked in. The other cashier and I have both been with the company for a while and we are both SUPER familiar with the uniform policy, so she and I both object and let him know that pregnant employees are exempt from the tucking policy. He waves his hand at us and says that we are incorrect and that all employees must tuck their shirts. The other manager that is there acting as a witness chimes in that we are correct, but clueless manager cuts witness manager off and says he knows what the policy is and that previous management was just being lax (they weren’t, pregnant employees were actually exempt). The other cashier and I shrug and leave the office to go tuck our shirts in. Clueless manager left for the day right after talking to us.

Here’s where the malicious compliance comes in:

We tucked our shirts in for sure, but if you aren’t familiar with pregnant fashion, you essentially have two options for pants. Option 1 is using a belly band on your existing pants or using pants with a belly band attached already. A belly band is essentially a VERY wide elastic strap that goes around the baby bump to hold your pants up, which essentially puts the top edge of your pants at your ribs. Option 2 is to do the hair band trick, which is to take an elastic hair tie and loop it through the button hole of your pants  and around the button of the pants. This gives you a few extra inches of waist room in your pants to accommodate the baby bump (and also exposing your underwear/ lower abdomen since you cannot zip your fly). Both options look absolutely ridiculous and are meant to be concealed under a shirt, and they only get more ridiculous the more pregnant you are (which we were both HEAVILY pregnant by this time). For those unfamiliar- by 8 months pregnant you are basically Violet from Willy Wonka with an internal Oompa Loompa kicking you in the bladder every 20 mins.

So we both emerge (waddle gloriously) from the back room where we tucked in our shirts looking absurd. I had my shirt tucked into my belly band just below my boobs, and the other cashier had hers tucked in to her hair band closed pants, below her belly and with her leopard print underwear exposed. Clueless manager was already gone for the day so he was not present to see our magnificent uniform compliance. He wasn’t in for another two days, so he didn’t see our dutiful compliance, but all of our customers and coworkers sure did. Our regulars asked why we had our shirts tucked like that and of course we obliged them and explained that clueless manager insisted we tuck our shirts in to comply with the uniform policy. For two full days (and part of that first shift after clueless manager left for the day), customer complaints to corporate about our treatment rolled in and coworkers called the employee hotline to report clueless manager. District manager is PISSED about the whole thing (which we found out on day 3).

On day 3 (return of clueless manager), he enters the store, sees the other cashier and myself with our beautifully ridiculous uniforms and asks why we are dressed like that. ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯ “You told us to tuck our shirts in”. He gets red in the face and bee lines to the office. He calls us into the office IMMEDIATELY and starts going off on us for not taking the uniform policy seriously. Mid-tirade the district manager arrives, FURIOUS. She turned to us preggo eggos and nicely told us to untuck our shirts and head back out to the floor before turning to clueless manager and going ballistic on him for enforcing something that we preggos were exempt from.

Turns out clueless manager ruined district managers days off because of all the complaints that came in about the two pregnant employees forced by a male manager to show their underwear/pregnancy attire in public due to an absurd uniform policy. The complaints weren’t just about the manager, they were about the company uniform policy as well (the customers didn’t know the real policy). AND the employee hotline complaints as well. ALL of these had to be handled by the district manger ASAP because the sheer number of complaints in such a short time meant that the regional manager was breathing down the district managers neck to resolve the issue.

District manager forced an apology to us out of clueless manager and treated us to lunch. We also got our stools to sit on at the registers back (clueless manager took our stools away because “if you can lean, you can clean”). Clueless manager was sent to back HR training and fired shortly after for another similar violation (I was on maternity leave so I didn’t get to get to wish him farewell).

TL/DR: Clueless manager forces heavily pregnant employees to dress ridiculously, many customer and employee complaints ensue

**Edit for the morbidly curious about that “similar violation” I mentioned: 
Clueless manager refused to special order a pin-backed name tag for an employee with a pacemaker (our name tags were magnetic), because “*young people don’t have pacemakers*”. Clueless manager also refused to let this employee at least move the magnetic tag to the opposite side of his chest to at least not have the magnet sitting *directly over his pacemaker* because this was not in compliance with the uniform policy. This guy was actually insinuating that this employee was just looking to make trouble and get special treatment *over a name tag*.So, I work at Papa Murphys and we always get this one guy We’ll call him dave. Dave comes once a week asking for a pepperoni and mushrooms with extra pepperoni and every time he gets the pizza he complains about there not being enough pepperoni on the pizza. We tell him that that amount is double and if he has a problem with the amount he has to take it up with the owner of our store. Well, one day we get a call from the owner. He tells us to have us tell Dave to just tell us when to stop putting on extra pepperoni and then ring it up for however many extra servings it is and not tell him we are ringing him up for extra. When he told us to stop we had put on a total of around 300 pepperoni on a pizza that takes 50 normally. The look on his face when he found out that the pizza that is normally $10 was about $20 was priceless.So this happened a couple of years ago and I finally found the right subreddit to post this, so here it goes. 

I worked at a fast food restaurant and we had a scanner machine to check if money is real or not. One day, I touch the machine's sensor and notice that it still scanned my hand as money. I did this with paper as well and concluded that the machine was broken. 

During the same shift, I had the one manager that did nothing but sit on her ass all day and only help us with orders if we were behind orders by 20+ minutes. I tell her about the machine and she says she'll check it later. See, I'm supposed to scan a bill that is $10 or $20, and for $50 or $100, I have to give it to a manager to check. 

A few hours go by and she still hasn't checked it, and by this point I'm checking every bill that's $10 or $20 by holding it up to a light, which can be seen as rude to a customer. One customer complains to me and calls my manager over. This customer complained how I was discriminating her (I wasn't) and I shouldn't be checking a $10 bill like she's a criminal. 

Instead of defending me (as the machine was broken and she hasn't checked it), she began yelling at me in front of this customer. I told her that the machine was broken and I needed to check each bill, the same I would if the machine was working.

She then, without even checking the machine, said to just use the machine and said "who would even use a counterfeit on a $10 or $20 bill?". I decided the argument wasn't worth $9 an hour and just complied. I quickly scanned every bill until I saw 2 shady acting women. 

The first woman handed me a $20 bill that was obviously fake, I didn't even have to check it. It felt and looked like paper. I decided I would just follow orders and scan it. Since it went off, I put it in the register. The second constumer came and handed me a similar counterfeit bill. I did the same thing. 

Later, when my shift was about to end, my manager counted my drawer and found the 2 counterfeit bills and freaked out at me. I zoned out for most of it, but most of it consisted of her calling me dumb for not noticing this obvious counterfeit and how I'm going to get fired. 

Well, what actually happened was the regional and general managers called me over to fire me before I told them the story. They then checked the cameras and listened to our conversation about the machine being broken, then concluded that the manager was in the wrong for 1. Not letting me check the bills and 2. Telling me to use the machine that I explained was broken.

She was then fired and saw her working the cash register at a grocery store. Hopefully she checks if she gets any counterfeit bills.

Edit: Spelling

Edit 2: So I kinda ran through the whole process with me about to get fired so let me further explain for those who are confused. The firing didn't happen the same day, as they count my drawer at the end of my shift. My manager would've found out about the counterfeit bills earlier if she did her job and took money out my drawer after I reached a certain amount of money, but again, she was a lazy sack of shit. 

Anyways, after it happened, she sent me home as it was the end of my shift and it wasn't until my next shift a few days later (I was in high school, so my shifts were far apart) that the regional manager and general manager were in and talked to me. They didn't come with the notion that they were going to fire me, but they did realize the machine was broken after I left, so it was more to see if I scanned the bill (If I did, I wouldn't be fired. If I didn't, I would be fired because it's then my fault and not because of faulty equipment). I then told them my story, worked the rest of my shift, and later found out that the manager was fired. I'm not sure if this was the last straw for many reasons to fire her (probably), or just this instance. But yeah, that should clear up some timelines and explain some things. I ended up quitting a few months after.This will be a long one, tl;dr in the bottom.

I worked in the service industry (well, to some extent) for about 2 years before the pandemic came.

When I say "to some extent", what I mean is I wasn't really "serving" anyone. I worked in a department called "back office" or BO for short. This is where goods come and go. Our department has 2 jobs: to "check" and to "input", therefore we called them "Checker" and "Data". The checker's job is to make sure that all orders are eligible. This included Quality and Quantity. After a checker has confirmed the order, the Data will then input the information regarding said order in the system, after which the merchandise is ours and will not be eligible for a return. Therefore our department was extremely important, the work was stressful and more often than not heavily supervised. We used to have 8 people working at full capacity during the normal days and barely managed to get by. There were weeks when we had to work overtime almost every day just to get everything running in order.

Because of these overtime hours, we got paid more than other departments, nearly 30-40%. *Of course*, this sparked controversy. Other supervisors argued that we're using our workload to exploit the company. Mine was having none of it. There were audits, sessions, supervision from the higher office, and they found nothing. They even tried to bring in another crew from another store that's closely related, they quit as a whole after 1 month. When we got back in control, we even requested more hours to cover the shit that they had left behind.

Eventually, the store stopped trying to change us. Instead, they tried to limit our hours. We used to request 2 or 3 hours on busy days before, but then even when the store was practically buried under mountains of goods they only let us do 1, very rarely 2. We tolerated it at first. Normally we would stay past the requested hours to see things done, not because we loved the job, god no, but because we're responsible workers and if we didn't finish the work that day there were chances we'd get consumed by the flow of goods the very next day. But it was usually 30 to 45 minutes of those extra, 1 hour top. When the change happened there are days we had to do 2 hours extra with no pay.

Yes, we should have said "fuck it" to their faces, but my supervisor asked us to stay and he'd try to fix things. He's a super cool dude and because I liked him very much, I agreed. The others weren't so cheerful, 3 left after a month, so we're down to 5.

Our HC then was 3 Checkers, 1 Data, and the cool dude. Us checkers suffered, yes, but the Data was on the verge of collapsing. She would be the first to enter the office, and usually the last to leave. Her shift was 8 hours, but she worked 12 or more every day. More often than not 2 or 3 of them were unpaid. We tried to share the workload with her but we couldn't even cover our own most of the days.

His objection to the work hours came to no avail. They were aware that we deserved those hours, so they simply ignore his request and response with something general. He's pissed, it was July and the heat should not have come from the company as well. He requested a full audit, threatening to leave if things didn't change. They basically told him to "Either suck it up or go home". So he just left.

He's the 3rd person they've hired in 3 years to manage that office, so they thought he's just as disposable as the others. What they didn't know was, he's the only reason I and Miss. Data stayed, so when we knew what happened, we immediately noticed the HR that we'll also be leaving. They threatened us with penalties for unlawfully terminating our contracts because we hadn't given them 2 weeks' notice, but we laughed it off and reminded them that being the special department, the BO was given an extra 3 days off each year, which totaled in 15 days. Also, our contracts stated specifically that if someone quit, they could choose to either use their remaining days off and leave early or get them converted into payment. They were so surprised when they found out that we all had our days off FULLY INTACT (it's almost as if we had been too busy to use them or something, IDK), so they couldn't do anything about it. We then left the office with everyone eyes shooting daggers.

Of course, everything plunged into chaos. Did I mention that we're the most important department in the whole chain? Because we were, and they found it out the very, *very* hard way. The other 2 guys managed to last a week before also leaving, citing something like "total madness" or "absolutely out of control". After they left, the store brought in a team of 10, but they couldn't have covered half our work despite being twice in number.

Honestly, I didn't care about it that much, but it's not something that flew by. There were days when their store had nothing on the shelves, so people started to go to the other store in town to shop. When they got things back to somewhat normal, it was after 5 months and the damage had already been done. They closed last month and the place is now rented to some small business.

Not as interesting as some of these stories, I just thought about it when Cool Dude called me last week. We were still friends, I'm out of town but we kept in touch. Apparently, after the other 2 guys quit, they called him and tried to get him back to work, but he's a free agent then and said he was gonna charged them twice for "consulting fees" (not sure if it's a thing). Also, he would only work with us, citing "familiarity to the environment" and if not then he'd do exactly as stated in the contract, which would be sitting around and ordering everyone to do their jobs (seriously, he's supervisor, he didn't have to do anything, he helped us because we're head to toe in work and he's a Cool Dude). He asked if they tried to contact me after that. They never did.

TL;DR: Store didn't want to pay us for our much-deserved extra hours, ignored our request, and told us to "take it or leave it" when confronted. So we left it.

EDIT: Firstly, thanks to all you kind strangers for all the awards. Hope you're having a nice day.

Apparently, a lot of people are gonna concern about the same things so I'll clarify it a bit.

1. The situation was not permanent. I've worked there for 2 years, this only happened during the last 2 months of my time. Before that, EVERY hour that we worked OT was paid for, no question asked. That's why we tried to hold on to it for so long, hoping everything would be back to the way it was.
2. The original HC for the department was 12, but after Lunar New Year people would quit and new people would join. This is a common thing, almost customary. Every year we had to say goodbye to some of our coworkers and welcome newcomers. No big deal. What we didn't anticipate was the pandemic, it's after the other people have left so we're stuck with 8 for quite some time. This led to those extra hours that others claimed us "exploiting" the store.
3. We weren't always OT, only during summer when the need for beverages and frozen products rose, and even then it's only 1 or 2 weeks a month. These were also fully paid. During the normal times of the year, we only OT on Tuesday and Thursday, I won't tell you why, but it's a known thing and was always planned ahead at the end of the last week. So it's only 4 hours per person a week.

Hope that clears up some misunderstanding!!

EDIT 2: tl;dr

EDIT 3: A lot of people is gonna ask the same thing over and over again so here's some more explanation:

1. I'm in SEA, overtime unpaid hours are a thing here. Corporations don't say such things out loud but you'll never have a chance at a promotion if you don't comply. And once again, the store was very generous to us, to me, for the majority of my time there (2 years). This incident only happened during the last 2 months, which is why we were trying to compromise at first. I figure it's just a cultural misunderstanding, I'm sure in the US or EU things would have been very different. But if you're in my area, there's a high chance you'd think that I'm just being dramatic. Almost everyone in the head office did. 
2. To those who think this isn't malicious enough, I have to agree. Which is why I was thinking about it before sharing. I think the malicious part is when we're not supposed to quit, but we did anyway. Basically, we're bound to the contracts, which stated clearly that we would have to turn in a 2 weeks notice, or else we'd face penalties for unlawful termination. A lot of bad things could happen from this, among which was a bad referral to our future employers, and there's absolutely nothing we could do about that. Yes, we could try to explain the situation, but they could refuse to listen and just simply go for more potential applicants. But, as I've explained, our contracts also consist of different terms that could nullify this agreement, which they did not see it coming. For me, it's justified enough, but I'm sorry to those who think it isn't. 
3. No, we didn't try to get our wages back. I think everyone was just happy to leave. Cool Dude especially, he was newlywed and could then spend more time with his wife. I think they were trying to have babies but because of his workload, they agreed to not think about it in a near future. His twins will be 6 months by this July.

As for me, I went there to work, so when there's no more work I just flew back to my hometown, which is in the other half of the country, and never look back. Then the pandemic got more serious and I had other more important things to worry about.

Looking back we could have got it if we had pushed the matter because every hour we worked OT was documented not only by ourselves but by the audit who approved our requests in the first place (then got rejected by the store managers). I had a conversation with Cool Dude a while ago, he said he considered it but decided it wasn't worth it since there were chances he would be shunned by the industry (they gossip like old women).[NOTICE: Youtuber Captain Reddit, take DOWN that YouTube video! You did not have permission to post it! In fact, no one has permission to post my MC right now. Take it down, or I swear to God, you will regret it!]

[Update: I have filed the Copyright infringement thing against Capitan Reddit, and requested on his video to take it down. If he does not, and if YouTube does not because I kept my personal information to myself except for my email, which is the same as the one for this Reddit, then I will ensure that Internet hell will be brought down upon them. That is a promise for infringing upon my privacy, defamation of character, and copyright infringement]

**Onto main event** 

For context, this was pre-2020, back in my early university years (aka 2018/2019). 

It started one Wednesday morning when I woke up feeling like complete and utter crap. This was a problem, as today I was scheduled to do my oral presentation along with other students in one of my classes. But, I figured no way would I be wanted to come in sick. 

And by sick, when I looked in that mirror I  was so pale I looked dead, my nose looked like Rudolf the Red Nosed Reindeer, my eyes were so sunken in they were in the back of my head, and I was sweating like hell from a high fever. Oh, and my throat felt like it was made of sand paper. Yeah, no way was I going into the lecture hall looking like this. 

So, I went through the normal procedures, submitting a temporary absence form, which meant for the absence to be valid I needed to go to a walk-in clinic (joy), and call any professors/teacher assistants to inform them of my absence (we have a LOT of interactive stuff in lectures. It’s also common curtesy). Along with an email for a paper trail. 

My afternoon physics professor understood. My evening teaching assistant for Earth Sciences was cool with it. My morning chemistry professor?

“Either you stop lying and come in or it’s an automatic zero!”

I’m sorry?! I’ve never missed one of your classes even with a minor cold, but *this*?!

…Okay, fine then. 

So, I get up and my Mom drives me in (as I didn’t get a licence yet - long story - and she wasn’t working that day - she’s self employed). She’s worried about me, but I reassured her that I would only be about 20 minutes max. 

I get to campus and walk in, heading to my lecture hall, and of course looking like utter crap, stumbling because I’m also running a really high fever. I got a lot of weird looks, and some students even stopped me to ask if I was okay. I recall responding with something like, “I won’t be if I’m late for class.” 

When I do get to my lecture hall, I enter two minutes late. Prof sees me and goes, “OP! About time! Get down here and start your presentation or it’s a fail!”

Alrighty!

I went up, plugged in my laptop to the projector-

And released an all mighty round of wet coughing. 

Now my lecturemates are whispering to each other, and Prof looks at me startled. But all I remember doing is looking right at the professor, smiling and saying, very hoarsely, “Sorry. I’ll get started.”

She quickly tried to send me on my way, but I say, into the microphone, my voice sounding like a sick bear’s, “No no. You said if I don’t present it’s a zero. I can’t fail 20% of my grade.” 

So, off I go, presenting with a hoarse voice, long, hacking wet coughs, and with occasional almost vomiting. When I finished, I then turned to the professor and asked, again into the mic, “Do you need me to stick around for the other presentations, or can I go?”

I was on my way to the doctor’s within 5 minutes. And wouldn’t you know, I had a serious case of the flu! Something that the university did NOT want you to bring to campus because it could spread like wildfire!

Needless to say, when I filed my full absence form with my doctor’s note, I mentioned about how my chemistry professor insisted upon me coming to class (I also included a screenshot of the email she sent me while I  was being driven in, which stated the same thing she told me over the phone).

When I was finally able to return to campus a week later, I was surprised to enter class to see a substitute professor. I later looked at my email and saw a class notification that our original professor was placed on ‘leave’. 

She was let go by the end of the term.So I work as a long-term care (LTC) biller. I do pharmacy billing for nursing homes and assisted living facilities. So any meds they get, I bill. My company is contracted with LTC facilities, we provide medications to people in LTC. 

On to the story.

I’ve been working in LTC for 16 years. The company I work for does something that is absolutely unheard of in pharmacy billing... they care about their patients.
So, if your insurance drops a copay of $20, but the “at cost” price is only $5, we charge you the $5. We give you the lower price. This is really rare in my field. Most pharmacies are out to fuck everyone. My company, actually gives you the better deal. 

Here comes Karen...
*inbound call: hi, I’d like to talk about my mom’s bill, she’s at *nursing home.


Me: ok, what’s your customer number. 
*pulls up customer number 

Karen: you didn’t run this through my moms insurance!
Me: let me check this out. 
*pause*

Me: yes, we saw that your copay was actually higher than the “at cost” rate, so we dropped the charge down, so it’s cheaper for you. 

Karen: I pay for insurance and I expect insurance prices!

Me: of course, but when we can charge you the lesser price, we do that, we try to-
*cut off 

Karen: IDGAF about YOUR prices. I want it ran through the insurance! For taxes purposes!

Me: regardless of that, we can send you an itemized tax paper, to show what you paid. We just are trying to give you the lower-

Karen: I WANT THIS RAN THROUGH THE INSURANCE! THIS IS RIDICULOUS YOU AREN’T BILLING MY INSURANCE!

Me: we did, but our “at cost” gives you a lower price, so we charged you the lower price. 

Karen: I AM DONE WITH THIS. BILL THE INSURANCE!

Me: your bill is $75. If I bill your insurance, there are some tier 3 and 4 meds (highest copays, talking $75+), they will raise your bill. 

Karen: IT WILL NOT AND I EXPECT YOU TO REBILL MY ACCOUNT TO THE INSURANCE AND MAIL ME A NEW STATEMENT!

Me: yes, ma’am. 
*call ends.
I rebill the account. Her bill goes from $75 to $396. 

She gets her new bill a week later. Calls back. Loses her shit, of course. 
My boss backed me and told her that since it’s been over 30 days since the meds were dispensed, we can’t reverse the claims. She’s stuck with the bill. 
Bottom line: if someone tells you they are giving you the best deal, take it.

Edit: I apologize for the shitty mobile format. I tried to make it decent. Mobile was not having it.I posted this as a comment on another thread and someone said it’s a perfect malicious compliance. So, when my Dad was about 18 he worked for a gardening center in Chicago  and he was closing for the night. Every night my Dad’s job was to close up and walk the money from the registers to the owners house. So right before closing a guy came in and pulled a gun out demanding all the money in the register. So my dad, being the only one there, and with a gun in his face opens the register and gives the guy like $60. The dude obviously took the cash and ran off and my dad being the calm guy he is just shook it off and locked up. He still had to go to the owners house so he did and he explained to the owner that they had been robbed and the owner was all worried and asked how much money they lost and my dad told him that if was about $60. The owner was pretty relieved because obviously he expected to have had more money stolen and so he asked me dad “that’s all we made today?” And my dad said “no! Here’s your $3,000” Since my dads job was to walk the money to the owners house every night he had already cleared out most of the register and put the money in his jacket pocket, only leaving some extra cash in the register in case someone came in last minute and he needed change. So my Dad stood there with a gun pointed at him and $3,000 hidden in his pocket and gave the guy with the gun $60 because he asked for the money in the register.With the holiday season coming up, I've been thinking about past years. My family and I differ in a lot of ways, but I especially differ from my mother.

Ever since I was little, we couldn't see eye-to-eye. She's the type of person who prioritises looking "good" in social settings, whereas I'm the type to not give a flying dolphin. She has expressed deep shame in who I am, and I have lost track of how many times she angrily asked, "Why can't you be *normal*?!" As I've grown into an adult, I've found ways to understand her and try to keep peace. We learned we have a few things in common, like places to go, preferred scents in perfumes, and most surprisingly, a fondness for weed. She tends to hide that last fact.

Now, one of the things my mom has been very bad about is tolerating that I'm vegan. I started as a teenager, but my mom wanted no part of it. She immediately stopped cooking *anything* for me, including plain side veggies that she would normally cook for everyone. Whatever, I learned to cook.

Whenever family get-togethers happened, such as during holidays, birthdays, or any other event, my mom and her family deliberately offered nothing for me. I would have to bring my own food, or go hungry. Again, whatever - with their attitude, I don't think I'd trust anything they offered me anyway.

One year, my parents were hosting Thanksgiving. As per usual, I expected to make my own mini-Thanksgiving meal while she and my dad prepared the "real" Thanksgiving meal. Now, normally, I prepare a veggie roast, gravy, several sides, and a dessert. I make more than enough, and always place my stuff on the same table with the rest of the food, in case anyone wants any. Every year before, nobody else wanted anything.

Weeks before the holiday, my mom did her annual tradition of reminding me to make my own food because she won't make anything for me. I already had recipes lined up and, until she said something, was feeling pretty stoked about what I had planned. Her unnecessary reminder only served to piss me off. I made a new, more maliciously-compliant, plan.

Fast forward to Thanksgiving. It's going pretty normal. Annoying relatives, loud TV blaring, my parents and I trying yet again to somehow share the oven. Just before the meal was to begin, some last-minute guests arrived. Two of my dad's cousins had traveled a few hours to get here. I barely knew them, but that was about to change.

Shortly after, we were bonding up a storm. We had some overlapping interests, agreed on politics, and they wanted to try my food. Sure! But I had to warn them, the gravy is a bit... special.

See, what my mom doesn't know is that when she "reminded" me to cook, it actually reminded me that I had made some cannabutter (using vegetable oil) just the other day. I figured, screw it, if nobody's going to eat any of my food anyway, I might as well get high off it. So I looked into vegan gravy recipes and used my special oil.

When I explained the situation to my new-favourite relatives, they thought it was hilarious. They also immediately wanted to try my gravy.

We ended up chillin' around the fire, laughing like old best friends. They promised never to tell anyone what I did.

We now look forward to seeing each other every year. I haven't added any "special" ingredients to my big meals since then, but they still make space on their plates to try everything I make.

TL;DR: Intolerant mom demands I make my own vegan meals for every family event. I make my food with pot, which I know my mom loves, but won't eat. End up bonding and getting stoned with awesomer family members instead.Not me, but my dad.  Many years ago my parents took us on a family vacation.  Being a family of 5 and trying to save costs, we opted to take a 2 day scenic drive in stead of flying.  My youngest sister was just off her diapers, and had to urgently pee.  My dad stopped at a filling station in a small town, to let my sister use the restrooms.  Cue the grumpy old store owner refusing to let her use the restroom, because we haven't actually baught anything yet (there was a line waiting at the fuel pumps, and still a couple of cars ahead of us).  Seeing as my youngest sister was really struggling to hold it in, my dad goes into the shop and chooses the shadiest looking snack he could find, and pays.  Sure as hell - after my sister did her thing, he proceeds to return the snack because - wouldnt you know it - the expiry date on the packet was way in the past.  You can also bet that we went to the filling station accross town to refuel the car.This happened a few years back but I remembered it at work today.

I work at a spa/salon at the front desk. The employees get a pretty good discount on services so plenty of them get their nails, lashes, hair, etc. done regularly. The rule is pay when you are done your service (like any other client) but some wiggle room was allowed in the case of "pay day is tomorrow, I'll pay as soon as the money goes through" or if the front desk was busy helping clients and they had to leave (we know where they will be tomorrow morning at 9). We would put these services "on hold" and the employee would pay ASAP.  It mostly worked on the honour system of "dont abuse it or we cant have nice things anymore." Most employees were pretty good about it, but OF COURSE there were the few that regularly "forgot" for days or weeks or "I cant pay today, I'll pay tomorrow" and these few were usually the ones with the most seniority (in years worked, not power). One of these employees in particular was far worse than the others.

On to the compliance: one day the owner comes in to pick some things up and asks someone on the desk "what is that little button with 23 notifications on it?" I stepped in and answered "...that's the staff services that are on hold." We have less than 23 employees which means that one or more employees owe for multiple services. The owner EXPLODED. She started shouting that its absolutely ridiculous this many people owed "her" money and "how could you have let it get this far???" and "who are the employees that owe??" I started to reply "Well, most of them are..." she cuts me off and says "just add it up NOW and tell me so I can talk to them about taking it out of their paychecks!!" I started to open up the window to show the list of employees who owed for services and said "ok, just letting you know that the reason there are SO many..." and she cuts me off AGAIN and says "Ugh you guys [front desk I guess?] ALWAYS have an excuse, there is NO excuse, just do it!" and storms off to the staff room.

My other desk coworker who had been hiding in the bathroom (I cant blame her, to be honest), comes out and asks "...did she see the names on the list?" I replied she did not and got to work on my list, writing out the names of the employees next to their total owing for their services in order from most owed to least.

About 30 minutes later the boss comes down in all her holy terror and demands the list. I handed it to her and after glancing at it for a moment she froze. 

Yall if you have never seen someone lose their steam in front of your very eyes I highly recommend it. At the top of my list is this owner's (adult) daughter's name who happens to be an employee and consequently owes the spa nearly $400 in services (after her 50% discount and NOT including tax). She had gone back to school recently and was only working part time so I guess she was short on money and regularly snuck out without paying for her lashes and her nails. 

Back to my shell shocked boss: after staring at the list for a moment in silence she went over to the computer, opened up the list of on hold services and scrolls through. 90% of the services on hold are her daughter's. After a few more minutes of staring at the list she finally looks up and says "I'm her mother and the owner so I'm going to pay this HOWEVER I want all the receipts to give her and she is NOT to get ANY services unless she pre pays. I'll tell her this myself. Make sure the rest of the on holds are paid by the end of the employees' next shifts." I cashed her daughters services out, bundled the receipts, gave them to my boss, she thanked me and left. 

I am simultaneously sad and relieved that I wasnt present for the verbal ass-whupping her daughter received.Back in 2014, I was a Support Analyst for a company that made and hosted medical screening applications and healthcare registries.  

One of the registries was for medical implants, and covered England, Wales, and Northern Ireland. It was the largest of its kind in the world, and as such we received data requests from organisations and government agencies from all over the world. 

One of my pet peeves was people mentioning the Freedom Of Information Act (FOI) repeatedly, as if we'd never heard of it; they'd put it in the subject line, on any attachments, and a few times in the email.  You didn't actually need to quote the FOI, just ask the damn question and we'll process it for you. Annoying, but nothing major. 

Then one day I got an email that set my inner bastard off.

The email was from some lawyer in Edinburgh, and he'd done the same thing, but with a slight difference...he'd quoted - repeatedly - the Freedom Of Information (Scotland) Act. It was mentioned at least 6 or 7 times in the email, plus the subject line, comprising about 40% of the total text (or so it seemed). The whole email was rather blunt, demanding, a touch patronising, and then ended with a threat of legal action if we didn't comply.  Completely unnecessary, and I just couldn't let it go.  

I did some research to check my understanding, and confirmed my suspicions. 

He very specifically and repeatedly quoted the FOI(S), and he is a lawyer, so he should know the law, right?  

I sent him an email acknowledging receipt, then did nothing for 28 days. On day 28, I sent another email advising that the <Medical Implant Registry> of England, Wales, and Northern Ireland does not operate in Scotland, and therefore we don't retain or process any data that falls under the FOI(S). I ended it by saying if he'd like to resubmit his request under the FOI, we'd be happy to process it within the 28 day limit.

Update

To add a little context.  All of the data/statistics we provided was adjusted for the surgeon/hospital, because even the best implant can fail if the surgeon does a bad job. The way he phrased the request, it could easily be interpreted that he only wanted the data that falls under the Scottish FOI  i.e. from Scottish hospitals.  As he opened with a threat, I chose this interpretation, and made him wait the maximum time to tell him.  If he hadn't done that, I would have called or emailed to clarify his needs. 

Some paralegal from his office resubmitted a request about a week later, it was much narrower in scope, and more politely written.  It was processed in about a week.Obligatory "this was a few years ago", but still a good story.

So, I used to be a store manager for a frozen yogurt shop that's part of a larger chain owned by a family. Not Menchies big, but still more than a few stores. As such, I worked in a store where we had a large walk-in fridge and freezer.

We also had a district manager named Jane who had a penchant for ridiculous rules and stern punishments for even the smallest perceived infractions. Once, the power went out to the plaza I worked in and, as such, we had to turn people away because we couldn't, you know, dispense product or take payments. I was almost fired for closing in the middle of a workday for that one, and was shouted at in front of customers and called incompetent, even with documented proof of being unable to remain open. We also worked alone, which will be important.

Anyway, you've got your picture of Jane. She was a joy and a delight.

So, one day I was working away before unlocking the doors and went to grab some yogurt from the freezer, when the door closed behind me. I pulled the handle.... nothing. Hit the plunger.... nothing. Locked in the walk-in freezer in jeans and a t-shirt. I, luckily, had my cell phone in my pocket and was able to call a coworker to come let me out. 

Called Jane, obviously shaken up, and was told "well, don't let the door close. I'll deal with it later." Later turned into four months of bothering her because, you know, a walk in freezer that locks from the outside is very dangerous when you WORK ALONE. We found solutions to try to keep from anyone becoming stuck, including a sign on the door to never enter without a jacket and your cell phone in case it managed to fall shut.

We had five more cases of door props slipping and staff becoming stuck(the freezer was very large and the door very heavy) before Jane paid a visit to the store. The first thing she did was tear down the sign because "it's an eyesore!" And start shouting that we should never have our phones while working, for any reason. She left, still no fix in sight, promising to cut hours of anyone caught with phones, even in the freezer.

Fast forward another month and one more incident of someone getting locked in and, this time, having to be rescued by a customer who she screamed the back room lock code to.

Jane arrives shortly after opening one day to "discuss the freezer." And immediately tears down the new safety sign and starts telling me about how I need to start listening to her and stop being so stubborn. While we're having it out in the back room, the front bell rings to let me know there's a customer. Jane tells me to serve them and that she'll stay and finish up some paperwork before leaving. She makes me show her that my cell phone is in my backpack, because "phones are against company policy, you know that."

I leave to serve the customers, who it turned out were a softball team on their way to a tournament. About 25mins later I was finished with them and was about to quickly mop the tables when I realized I hadn't seen Jane leave, and she usually didn't stay long.

I finished cleaning up and doing some restocking before I heard it: Unmistakable shouting and banging on a door, coming from the back room. I put my ear to the door, turned up the store music a few notches and then gave the bathrooms a quick refresh before opening the freezer to find Jane, shaking with a rage/fear combination I'd never seen before, and putting on my best shocked face.

"Oh dear! You really can't let that door close. How long were you in there??? I wish you'd had your phone so you could call me...."About 15 years ago when I was in my last year of college, I was working at a pay-by-the-hour daycare.

Although, this was just a typical college job for me, i still did my best and made sure to show up on time, work the station i was supposed to work, and do my best at whatever task i was supposed to do.

Imagine my surprise when I got a call on my day off asking where i was and why I wasn't coming in.

"Well", I explained to them "It's my day off, I do not work today".

That is when i was informed that my name is on the schedule and this would be treated as a no call no show. That means a disciplinary write up. The rest of the night was spent worrying about not going to work and wondering how i messed up so badly.

I come into work on my next shift where the Manager and Assistant manager proceed to give me the write up. They condescendingly show me the schedule like they are going to show me how to read it when i notice that the person who normally works the shift i "missed" had their name crossed out and my name put in their place.

I pointed this out to them and they explained that on the morning that I missed my afternoon shift, the original person called out, and i was slated to replace her. They did not call me to let me know, or i would have happily come in for the extra cash.

Naturally, I was a bit hesitant to sign a write up because they changed my shift and didn't tell me.

At this information, the manager simply said "It's your responsibility to know your work schedule"

"Even if you change it the day of and don't call me?"

I could see the wheels turning in their head when they doubled down and said "Yes, you are an adult, this is the real world, and you are expected to know when you are scheduled to work. You should have called to double check your schedule."

So malicious compliance time.

There were three main shifts at this daycare: morning, afternoon, and evening.

I called before every single shift of every single day. I called on days that I was supposed to work, and on days that i wasn't. After all, as a responsible adult it was my responsibility to make sure my schedule didn't change, right?

"Hi this is INAGF, I am just calling to double check if i am on the schedule for <next shift>. My copy says <insert next time I'm supposed to work>."

It didn't take long (although longer than I thought it should) for them to call me again into the office and tell me that they would call me from now on should the schedule change.

Sometimes i wonder what happened to them until i remember that IDGAF.

EDIT: A lot of you are asking if they removed the write up when they realized they were wrong. No, they didn't. Which why when I gave my two weeks notice, [I didn't exactly leave gracefully.](https://www.reddit.com/r/MaliciousCompliance/comments/f5fgzf/its_your_responsibility_to_know_your_work_schedule/fhyi4pf/?context=3)So this happened like 7 or 8 years ago when I was jobbing at a driving service while I was a student.

The driving service was one for people with disabilities that could not drive ot walk on their own. Our main office was in the building of a housing/working facility for disabled people. The two companies (our drivers service and the housing facility) were loosely connected as they were both financdd by the same organisation. However, management-wise thdy were clearly separated.

We were about 15 drivers at this location and we shared our lunch/social room with about 10 caretakers. Since our schedules were horribly organized, the drivers often had idle time so the social room was where everybody hung around waiting for work.

One day my boss, call him Tom, brought cake to work because he became 60. The cake was enormous. Like, a wedding cake could hide behind it twice, I can only imagine how expensive it must've been. At 9 every driver had eaten some pieces and there was still like 80% left of it so Tom told the caretakers thdy should feel free to take some.

Then Karen happened. She was something like the security inspector of the facility. So she had authority over the caretakers but no dealings with the driving service. Her job was to watch for potential hazards, organize the caretakers' schedule and generally having an eye on everything happening.
When she heard there was cake, she was FURIOUS. She and Tom couldn't stand each other, so she was always trying to ruin his day. In this particular instance, she claimed the cake was a health hazard as it containdd cream and she could not verify whether the cooling chain was never broken during transport. So she threw. It. All. Away. Roughly 400 euros worth of food just thrown away. Needless to say Tom was less than amused. He went extremely mad. He was usually a very calm and gentle man and this was the only time ever that I heard hin shouting at someone. Still, there was nothing he could do, Karen could basically declare anything a hazard and take action how she saw fit and her higher up didn't greally care.

To make matters worse, she doubled down and demanded that every food that was brought into the social room had to be inspected by her first. Cue malicious compliance.

Obviously, all the drivers were mad at Karen for upsetting Tom and for throwing away a oerfectly fine cake. So the next day, first thing in the morning, 15 drivefs went to her office. Everyone with his lunch demanding she inspect it. It took her roughly 10 minutes looking at sandwiches and answering questions whether mayonnaise was too hazardous to be brought in.

This went on for the whole week, each day our questions about hazardous foods becoming more dumb and degenerate. On Friday it toon her more than 2 hours to "inspect" our lunch as we would collectively steal her time. Afternoon she said she got the message and that sandwiches got a general OK and not to bother her with it anymore. Fine.

The following week we went out of our way to eat anything but sandwiches. Salads, cake, pretzels, normal lunch stuff; everyday there was a line in front of her office having their lunch checked asking stupid questions whether this food was or was not too dangerous to enter the social room. Karen was losing her patience, becoming increasingly aggressive towards us but still refused to apologize to Tom.

Then at the end of week two of food checking, Tom brought a bucket for lunch. When he entered Karens office to have his lunch checked, like he did every day, and opened the lid of his lunch pot the smell hit everyone in vicinity like a brick to the face. Apparently he had made some unholy mix of garlic, cream, pickles and herring which he called fish soup. It looked like what happens if you leave something dead in the sun for too long, all brownish and sluggy with some green specks in it and it reeked twice as bad as it looked.
Karen looked as if she would puke any moment commanding him to remove this monstrosity from her office.

Tom asked if she didn't wanna check it, since he could imagine the cooling chain could have been broken during transport or some time in the last two weeks.

The lot of us drivers laughed so hard, I swear some nearly choked from laughter.

This was roughly the time that Karen had to admit defeat. Food checking stopped immediately and the following week Tom brought another cake.


Sorry for any typos.

Edit: Wow, and thank you guys for the awards!So i booked a flight for the 24th of December to visit my grandparents. Trying to be responsible i booked the flight 8 weeks in advance. Payed 150€ for both flights( there and return) And sure, i,ll pay that 6€  for a suitcase. So all is good and i forget about the flight.

 Well last week i get an email telling me that the flight time has changed, ok, i check it, Great! It departs 2 hours earlier. No worries. 3 days later. PING. Another email, but now the flight is a day prior. Shit. I have university that day. But let me see what i can do. Contact customer  service, jump trough hoops, but there is no alternative flight.

 Ok , while browsing i notice that the flight is now a bit cheaper, 40€ cheaper. So i ask if i can get a partial refund or an upgrade for the inconvenience of the flight leaving earlier and me reshuffling my schedule.

 Well , nope, they insist that i can only accept the flight or cancell it fully. I hold off. Not worth the hassle, i think. Who knows how long it takes to get my money back. 
So after a few days i check the flight, Wow they reduced the price, now the asking price is 7.99€, thats almost free. 

So i ask again, is a partial refund possible. 
Ok, no problem, please cancel my booking. 
24 hours later they notify me the full refund has been processed.

 Great now i book the flight again , for just 15€ there and back. Now thats a cheap flight. 
The taxi to the airport costs me more. But hey no partial refund 

Update: Today they change the departure time AGAIN now it departs at 7 in the morning instead of 2 in the afternoon.Many moons ago, after I married a narcessist a-hole; he started revealing his douche-baggary in subtle, stupid ways.      One way was: he stopped doing his chores, and stopped cleaning up after himself altogether.       That was really insulting because I had always worked a full-time job, and before we had wed, I had been VERY clear that I was not going to be a housewife; that we would do things equally.

Well, his answer to that was to say that I couldn't MaKe him do anything- if I wanted the house cleaned, I'd have to do it myself.
<slowburn>

For some reason, this made me thing of the Simpson's episode with Blinky the three-eyed fish; where Homer says to Marge, She can express herself with her lovely home.       So, I replied the way Marge did, "Okay, I will!" I said.     ...and immediately set to work.

Starting with the living room, I gathered my (now) Ex's jacket and clothing he'd left strewn about, and tossed them on his computer chair.      His backpack and books, also dropped on the computer chair.   Then I went in the kitchen and took his dirty dishes, and boom onto the chair.       His dirty laundry?      Plop, onto the chair ...which had fallen over by now.      Etc. Etc. until the house was clean, yay!

Now, my ex couldn't use his PC, till he cleaned up his shit.       That first night, he took it like a man.
The next night when I dumped all his stuff on his chair, and for good measure, vacuumed the rug and dumped the canister over his crap; he squealed like a pig, "What are you *doing*!?"

"I'm cleaning!" I answered him, "You wanted me to do it all- well, *this* is how I'm going to do it!"

He started doing his chores after that.     The divorce came later.


Whoa!    My first gold!    'I'd like to thank the academy...     '

A silver!     'You like me!    You *really* like me!'

Platinum!!!       'This is for the little people!'When I was a kid my parents made me take a religion class, (sunday school type thing, but it was a wednesday after regular school). This thing was 2 hours long, but always felt much longer.

One Wednesday we had a substitute teacher in class. This guy starts off class saying how he understands that it's a long class after we all had school earlier in the day. He said that if at any point we're feeling tired, want a drink of water from the fountain, or just want to walk around for a few minutes, let him know and he'll let you take a quick break during class.

About halfway through this class I was really running out of steam. Listening to this guy drone on was taking it's toll, and I raised my hand to ask to go get a drink of water.

When I came back a few minutes later, this asshole starts going off on me about how he can't believe how rude I was to be so disinterested that I wanted to leave, and that in all his years he's never had anyone take him up on his offer for a break.

When this guy was done chastising me for asking to get a drink of water (fuck me, right?), in a stroke of genius malicious compliance my buddy Jordan raised his hand and asked to take a break too. This teacher absolutely lost his mind!! And as a little bonus, Jordan and I got to hang out in the hallway for the rest of class. 

TL;DR - Teacher says you can take a break at any time during class. I take a break and he yells at me for taking a break. GGG raises his hand to take a break too. Teacher loses his shit! TL;DR at the bottom;

Sorry for the huge WoT and any grammar/spelling mistakes.

&#x200B;

**HUGE WALL OF CONTEXT**

I come from a country where moms are overprotective and criminality is not negligible (Not as safe as Japan, but also not war territory either, 3rd world issues).

I still lived with my parents at the time (i was 18ish) because we could not afford me moving out for college, so I would go to college everyday by car.

I had a car of my own, it was more than 10 years old back then but 'twas well taken care of; it was nearly a necessity having a car where I lived (not having to take the bus was a huge plus, no trains/subway over there).

My daily routine would consist of driving to the campus, classes, internship and gym, all which were in the campus' vicinity.

&#x200B;

Fast forward 3 years and I was in my last years of college/university and I could afford (with moms help and my part-time job) to finally replace my old faithful companion.

We managed to get a good second-hand car from an acquaintance and she agreed that i would pick up the car at a dealership (the details are not relevant).

On the day itself, i show up, get the keys and documents, everything is ok, I call my overprotective mom and let her know it's all good.

I do the usual route after, classes, internship and gym. But because i had to do extra car stuff, I was a little late on my schedule.

&#x200B;

By the time i leave the gym, it was already 8-9ish pm and i noticed that my phone was on top of my wallet, where one of my badges (probably internal university's id or something) triggered the NFCwhatever on the phone over and over, causing the battery to dry completely.

&#x200B;

No biggie right ? Here comes the second part of the huge wall of context with another key info:

My mom had her car stolen, at gun point (something very, very uncommon in our city) a couple of years before that, and since then, she was a bit paranoid with the whole driving-alone-after-7-8pm-thing,

asking me and my sister to always reply SMS and/or pick up the phone/call back within 30 minutes.

&#x200B;

When I get home, I see my mom, my dad and my sister all waiting for me in the living room, with their faces representing a mix between relief and WHERE THE FUCK WERE YOU, YOU SON OF A \*\*\*\*\*\*

I get my ass chewed hard by my mom, because I (supposedly) turned my phone off on purpose and she thought that I was kidnapped with the new (second-hand) car.

She called the university, their security department, the police, a couple of friends of mine and the gym (the person working at the front-desk also made sure to tell my mom "I didn't see him here today").

yadayadayada, she made me promise that i would tell her whenever I'd leave the gym, class or any other place that i might be late home.

&#x200B;

**HERE IS WHAT YOU WERE LOOKING FOR, THE MALICIOUS COMPLIANCE**

I said ok, if that's what she wants, shes getting it. My dad, in a mix of "do as your mom says" and "its not really my problem" agreed with her.

Smartphones were a thing, and so was an app fresh out of the oven called *Tasker*.

I used tasker for little things like, switching to silent mode when inside the campus, switching on and off all kinds of stuff you can imagine based on time/place/battery level, etc.

&#x200B;

You can already imagine where this is going right? Yes, i added a few extra rules that would send an SMS every time i would go in or out of one of those areas. To all my family members.

Enters gym, SMS mom, dad,sister "Im at the gym". Out of the gym SMS mom, dad, sister "Im out of the gym", for all the locations i mentioned previously (campus/classes, internship, gym and home).

&#x200B;

An important detail is that sometimes the phone's GPS signal jitters/wobbles a little, so the texts would be sent sometimes 2-5 times per location as the phone's location would alternate between in and out of the specified areas.

&#x200B;

After 5 minutes my sister texted me back: "Please stop, i get your point".

After half an hour, my dad texts me back: "I am at work, can you please stop texting me all the time, just text your mom"

Two hours later (not following the 30min rule btw), my mom replies (thinking it was not an automated message): "Hi son, thanks for letting me know, xoxo, mom"

&#x200B;

On the second day my mom figured it was an automatic system in place, and after seven days she also got tired of it and just asked me to inform her whenever something extraordinary happened instead.

&#x200B;

Edit: as a lot of ppl pointed out, i was a senior and not a freshman :)

**TL;DR: College senior me living with parents got ass chewed by overprotective mom for not picking up the phone the day i got a new(ish) car, developed flow with Tasker to spam her with SMS with my location.**