Quick Bio: Im 41, AA male, athletic build, 6', 200lbs, slightly above average in the manhood dept. My best features are my eyes and my voice (think Allstate man). I lost my v-card on my 15th bday and in the 26yrs that have followed, I've had countless approaches (+500), slept with over 200 women, have had about a half dozen LTRs, and I'm now engaged to a wonderful woman and we frequently enjoy the swinger lifestyle together.

Here's everything Ive learned; from being the best version of yourself, the simplest approaches, building attraction, securing a date (and avoiding flakes), my three date rule, sex that will have her begging for more, and transitioning into a LTR.

Enjoy.

Part One: The Best You

* The biggest hurdle you'll face in your seduction journey is trying to convince someone to invest in a product (i.e. YOU) that you don't believe in. Take some time and focus on you. Go to the gym, develop your style, work on building a life and lifestyle that you're happy with and proud of. It makes it so much easier to interact with women/people when you have an awesome life backing you up.

* A few quick style tips: It doesn't matter how you dress or what your style is; your clothes should always follow three simple rules: Clean, Neat, Fit. And remember, style is fluid, not stagnant. Sure shorts and a t-shirt are comfortable, but slacks and a button down are stylish. Change it up and dress for the occassion.

* You dont need a shit ton of money, the body of a greek god, or the face of a cover model. All you need is a positive attitude, confidence, and a little bit of "fuck it" to be successful with women. 

* Discover your best features and use them to your advantage. I'm constantly complemented on my voice so I trained myself to speak in a tone/pace that makes people focus and pay attention. Once I have their attention, the rest is cake. Whatever your best feature is, learn to utilize and market it to your advantage.

Part Two: Approaches

* Smile. This not only makes you instantly more attractive, it eases tensions in others.

* There is no golden opener or perfect pickup line. Odds are, if you approach a random attractive woman, she knows why you're there. Just be authentic and genuine. The truth is that it doesnt matter what you say, but *how* you say it makes all the difference in the world. And at the end of the day, if she finds you attractive, it less about saying the right thing and more about not saying the wrong thing.

* Approach is the goal. Dont focus on anything else. There are a dozen reasons you'll get rejected (**IT WILL HAPPPEN!**), and 10 of them dont have shit to do with you. Just approach. "No" is always the answer to a question unasked.

* A.B.E. - Always Be Escalating. Not just in your approach, but in every step of your romantic interaction. 

* Make her **WANT** to. Your job is not to try to convince or persuade her to do anything with you. Your job is to make her *want* to; want to give you her contact info, want to go out with you, want to kiss you, want to touch you, want to have sex with you, want to be with you. And when a woman wants, it's easier give.

* Most importantly, always remember that you are inviting her to be a part of YOUR world, not asking for a place in hers. Women come and go. You are the only constant in your life. So invite her to be a part of it, and not the other way around.

Part 3: Communication

* Diversify your communication. Don't rely on just texts. Since one of my best features is my voice, I'll record a simple voice message and send it to her "Hey. I hope your having a wonderful day. I really enjoy talking to you and I'd love to hear your voice later. Call me when you have some time to chat."

This makes her WANT to talk to me.

* Throw in some pics (no dic pics guys) of you just out and enjoying life.

* Add a meme or two that describes your mood or day.

* Dig deep. Get to know her. Ask about her day, her life, her family, her hopes and dreams, her goals, her fears, her secret desires. Find out as much about who she is and what she wants as possible.

* Don't over share. Think of yourself as a nesting doll; share each doll sparringly. No one likes a simple puzzel.

Part 4: Dating

* Don't ask a woman "out". Instead, ask her to join you for something: 

"Have any plans Saturday?"

"Not at the moment."

"Well,  Im going to go to X and do Y and I remember you mentioned you like X and Y, care to join me? Afterwards, maybe we can Z. I can pick you up or we can meet at (time)."

Now, firstly, this eliminates "flakes" because A) You're doing it anyway and her attendence is not required for you to enjoy your life. And B) How she responds will let you know how to proceed. If she is non-commital, then retract your offer and move on. If she's down, you have plans.

* There are three dates that really matter: The Physical Date (something active that gets your blood flowing and heart racing), the Formal Affair (something that gives her a reason to dress up and show off), and the Intimate Setting (something private for just the two of you). How you interact in these three dates will tell you everything you need to know about each other. 

What I typically do is make the first date a physical one, the second a formal one, and for the third, I usually offer to cook her dinner at my place. 99.9995% of the time, this leads to Secci Tymes.

(A quick note about dates: You dont have to spend a lot of money or try to impress a woman. One of my go-to dates when I was low of funds was a picnic in the park. Play some music, make a salad, get some fruit, maybe a bottle of wine, and just sit, chill, and talk. Bring a frisbee or a football)

* Learn to cook. You dont have to be a culinary master, but you should have at least a half dozen dishes under your belt; something with chicken, seafood/shellfish, beef/steak, and something vegetarian.

* Also, learn to bake. A man that can feed you well, satisfy your sweettooth, and fuck your brains out is always a keeper. Which leads us to...

Part V: Physical Escalation

* Remember, you want to make her *WANT* to... 

One of the ways I do this is a psuedo-push/pull. Let's say I'm out with a woman having drinks at a bar. I'll get close, do something intimate and sensual (kiss her hand, caress her cheek), and then I'll move away. I wait until she comes to me, either closing the distance between us or reciprocating the intimacy. Then I take it to the next level. Rinse... repeat.

* You never want to make a woman feel like she's giving you intimacy. Instead, make her desire that intimacy and fullfill that desire. 

Part 6: Sex

* There's no one way or "right" way to satisfy a woman. Every woman is different and while there are many commonalities, ultimately, you have to learn each womans body in order to completely satisfy her desires.

* To that, learn to "listen" to her body; the way she moves, breathes, the noises she makes (or doesnt), the way she tilts her head, holds her breath, curls her toes, grips the sheets... these are all road markers to her pleasure.

* It doesnt (really) matter how big (or small) your dick is, it doesnt matter how good you are at oral (ok... that one *kinda* matters), what matters is your ability to read and guage her pleasure and respond accordingly.

* A few Protips: Stamina isn't how long you can go without climax. Stamina is how long you can maintain the pleasure despite climax. Go down on a woman for 20 minutes, have intercourse for five, and then go down on her again for another 35 minutes and when someone asks her how long she had sex, the answer wont be "five minutes", it'll be an hour.

* Always remember the FDL rule: She cums First, she cums During, she cums Last.

* And if she doesnt/cant orgasm, it doesn't mean she wont/didnt enjoy it, and it definitely doesnt mean you should focus or obsess over it. A womans pleasure is just as much her responsibility as it is her partners. Some women have a hard time reaching climax. It's not you. Dont overthink it.

* Sex isnt just oral and intercourse. Sex is every intimate, sensual moment leading up to, including, and after intercourse. Its all those things you do, all those buttons you can press, that turn each other on. Dont focus on just the physical. If you can turn a woman on without touching her, she will follow you to the ends of the Earth.

* Toys are your friend!

* Dirty talk is a raunchy conversation. Dont just shout obscenities like a Touretts sufferer; ask questions, make comments, give instructions.

* Learn how to give a full body massage.

Part 7: Transitioning into a LTR

* Dont focus in the goal. Sure, we all want the white picket fence scenario (or version of), but a relationship is a journey. Dont be the passenger in the car yelling "Are we there yet?" every few dates. More over, know what you want out of a relationship and a partner before seeking to have one. Looking for a relationship without knowing what kind of relationship you want/need is like going to the grocery store hungry; you'll wind up with a lot of crap with very little nutritional value.

* When you're ready.... *really* ready to commit to someone, go out for a drink and have a mature conversation about how you feel, why, and where you want the relationship to go, and ask them to share their thoughts and feelings, then proceed accordingly. 

* Dont assume that just because you've been on six dates and had sex four times that you're in a relationship.  

Hope someone here finds this useful. Its pretty bare bones but its the backbone to the success I've enjoyed with women. Feel free to share your thoughts or ask questions.

Cheers!Honestly, I was so impressed by him just for having the guts to actually walk up to me and my friend (both of us wearing masks) and introducing himself out of nowhere. He did so politely, shook both of our hands, said we struck his eye but that I was more of his type, obviously trying (and successfully so) not to insult my friend. She then left and we had a short chat. I then told him I was into more older guys, which is true. Encouraged him to keep his game up and thanked him for the compliment. 

I don’t know if this is gonna get downvoted or so. But what I want to say, I guess, is that it truly is impressive to me, and I’m sure other women too, when a man actually approaches us. Honestly, go for it. Who ever views it as an insult is too messed for their opinion to matter anyways. I have great respect for your courage and appreciate it a lot!A nice little excerpt from Mark Manson's "[Models: Attract Women Through Honesty](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/12633800-models)":

&#x200B;

>Men who have the perception of women as these ego-centric creatures who laugh at us from their sexual mountain-tops, doling out which man gets (a chance at) the divine pussy access and which man gets to squander away his time in solitude — it doesn’t work like that.  
>  
>Think about it. Why do women spend so much time and effort on their appearance? Why do they go to singles’ bars and join dating sites and give blind dates a try? They don’t do it so that they can revel in rejecting a bunch of guys. They’re just as lonely and frustrated as we are. They want to meet a man. But not just any man, a great man — a man who is confident, charming, fun, and interesting. A man who is non-needy, who is vulnerable, and who will honestly express himself to her.  
>  
>She wants you to be that man. She’s secretly rooting for you. She doesn’t want to reject you. Every time a new man walks up to her, she’s secretly saying to herself, "Please, please, please, be that man! Be the attractive man that I can't say no to." And then he nervously stutters around buying her a drink and making uncomfortable jokes about the weather and she’s back to that horribly uncomfortable position of having to reject him again.  
>  
>Other times it doesn’t even get that far. It’s obvious before he even opens his mouth that it’s game over. He’s dressed like a clown or hasn’t combed his hair in three months, or he’s too drunk to even look at her directly.  
>  
>This is also why women are willing to overlook a lot of bonehead moves and mistakes we make if they like us. It’s amazing how many second and third chances a woman will give you if she likes you. She’s rooting for you. She’s your biggest fan. She’s saying, “Oh, he chickened out on asking me out this time, but I’ll find an excuse to call him so maybe he’ll do it next time.” They’re begging for you to succeed. They want it just as bad as you do. That women at the party, in the coffee shop, on the dating site, they want you to be that unbelievably attractive man, that man who makes time stop for them and can make them feel things they’ve never felt before. They want you to be that. And when they reject you, it’s not because they enjoy it, or because they have a big ego, or because you’re too short or your muscles aren’t big enough…  
>  
>It’s because you didn’t give her that feeling. You didn’t make her spin and fall and laugh and forget where she was or who she was with. That’s what she goes out looking for: the man who can make her feel more alive.  
>  
>The next time you make your move, when she sees you coming — and trust me, she usually sees you coming — know that **she’s already rooting for you**. Secretly, she wants you to succeed as much as you do. And for a moment, she’s your biggest fan.  
>  
>And your role as a man is to take action. It’s all on you. It’s always on you. You move things forward.**Distinguishing the key differences between Nice Guys and genuinely good men.**

In this world, there is a subset of men that believe women are only attracted to assholes.

Which is true, if you preface this belief with 'very few'.

The vast majority of women are attracted to good men.

The subset of men that believe otherwise are Nice Guys.

# What's a Nice Guy?

## Nice Guy: (noun)

A man that displays overwhelming acts of kindness towards women, with a firm expectation of immediate romantic or sexual rewards.

Some of the common traits of a Nice Guy include:

## He puts women on a pedestal

Nice guys are prone to putting women on a pedestal. They do so to the point of making a woman uncomfortable, or worse, bored.

They will 'coincidentally' have all of the same hobbies and interests as her.

They will agree with all of her world views and personal opinions.

They refuse to say anything that could offend her (up until the point she rejects him, but we'll get to that in a moment).

They are at her beck and call whether or not she becks or calls for it. 

They constantly fawn over her.

They laugh too loudly at her throwaway jokes.

They drown her in unnecessary flattery.

## He's dishonest

Nice Guy's are, by their very nature, dishonest.

They pretend to agree with everything a woman says.

They deceive women through the use of emotional manipulation.

They falsely big-note themselves to women.

They literally tell women: 'I'm a good guy'.

Nice Guys are dishonest.

## He's a (sore) loser

When a nice guy faces rejection from a woman, his response generally involves a two-step approach:

## 1. He initially ignores it.

A Nice Guy will relentlessly continue his pursuit of a woman, despite any subtle, initial signals she gives off that she's not interested.

As such, women are eventually pushed to the point of forcefully spelling it out to him: 'I'M NOT INTERESTED, LEAVE ME ALONE'.

## 2. He throws a tantrum

Once a Nice Guy realises defeat, he doesn't keep his cool and move on from the rejection with grace and civility.

He burns the bridge between him and her until there is nothing left but the charred remains of his bruised ego.

He calls her a prude or a slut (or sometimes both, unaware of the irony).

He makes nasty comments about her personal appearance.

Finally, he caps it off with something along the lines of: 'I'm out of your league anyway.'

Here is an example of how this could play out in an online dating scenario:

**Nice Guy: Hello Emily, you have beautiful eyes. I should tell you, I'm not like most guys. I know how to treat a girl right. If you go out with me, I'll be the one in the kitchen making YOU a sandwich! Hehe...**

**Emily: Hey, thanks for the compliment.**

**Nice Guy: You're welcome. So, what sort of sandwich can I come over and make for you tonight?**

**\*15 minutes pass\***

**Nice Guy: Hello?**

**Emily: Hey, sorry, I'm at work. I appreciate the offer, but I just got out of a relationship, and I'm not really ready to meet up with any guys just yet.**

**Nice Guy: Well that's good, cos I'm not just any guy. Hehe.How about we take it slow then. Let me take you out for a coffee.**

**Emily: As I said, I'm not ready for that yet.**

**Nice Guy: Come on, I promise I'm a good guy.**

**Emily: Look, I'm not interested, ok? Sorry.**

**Nice Guy: Ok, fine. Jeez. Just trying to be nice.**

**\*15 minutes pass\***

**Nice Guy: I bet you'll end up dating some jobless loser who treats you like shit.** 

**\*1 hour passes\***

**Nice Guy: No wonder your last boyfriend left you. Women only date asshole losers. If you don't want to meet any guys, then why the fuck are you on this app in the first place?**

**\*1 hour passes\***

**Nice Guy: Fine, don't respond. Slut.**

Nice Guys fail to realise that by being sore losers, they are indeed assholes themselves.

## He has no respect for women

Deep down, Nice Guys have no respect for women. 

This is apparent when you witness the Jekyll to Hyde transformation a Nice Guy makes whenever a woman rejects him.

It is also apparent with the overwhelming approach Nice Guys take in their pursuit of a woman.

Men who respect women don't check in on them every ten minutes, nor do they leave women banks of 4 unresponded text messages on the regular. 

This sort of behaviour is invasive, uncomfortable and ultimately, disrespectful.

## He's completely unaware of himself

Nice Guys seldom accept fault when a woman rejects them.

They refuse to consider: 'If I keep sending women uncomfortably flattering messages and not a single one of them responds positively, maybe that's on me?'

Instead, a Nice Guy carries on recycling the same tired, empty messages, growing more resentful with each rejection he receives in response.

A Nice Guy's inability to self-reflect and self-improve condemns him to a life of bitter cynicism and exponentially painful rejection.

## Are Nice Guys born Nice Guys, or do they become them?

Now that you've read through some of the typical traits of a Nice Guy, you're probably wondering: 'are Nice Guys born Nice Guys, or do they become them?'

While many Nice Guys have always been selfish, cynical people, not all of them were born this way. Some are newly Nice Guys.

## What's a newly Nice Guy?

Newly Nice Guys are those that began their dating life as insecure, misguided young men and devolved into Nice Guys over time.

Let me show you an example of how this happens.

In this example, I'll call our pre-Nice Guy, Guy.

***Guy starts speaking to a woman.***

***He is overwhelmingly flattering in his approach.***

***The woman feels uncomfortable, and eventually, Guy gets rejected.***

***Guy is heartbroken by the rejection and confused as to why she rejected him. After all, he was so kind and friendly towards her.***

***Eventually, he gets over the rejection and moves on in search of another.***

***Guy starts speaking to a new woman.***

***Just like last time, he is overwhelmingly flattering in his approach.***

***The woman feels uncomfortable, and eventually, Guy gets rejected.***

***Guy is heartbroken by the rejection and even more confused as to why it happened. After all, he was so kind and friendly towards her.***

***Eventually, he gets over the rejection and moves on in search of another.***

As this pattern continues, Guy becomes a little more cynical and a little more frustrated each time.

Ever heard of the saying: The definition of madness is trying the same thing over and over and expecting a different result?

Well, that's spot on in the case of how some men become newly Nice Guys, and how Nice Guys stay Nice Guys.

They continue the same lazy, ill-conceived attempts at seduction over and over, expecting someone will eventually take the bait.

As the rejections pile up, they develop a resentment towards women, become sore-losers and convince themselves into believing that the only reason women don't like them, is because women are only attracted to assholes.

## Let's talk about good men

Nice Guys and good men are polar opposites.

While a Nice Guy is disrespectful, insincere, overly agreeable and selfish, a good man is respectful, confident, honest and selfless.

Some of the common traits of a good man include:

## He carries out acts of kindness with no ulterior motive

Good men don't hold the door open for women or compliment their smiles, as a way to get her into bed.

A good man displays acts of kindness towards women because being kind and respectful is in his nature.

Women appreciate acts of kindness when they sense that it's being delivered in a sincere, ulterior free manner.

Sincere gestures from a man lower a woman's defences and increase his credibility in her eyes.

## He treats women as individuals

Unlike Nice Guys, (who let their negative experiences with a few women dictate their views on all women) a good man treats women on a case by case basis.

This is beneficial, regardless of the outcome of his past encounters with women.

When a past encounter was negative, he doesn't project his baggage onto the next woman.

When a past encounter was positive, he doesn't set unrealistically high expectations upon the next woman.

## He's a good loser

When a good man gets rejected by a girl, (yes, it does happen) no matter how painful it feels, he knows when to call it quits, accept the loss and move on.

He won't respond to her rejection message demanding she explains herself further.

He won't accuse her of disliking him because he treated her too well.

He won't send her insulting messages until he elicits an emotional response from her.

He's too busy getting back on his feet and finding somebody else.

***Disclaimer:*** *The recovery time from a break-up is dependent on the length and nature of the relationship. I'm not suggesting good men move on from every rejection quickly and effortlessly.*

## He doesn't dote on women

Good men are rarely accused of appearing desperate in their pursuit of a woman.  This is namely because a good man won't dote on a woman.

Before he compliments her, he senses that the situation calls for it.

He won't show strong affection towards a woman until he feels that the relationship has developed to a point where his affection will be well received and reciprocated.

He doesn't treat women like poor, lost puppies, as he sees them as adults who are capable of looking after themselves.

## He is always looking for ways to improve

Good men are naturally self-reflective beings.

When a good man realises his shortcomings or is faced with rejection, he makes a concerted effort to confront and improve himself.

This is vastly different from Nice Guys, who prefer to blame their problems on everyone else.

## He challenges women

Good men won't enthusiastically agree with everything a woman says and does. If he disagrees with something she's said, he will make it known, respectfully.

Good men also aren't afraid to make fun of a woman (in a fun and playful way). 

Examples of this include: 'I'd ask you to dance, but you couldn't handle my moves' or 'I don't think you and I are going to work out, we should call it quits now' (after she reveals she doesn't like Nando's).

## He is self-assured

Good men know their worth and remind themselves of it often.

They won't bend at the will of others or let 'haters' alter the views they have of themselves.

They hold strong to their values and express them to women in a mature are rational manner.

## He respects women

Good men view women as their peers.

By treating women as their peers (which, in fairness, all men rightfully should), good men reap 2 benefits:

1. They don't run the risk of becoming subservient to a woman.
2. They don't view women as inferior by expecting immediate gratification for their attempts at seduction (therefore their expectations aren't constantly crushed, leading them down a hateful emotional spiral ala Nice Guys.)

## He owns his insecurities

Being a good man doesn't mean being free from insecurities.

Sure, the average good man has far fewer insecurities than the average Nice Guy, but still - he does have them.

The difference is, he's not afraid to admit them.

Where a Nice Guy will channel his insecurities into bullying others and bringing them down, a good man owns his insecurities and looks to address them in a healthy manner.

The way a good man owns his insecurities is by:

\- Being open about them and seeking counsel from friends where necessary

\- Considering ways he can alleviate his insecurities by improving himself

\- Developing strong empathy and understanding for the insecurities of others, based on those he possesses within himself

# Final thoughts

While the traits listed above provide an underlying framework of what makes a Nice Guy vs. what makes a good man, the world is not so black and white.

Some good guys have moments of weakness, just as some Nice Guys have moments of clarity and good.

If you are guilty of a few Nice Guy traits and you fear you could become a full-blown Nice Guy, please know - there's still a chance for salvation.

My advice to you is to change your mindset and attitude towards women, but firstly - towards yourself.

If you don't,  you are likely to live a life filled with romantic rejection and increasing bitterness towards yourself and others.

Nice Guys, start being good men.

Good men, keep up the good work.

This is taken from my website - Men with Manners.

[Here is a link to the original post](https://www.menwithmanners.com/advice/women-dont-like-nice-guys-women-like-good-men)Quick snap shot for you brothers. 

Recently began dating again; blonde, blue eyes, olive skin. 
The sort where you can't go anywhere without men craning their necks looking at her. 

2016 started off rough, I drew a line in the sand and focussed on these core principles. 
Not one of them is women. 

1. Health: gym (no less than 4 times a week) clean eating, lots of water
2. Career: work hard, regardless of industry, work hard.
3. Style: Instagram is a great source of inspiration, care for how you present yourself. This is not for them, this is for you. 
4. Social: keep an active social life with friends, coffees dinners drinks. Go to events. Be seen. 

This morning she said one sentence which for me defines how women view men. And it's essential in how we attract and how we remain attractive. 

Word for word 

"What I find so attractive about you, is you have this amazing, exciting, full life and I get this feeling your life is good with or without me in it. I love it"   

Good luck boys 

Edit: There have been a few questions about Instagram, for me personally I find Instagram works well, but it may not for you, there is a wealth of inspiration out there. I follow accounts that I like personally, usually searching hashtags is a good idea. Although as much as anything and this point I cannot express enough; 
there is no right or wrong way to do this, but it's being open enough to seek inspiration to present yourself better. 

So I’m a barista (19F) and there is this cute customer (25M)who comes in regularly that I have a crush on. I’ve been trying to get him to notice me and talk more. I got the perfect chance yesterday. It was raining so no outside seating where I would have to run back a forth for orders and not have time to talk. 

The shop is completely empty because of the mid afternoon lull. He walks in, asks if it’s okay to sit inside (always the gentleman). We actually get to have a long uninterrupted conversation. I tease him a bit and he smirks back he doesn’t even open is backpack to do work. 

Now he has long blonde hair that’s tucked behind his ears. There is one curl in front of his ear that’s not tucked back. He’s in the middle of something before I just tuck it behind his ear. I said “sorry that was bothering me” he replied “I would hate to not look my best for you”.

I still can’t believe I touched his face.


UPDATE: https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/hxliqb/19_year_old_barista_update/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmfI feel like this is one of my best pieces of advice I give my friends and want to share. A girl will NOT take her sweet time to leave if she didn’t enjoy the date. She will get out that car/ room/ etc QUICK. If she’s lingering stop being scared and go for the kiss/move to initiate the sexual tone before it enters the friendzone. Geez LouiseRan into this girl in my class outside of the class and I struck up a convo with her.  Got her # and we made plans to go drinking.

At the bar we were with a mutual friend and he sat across from us, my arm laid on the booth behind her head.

She began to talk about other guys at a certain point, which I bit into and agreed “oh yeah, I wouldn’t push him outta bed shiiit”

She talked about a guy she had a crush on in class, I did the same thing I had said about other guys.

Toward the end of the bar scene she called two
of her guy friends to come drink with us, instead of getting jealous I just entertained them and made friends.

(I believe these were shit tests as mystery would say)

Whole time all this is going on I’m getting gradually more hands, she’s starting to grab the inside of my leg, and we end up getting a ride home from the guys she called.

We get up to my room (me, her, and our friend) and after a while the friend says he has to go home.

Me and her had been cuddling on the couch for a second and when that door shut I knew I had to make a move.

I got cold feet and though “well maybe she doesn’t want it” then I remembered she was currently feeling up my body on my couch in a room with just us, of course she fucking wants it.

I tilt her head up, we get to making out.

Got to banging

Sleep

Woke up

Bang again

Dick was so numb I didn’t even bust quick!

We’re getting lunch in an hour and then going back to day drinking.

Never been laid before, thanks you guys!

Edit:

I really appreciate all the support this post got, I had another great experience with her last night where I almost fucked it up.  I’ll post it in a bit, thanks again to everybody in the community posting their reports and sharing their knowledge!So I've (F/20) been reading some of the cold approach posts recently (mostly from men talking about women) and some of them described approaching girls on the street and telling them they're pretty. What I'm about to say is only based on my personal experience and some conversations with my female friends, so keep that in mind, please.

I've been approached in various places but what I've noticed is: when a guy walks up to me on the street when I'm going somewhere and he outright says to me something along the lines of "Hey, you're pretty, what's your name", I'm almost always startled and want to leave asap. First, because I'm usually in a rush and need to get somewhere and he's stopping me and making me be late, second, because I already know what's on his mind. And don't get me wrong - it's really nice that someone thinks I'm attractive and I don't suspect every guy to constantly think of sex, it's just... he's already stating, in his very first words to me, that he's only talking to me because he's thinking of me in a "date material" sort of way. And it makes me kind of uncomfortable, because I'd rather meet you first, talk to you about things, get to know your character and your charisma, and THEN ask you out or be asked out on a date (or give you my phone number/be given yours). You get it - my appearance wouldn't matter to you, if you only wanted to expand a social circle; by mentioning my looks first, you're making a clear statement of your motives.

On the other hand, I've also been approached in bars, in clubs, on campus and in supermarkets/shops. What those situations had in common was me not rushing anywhere and those guys starting a conversation with saying something casual, for example asking about the lettering on my tote bag (it's sort of a wordplay). One mentioned that he thought my glasses were really cool and then showing me his, which were almost identical; another one asked me if I knew what the bar's specialty was etc.

Basically what I'm trying to say is: all of the successful approaches were super laid back (I didn't feel 'hunted down'), gave me a chance to escape them without saying that I'm not interested (it's actually quite hard to tell such a thing to someone) or lying about having a boyfriend (that only happens when a guy is too persisent). Those guys also made it really easy for me to get into a conversation with them and actually let me talk to them like I'm a normal person (not just an object of physical attraction), thus making it easier to either exchange numbers or just expand our social circles (without any pressure). They made me feel like a nice human being, worthy of their attention not just because of my looks but rather because they found me be an interesting person to talk to (girlfriend material or not).

I think I've made it into a little rant, but I honestly don't mean to offend anyone. I'm also really curious about your experience (both women and men) :)

Tl;dr when cold approaching a girl, consider your surroundings (if it's an approach-friendly place), the timing (if it's not busy work hours etc.) and your opening line (if you're not 'attacking' her with compliments rather than starting an interesting conversation).

EDIT: I want to be clear though, that I'm only talking on behalf of the women from my social circle and my family and we're from central Europe, so that's an information you may want to take into consideration. Cultural differences may have an impact on your success with cold approaches depending on your location. Also, yeah, I might only be 20, but I've talked about this many, many times with teenagers, girls my age and women over 30 and I'm not writing all this to offend anyone - I only hope to make approaching women more comfortable for both sides.Hello Seddit! Throwaway for obvious reasons, I’ll put a short bio at the bottom.

I’m a lady who loves men and loves the D. Here are some ideas:


* **Daygame: when going places, don’t wear headphones**

Every time you leave the house, there is infinite potential for meeting girls. Even if they aren’t bangable, you can make female friends who will introduce you to hot bitties. Wearing headphones makes you pretty unapproachable and less likely to chat up the cute girl on the bus. Stare out the window and observe stranger’s conversations. Be comfortable in the presence of others without having to rely on candy crush to keep you company. Nothing is sexier than someone who is completely at ease with themselves. 


* **Wear cologne**

Buy yourself some cologne and wear it every time you leave the house. I melt if a guy smells good, it lifts your attractiveness exponentially. Your game can be terrible yet we will still want to fuck your brains out if you smell amazing. When you are going shopping for cologne, wear your normal deodorant as you want to ensure it doesn’t clash. Nothing conjures up memories more than smell, so by wearing the same scent every day you are infiltrating her subconscious mind.


* **Live with girls**

Nope, your mother doesn’t count. I mean sometime during your adult life consider living with a lady/ladies. Whether it is a flatmate, a girlfriend or a sister, this will HUGELY improve your game. Especially if you have a habit of putting girls on a pedestal or get easily intimidated by hot girls.  You’ll gain insight into how girls think and live. Yes, girls look terrible when they wake up after a big night drinking. They also take big, smelly shits. Sorry to burst your bubble. They will also invite female friends over, increasing your social network and therefore chances of getting laid. 


* **Become the type of girl you are attracted to**

Do you like athletic, toned girls? Join the gym and a local sports team, start getting ripped (NOTE: you do NOT have to be ripped to get girls as we are attracted to a variety of body types, see dot point later)

Into hipster girls? Grow that moustache, dress like Zooey Deschanel’s boyfriend and frequent bars that indie girls go to. 

Or maybe sophisticated, career oriented ladies butter your muffin. Suit up, knuckle down and climb that career ladder. Are you a guy still in high school? You will be able to cast a very wide net and be extremely desirable if you work to become a doctor, lawyer, firefighter etc. 


* **When drinking, ensure that you are less drunk than the lady**

Getting hammered on tequila shots can be awesome fun. Trust me, I’m a bartender. But make sure that you are slightly LESS drunk than your female companion (prey?). Carrying a guy out of a bar is not so fun. 


* **Exercise, not just for aesthetics**

A great physique not only is visually attractive, it shows consistent commitment and dedication- attributes HIGHLY valued in potential partners. I’m athletic so am attracted to sporty dudes, but also love guys that are a little bit chubby. Instead of focusing your energy on exercising for appearance, use it to improve your inner game. Do it because it releases endorphins and makes you feel like a fucking king. Get outside in the sunshine and soak up some vitamin D. You will be and look healthier, and increase your chances of a girl soaking up your D …see what I did there ;) ? 


* **For the love of god, please manscape**

Ladies generally put a lot of time into maintaining their appearance. Please do us the favour by keeping clean down there. No-one likes sweaty ball sack aroma, and mufasa pubes are not appreciated. 


* **Guys who have had girlfriends are the best lays**

Controversial, I know. This is a personal opinion but one that is shared with a majority of girls that I have discussed this with. Especially with guys from their teens to their late 20s, previous relationship history is a much better indicator than dick size of how good they are in bed. The theory behind this is that someone who has been in a relationship has had to put effort into finding out a partners turn ons, and knows what makes sex satisfying for both parties. It isn’t the how many chicks you’ve banged, so stop worrying about your number. Guys that have only have one night stands are often a dud root. If you’ve had a previous relationship, it also instills hope that we could be the girl to change your bad boy ways.
 
If having a girlfriend is not your thing, put some time into learning what makes a girl feel really good. Get a regular fuck buddy and have SOBER sex. Get good at oral. Know what positions work with your penis size (for example, well endowed guys can cause discomfort hitting the cervix when they pump away at a girl doggy style. Smaller penises can do well at different angles, especially positions where they thrust from behind).


* **If you approach, you’re doing better than 9/10 guys**

Please approach us. Especially during the day, this is much more flattering than when you’re hammered in a club. Even if you don’t get a number close, it gives the girl a story to tell her friends later and gives you the real life experience that is needed. This goes even more for the really gorgeous ones.  Super hot chicks may intimidate guys, so you actually may have a shot with that HB. Often the only ones that approach are over-confident, alpha schmucks- this may not be the personality type that that particular HB10 is attracted to.


**So there you go, hope some of this helps. **

I’ve been lurking here for a while and wanted to share some pointers. I’m female, early 20s and work part time at a bar in addition to studying. As the title suggests, I have had a huge variety of relationships from boyfriends to fun hookups and FWBs. 
 
These tips are pretty general, but if there is interest I will chat with some hot ladies and hustle for more specific advice.



**TL DR:** Too lazy to read? Too lazy to get a root

**Update**: Well this was more popular than I expected it to be. Thanks guys! It seems that there is interest in FWBs, day game and college game and I'll elaborate further tomorrow.
Your mind seeks comfort. It will trick you into complacency whenever possible. You can rationalize excuses for not chasing what you want, but ultimately your reality is incongruous with your desires. This dissonance will build and inevitably manifest through depression, anxiety, and hopelessness.

Once you're here, it can become very difficult to escape. It can seem like the only way you'll ever become happy is if you have all the things you've ever wanted (multiple fwb, attention and validation from girls and friends, etc.) The more hopeless you become, the further you feel you are from ever realistically reaching these goals. Taking a large leap like approaching a random girl or even going on a date from a hopeless state like this can cause gut-wrenching anxiety that makes it feel like you'll never be successful as a man.

The way out of this hole is incredibly simple. You have to fucking climb. It can be an inch at a time, but as long as you're making consistent progress, you can find solace in the fact that you will, by sheer will and inevitability, become a successful man.

There's no better way to suck the joy out of life than to convince yourself that you'll "finally be happy" when you've achieved X. Gaining 30lb of muscle will improve your life immeasurably, sure. Getting that girl will be gratifying, yes. But these accomplishments won't make you happy. When you've achieved them, all you'll think about is how they didn't live up to your expectations. This mindset will make you chronically dissatisfied. It will only push you further back into hopelessness. I know because I've been there.

To enjoy life is to enjoy the process. Gratitude changes everything. This may sound like self-help BS, but it's true. When I think back to my most content state, it wasn't mid-orgasm in some random chick. Some of my happiest days have been spent entirely in my own company, eating, lifting, and doing whatever suits me. Be grateful for the fact that you're able-bodied, young, and male. Be grateful for the fact that you have the opportunity to improve yourself physically, mentally, and socially. Be grateful for the fact that you can bring value and laughter into other people's lives. Shit really ain't that serious, dude.

Lift, meditate, and read. Play an instrument. Go for a walk. Pet a cat. In the long term, these are the things that make life worth living – not the attention of some vain 19 year old girl who spends her day on instagram. Chasing her validation will lead you absolutely nowhere. Sure, the prospect of sex can be exciting. But don't ever confuse that excitement with the promise of happiness.

The truth is, no girl can make you happy. If you're already happy, she can add to your life, sure. But if you feel truly hopeless, a girl's validation can only provide fleeting hope – a hope that will fade when she inevitably loses attraction for the weak, needy version of you.

I'm not gonna profess to be an expert on any of this shit. I'm very early on in this journey myself (I'm only 19 ffs). But I just recently began to pull myself out of a hopeless depression much like what I described, and I thought that someone could benefit from hearing this.

Stay strong boys, and keep climbing.

Edit: thanks for the gold! glad this could help so many of youHello, as a woman I might be in a minority here but i still wish to express this since I’ve seen many posts here like “should i approach a girl if she smiles at me?” and alot of comments discourage men from shooting their shot since women are just being fRiEnDlY.

I agree, women tend to be friendly BUT if you make eye contact and she hold it/ looks away then looks back and smiles just approach her. If you can see the eye contact lasts longer than the one you’d make with an acquaintance to acknowledge their presence then it’s a clear sign of attraction. On top of that if she smiles it’s a clear hint!!!!

We women realize that most men (even if you don’t want to admit it) like to play a game of cat and mouse at least for a bit and if we smile it literally means “i like you please come talk to me” its kind of like teasing but in a really subtle way. 

So men of seduction subreddit please approach my girls out there! Best of luck!I used to go on dates thinking “Will this girl like me”? This would inevitably lead to needy behavior where I tried to impress her, boast about myself and try to act cool. This is a major turnoff for most women.

Now, that mindset has changed to “Will I like her?”. And this is INSANELY powerful. Women try to prove themselves to me. They try to impress me while I sit back and watch them do all the work for me.

On one of the occasional, the woman herself asked if I wanted to go to her place after the date. I suggested it the other two times. But I took all three to my place as I’m most comfortable escalating there.

Trust me, this change is not easy. It took me few failed first dates and many failed multiple-dates to get to this point. But even if you are not there, just fake it while going out on dates. Always say to yourself “Will I like her?”. Don’t ever try to impress her, but play it cool. It’ll take some practice but you’ll get there! Also say this to yourself - “I’m prepared to walk if I don’t like her”. It is VERY intimidating at first as you might think that she’s your only chance. But it is counterintuitive. The less you chase, the more women will chase you!

Good luck fellas!Now is the time to figure out what you enjoy, set up habits, or learn and develop abilities in certain areas, so when quarantine is over, you can keep working on them, and have them in your Top 3.

Is there a new skill you have ever wanted to learn, like playing the guitar, or cooking certain types of dishes, etc?

Is there a language you might be interested in learning? Any subject like history you would like to read books about? You can order books online, and also learn a lot from the internet.

Or you can try to write a book or blog? Or do something creative like paint, or draw, etc.

Maybe try some exercise like push-ups, squats, etc. Our options for exercises are limited with quarantine, but there can still be a little that is done indoors. Start to get into the habit of exercising regularly now so you can have this as one of your Top 3 when quarantine is over.

Or is there something you used to enjoy doing when you were younger, but don't do anymore? Or maybe there is something you do currently, but you wished you did more of?

Now is a good time to explore and develop these areas. The options are limited to indoor activities, but it's still a good place to start, and there are lots of indoor hobbies that can be in your Top 3 (like what I mentioned at the start of this post).

The biggest lesson I have learnt about girls is that "Being Productive is being Attractive." When you are busy and have more important things than girls, you fix a lot of unattractive behaviour. You become less needy, and less outcome dependent. So when you do go out to meet girls, you are less emotionally invested in them and their reaction to you, and this makes you more attractive to them.

You can't practise game now, but you can try to figure out what are some things more important to you than girls, and start working on them. The more time you spend on your new goals/activities/skills, and the more you see yourself growing and improving, the more emotionally invested you will be in those goals/activities/skills. 

So when quarantine is over, it will be easier for you to continue doing them, and see them as more important than girls. And when you do go out to meet girls, they will sense you don't need them for your happiness or self-esteem. Which is Attractive to them.So I was going to meet an online date for the first time in the city. I got there a little early so I’m walking around taking in the sights and sounds, and outside this little cafe I see a really cute woman sitting alone. Well, fuck it, I’m still single and my date won’t be here for half an hour  so I walk up to her and compliment her hair. 

“Hey, I like your hair!” 

She smiles. “Thanks.”

“Do you have any tips for mine? The curls just keep falling out.” I take off my beanie (it’s cold okay) and reveal my perfectly bald head. She laughs again almost spitting out her coffee. So I motion to the empty seat and ask if it’s taken, then follow up with “you know, that’s such an overused line. What about you, are you taken?” 

To which she replies yes, she was actually waiting on her boyfriend. But before I went, she told me it was smooth and not to lose that charm. Made me feel good. 

The date went well, too.I found this out year or two ago. Wanted to share it with you. I always wondered how he seems to magneticaly pull people in, everyone he met liked him and he was not really doing anything special. I was intriguied by him. I go to the same barber he goes, i get the haircuts for free since they are good friends. The barber sometimes asks me how is it going with girls? If you are like your dad you wont be bad, haha. Then the other guy usually smirkes. I took that as a banter. Often times when i say i am his son people open up their eyes and say really, well how is he, where is he. They look in some direction, say his name and shake their head like “that was the times”. 

I then realized he is my father and i can ask him. I said it nonchalantly, people somehow gravitate towards you. He said, yes i do have something dont i, he smiled. That was it. 

Then one day he opened my eyes. He was showering and i was getting ready to go out so while he was in shower i brushed my teeth and what not. He asked me about girls, whats up with girls. I said nothing much, i dont have a girlfriend. He asked me something i answered and then it started. He said, okay listen to me. He started talking slower. The most important thing you should know is that you are going out to meet women and be with them, but you should actually go out and have fun, drink a little, sing and dance. The girls will come to you, or your friends will look at you in a way that you will feel there is something going on. When talking to girls you should never tell her you like her, but you should show it. You should talk to her and tease her, make her laugh, look at her eyes, make strong eye contact, with everyone in general. Be close with women, touch them. Hug her when she deserves it and push her away accordingly. You should have a mentality of being a man and everyone around you is something to suplement your world, your view of the world. The disco ball in a club does not work and music does not play until you walk into that club. But take this with a grain of salt. Everyone is different, you should be you. If you are not the type to dance, dont. And you should always do good to people as long as what you do does not harm you. 
Have fun and never, never worry about what others will say. Because they are living their lives and you are living yours. If you like pizza and someone says i hate pizza you would not stop eating it. You would say ok, and eat the whole damn pizza. If someome says you are stupid, you are stupid for them, and their smart is maybe being an alchocolic and not finishing school. 

He talked to me for 5-10 minutes while taking a shower, spilling all this inner game stuff left and right, you could say he taped into a rant mode. And i really resonated with things he said, then he said go out now i need to step out of the shower. I was already finished and i got out, said bye and went straight to the club and that was the night i kissed a girl for the first time. Since then he talked to me about funny stories, women he met. He also trained judo and has a black belt and many trophies which probably explains his confidence amongst other qualities.

Since that day i am constantly growing as a person and i am talking to him daily about everything. He often jokes “hey if you are searchung for a girl, see if she has beatiful mom, you need to take care of your father too,haha”. He is more than hapily maried to my mom tho, and he is my hero, truly.

Edit: Thanks for silvers and hugz!! I really appreciate it.I’m gonna make this short, because some of y’all are better writers than me. 

When I meet somebody amazing  and I ask them about their hobbies and their dreams, usually they’re full of life. 

And when I match with a girl we’ll start dating for a day or a month, I look at their Facebook page full of photos of memories and friends going back years. 

And I realize that I need to build my squad of friends and check things off my bucket list. 

It makes me a more interesting person. 

I realize that the type of woman that I’m attracted to doesn’t sit around at home and swipe on these stupid apps. The woman of my dreams is out there living a full life. 

So should I.Seriously guys, in today’s day and age, women are literally checking on their phones 24/7. If she hasn’t replied yet it’s because you are not a priority of her, either because you messed up interacting with her or she’s just shallow.

The best thing to do is to move on instantly and don’t text her first EVER again. This will show that you have some self respect and your time is valuable and not to be wasted.

In example, a group of friends wanted to introduce me to a girl - she lived far but was in town for a while - so I started to text her. At first, things seemed to be going ok, but then she stopped replying. I had screwed up by texting her too much. I knew because one of her girl friends secretly told me about it.

Instead of waiting to text her again, I simply deleted and blocked her. Why? Because my time is valuable and I’m not going to waste it with someone who does not want to reply to my texts.

She didn’t expect me to react this way. She expected me to keep chasing her, but I didn’t. Few weeks later, my friend hosted a party in which me and the girl were invited. I didn’t go because I had some stuff to do. Then I had learned that the girl did the 5 hours drive to see if I would be there. She asked all of my friends where I was. That’s ironic coming from the girl who was ignoring my text. All of a sudden she tries to force meet-ups with me by showing up at places she thought I was going to be and start asking my friends a lot of questions about me.

All of this because I had the balls to make the statement that my time is valuable.**Step One**: Move near a major city or college town. This is critical.

**Step Two:** Swipe consistently for a while.

I barely got matches the first month, it takes a while for Tinder to understand your preferences and show you to the right people. I've incorporated swiping for 5-10 min into my day during dead time or bathroom breaks. Consistency is key here. 

Use at least four bright outdoor photos that show you either in interesting places or doing interesting things. Make sure you're around 5-10 feet away from the camera. Selfies are way too close and feel cramped. 

As for your bio, the idea is you want as many things as possible for conversation to spring from. I simply listed everything I was interested or wanted to talk about. So even though Game of Thrones is very popular, tons of girls will see it and talk about how garbage the final season was. The second you share something in common with someone, you begin to accept them as not just a stranger.

**Step Three**: Swipe strategically

Do NOT swipe right on everyone, Tinder's ELO algorithm will see that and punish you for it, and you will psychologically feel your self worth drop. Swipe right on at most one in five profiles, focusing on relative attractiveness rather than conventional beauty. This means tuning into things that specifically attract only you rather than barbie looking girls that probably get overwhelmed with attention. Beauty is very complex and subjective and can come in many shapes and sizes. 

Superlikes matter. Some girls find it too much but the truth is, they’re not going to bother spending the effort so being at the front of the like-line counts. While it’s not critical, Tinder Plus gives you five a day, and also lets you swipe in specific areas so you can narrow in on neighborhoods and universities which have the types of people you like. 


**Profiles to swipe left on**: 

No bio


Any bio with an instagram or snapchat username. *Never break this rule under any circumstances.*


Any bio that is a laundry list of demands, any bio complaining about men or hate the fact that they have to use dating apps, any bio that is a political lecture rather than talking about themselves


Any pics or bio involving weed as their personality 


Low effort and vague bios that just mention popular things such as hiking, dogs, brunch, etc. 

**Profiles to swipe right on**: 

Long detailed bios talking about passions, experiences and desires, genuine interests that they are eager to talk about

Any bio with the key words  "fun" "drinks" "new people", these are a very good sign. Positivity and eagerness is always good, it’s a very difficult and complex subject for a woman to be open to meeting a bunch of random dudes so sometimes it’s in the subtle details.

Any bio of someone that recently moved to the area. These girls don't have established connections in town and are very enthusiastic about meeting new people and going out. Plus you get to show someone around town which is wonderful. 


**Step Four**: Chose an opener customized to their bio or pic

This usually takes the form of a funny detail or comment regarding something about them that ties into a funny story you have. The conversation will become natural when one or both of you have things in common that you’re passionate about, and storytelling is a great way to normalize the conversation. 

For example one girls bio said she liked cooking and was bad with directions, so I said "I used to work in navigation so I could help with directions hopefully. Hey and you like cooking and I suck at cooking so it seems like a perfect relationship already". Another girl said she like weightlifting and abolishing the electoral college so I opened with "Between those two, which do you spend more time on? For me it's probably the second, I've been really bad about going to the gym lately". As you can see, the basic recipe is taking something about their profile and tying it to a clever joke, funny story, current event, or self deprecating jab. 

If I can't tie anything to the bio my generic opener is "Hola, Hablas Español?". A lot of girls have learned Spanish so it kind of seems like a test, and a lot of them want to practice their Spanish with me. 

**Step Five**: Converse, and *always be entertaining*

Use storytelling, clever jokes, and educated opinions. Again, you want to throw in many details/subjects in your messages in the hopes that she will have something relevant to say to one of them to spring off of. It doesn't matter if her responses are short, just keep it going a bit without waiting for a reply. People don't like being interviewed, they like joining in with their opinion when they have something to say. 

If the conversation gets stuck, only then do you bust out the basic questions of work, school, etc. Food, travel, art, and entertainment are even better to talk about. Using proper spelling and vocabulary is *critical* and will separate you from other guys. 

Don't be really sexually forward unless she is using dirty humor. Dirty humor is a great sign and has been shown to correlate with sex-positive personalities. If you say something dirty, always add a humorous or self deprecating aspect to it to defuse the tension, and if not, make it seem like she said something that could be interpreted flirtatiously or sexually, not you.  Don’t say “I want to kiss you”, say something like “you’re a couple inches shorter than me, but luckily I have bad posture so you won’t have to strain yourself when we kiss”. Be playful.


**Step Six** Escalate, get the phone number, and make plans

You start escalating by casually bringing up romantic, flirty, intimate, and personal topics and getting a good reaction. 

At some point, I straight up ask "What are you looking to get out of using tinder”. Some people get intimidated and ghost here (they weren’t worth your time anyway), some appreciate the straightforwardness, sometimes you’ll learn that you’re looking for different things and that’s the end of that, but often times you’ll get a vague answer like “Oh not really sure, could be open to anything for the right person”. This is frustrating but remember that not everyone you meet fills the same role in your life- if you meet someone who’s better as a friend, or someone who you want to be serious with that’s fine too. When she asks you for YOUR answer to the question, say that you regularly meet up with tinder girls for drinks and you’re looking for wholesome intimacy, cuddling, watching tv, getting food. 

Whenever you make a big ask, *don’t leave it hanging!* This isn’t a marriage proposal, there are no million dollar questions here- defuse the hanging tension by immediately telling a story or making a tangential observation. This technique is really useful since if a girl continues the conversation here, it often means she’s interested in what your offering without her having to say it explicitly/awkwardly. 

Sometime later I like to say “My number is …” , I find that leaving a number and waiting for someone to text me if they’re interested works better than asking for theirs. Once you get a text, respond and continue the conversation- show that you care about getting along and having a nice bit of chitchat without being pushy or impatient. You’ll find that it’s way easier and more personal to talk and make plans through text rather than the app. 

Location is important- choose a bar that’s well lit, cozy, and doesn’t have loud thumping music so you can talk- these are getting harder to find these days. Most importantly, choose a place you’ve been to before and feel safe and comfortable in, preferably the same place every time- *this is your home field advantage*. 

When choosing a place and time, say the date and time assertively and she will follow. For some reason, trying to be accommodating or flexible always fails hard. Don’t go around dinner time or there may be food expectations, which is too big of a time commitment for a first date. 

**Step Seven** Light a Spark

For me this is the hardest part due to my anxiety and introversion. I’ve worked on it, gone to therapy about it, but I still struggle being myself in person around a stranger. Just remember that sometimes it doesn’t go well and that’s perfectly fine. You don’t need to impress someone, you don’t need to hide all your flaws and faults, you just need to be an honest and happy you. That’s often enough for someone. It’s hard, but it gets a tiny bit easier every time. 

Talk about shared interests, have a drink or two, and most importantly enjoy yourself. This isn’t a test of your worth. If some chemistry is there, that’s amazing, but it’s not completely necessary. Sometimes all you need is a bit of trust and positive signs. Offer to go for a walk, hold hands on a park bench outside, kiss outside an ice cream shop, just have a good time. If you’re enjoying yourself every date, you’re on the right track. Remember, the person you are meeting with is a unique human being just like you who found you attractive and was open the idea of meeting up. 

Just remember you can and will be ghosted at any step of the way. Only about 1-2% of swipes will be a match, only half of those will respond, only half of those won’t ghost you at some point in the conversation, a significantly smaller fraction of whom you will have some kind of connection that goes anywhere, less than half of those might be open to what you’re offering and agree to meet, and even then it’s really common to be ghosted or chickened out on via text. Just be happy in who you are and what you’re doing, dude, because you are worth it.This may seem like a foreign concept to some of you men who do a lot of cold approaches.  Some men are so aggressive that it's like they're walking around with their dicks in their hands.  I'm not saying you can't be ballsy, but you don't want to look overeager and thirsty with women.

I wrote a post called [**Getting Her Hornier Than You - Getting Laid Takes Patience**](http://theconfidenceskyscraper.com/getting-her-hornier-than-you-getting-laid-takes-patience/), and one thing I would like to point out from it is self-control and delayed gratification leads to the bedroom.  If you play the long game, women are more open to sleeping with you because you had enough time to build  up that desire.  If you make a woman feel those strong feelings of desire for you, she'll get to the point where she feels compelled to sleep with you.

Women hate men who are at their mercy.  The number one way a woman will have a man at her mercy is dangling sex or the anticipation of sex in front of his face.  If a woman sees you're motivated by sex, she will resent you in a way.  She knows that you lack mental and emotional strength, so she will manipulate you with sex.

Wanna know why women are insanely attracted to men with sexual discipline?  Men who are mentally and emotionally strong take care of their business.  When a man can take care of his business (finances, fitness, nutrition, etc) his life improves, and as a by-product, the women in his life also benefit from that.  So if he is not trying to sleep with all these women in the neighborhood, but instead trying to build a successful business as an example, once the business starts spitting out tens of thousands of dollars a month in profits, his life is improved in a major way.

Sexual discipline doesn't mean abstinence either.  You could be fucking hot women every week, but you are very sexually disciplined because you aren't controlled by sex.  You know the power of seduction and you know that's it's better to get the woman hornier than you so she can give in to you sexually.

You may think you'll have to wait for years for her to want to sleep with you, but the less thirsty you are, the more she feels she needs to speed things up.  Don't believe me?  Ask women what she does when she likes a man and he's not pushing up on her.  He's not afraid, it's just that he's not trying to make sexual advances on her.  You may hear her say that she will kinda throw herself at him.  She may hug him a certain way or find an excuse to touch him (grab his arms, play fight with him, or even sit on his lap.

If you want to have women throwing themselves at you, you need to start being sexually disciplined and practice self-control and delayed gratification.The question isn't "How do I impress her?"

It's "Will she be a good fit for me? Can we have a good conversation with each other?"

It took me time to change my thought process from trying to impress her, to seeing does she fit into my life. I still haven't completely made the switch in mindset, but I'm getting there.

It also took me time to stop thinking about ATTRACTION, and start thinking about CONNECTION. In a conversation my focus isn't bragging or trying to convince her I'm cool anymore. It's instead trying to learn more about her.

If I'm confident, that will make her feel more comfortable with me.

But bragging will train my mind to think I'm not good enough, which leads to less confidence in future interactions with other girls and guys, who will then feel less comfortable with me.

This is one of the biggest things I've learnt that improved my social skills. Changing my thought patterns like this is a lot harder than learning a conversation technique. But it has much better results.I went to a club last night and there was a guy dancing from girl to girl. Granted they were his friends, but man did he have game.

So I looked at him more closely and I realized him and I looked almost the same, if anything I was better looking. 

What made him have game versus me feeling like a loser was literally just how he carried himself.

I went to talk to him and I realized he’s my exact height (only like 5’7”) he said he’s just there to have fun and not worry about anyone else and if I wanted to meet people I should just do my own thing. 

So I stepped back and looked at his outfit, he wore tight clothes and stuck his chest out to look buff. And he just had a lot of energy.

So i tried it. I unbuttoned the top few buttons on my shirt, rolled up my sleeves, and stuck my chest out. I started dancing like crazy and within minutes I saw a girl looking at me and smiled. I ended up dancing’s with her for a while and went on to dance with about 8 other girls that night.

My game literally changed in minutes and all I had to do was look and act confident even though I’ve always been incredibly shy and awkward.

TLDR; wear clothes that makes your body look good, roll your shoulders back and stick your chest out, be confident and don’t worry about what anyone thinks just do your own thing.I see a lot of posts on this sub saying, ‘I’m going to make a goal of talking to x number of women” or “I made x number of approaches”.

The mindset of talking to women as a homework assignment or goal is counterproductive and seeks validation when it is end goal oriented, like focusing on getting a number after the interaction.

Most women will be able to sniff this out, that you are being disingenuous and are seeking validation, or simply trying to get their number, instead of having an interesting conversation and letting things unfold naturally.

Being successful in seduction is just fine-tuning general people skills and Charisma . Rather than focusing your energy on just talking to attractive women, talk to all strangers. Try being genuinely interested in how they are doing, and making them feel good about themselves without an end goal in mind, or if they reciprocate your gestures.

When the time comes to talk to an attractive woman, you aren’t treating them as a means to an end or a homework assignment. They aren’t on a pedestal, it’s just part of your routine of being friendly, interesting, and conversational.Okay so recently I set myself a little challenge: say hello and talk to literally every person you have the opportunity to talk to.

For example, last weekend as I was walking to the clubs an Indian man was next to me waiting at the dome traffic lights. I struck up a conversation and we ended up talking for 10 minutes until I got to the venue. 

Not only just this improve your social flow for the night, it improves your talk talk/general conversation ability and makes it natural for you to talk with strangers.

It also increases your chances of finding new opportunities. For instance, I’m new to my city and a guy who I was talking with in the elevator ended up introducing me to his friends and taking me on a boat ride around the city. More so, I stopped to talk to a “donation seeker” (someone working for a charity trying to get donations) who ended up asking for my phone number so they could hire me.

The world is yours: you just have to speak and speak well. TALK TO EVERY DAMN PERSON.

Good luck amigos.Want to actually start being seen as a high value man to women? Stop chasing them like it's your priority. There are more virgins and sexually frustrated low value creeps than there's ever been because y'all can't stop complaining, chasing and putting the idea on a pedestal. We've all made mistakes, but it's time to correct them like us men should. Call it toxic masculinity all you fucking want, I don't give a shit. You can ban or remove this thread all you want. If it means at least one guy sees this and it changes his life, my job has been fulfilled. You know why us men don't get respect from feminist? Because you bow at their cause in hopes of getting laid. Because you subscribe to their only fans page and spam their Instagram accounts because you're so desperate for attention by them. It's fucking weak.

Women don't want weak ass men who sacrifices their values for them, especially in the hopes of getting laid or a relationship. I see all these complaining topics on Reddit of men saying "dating is so hard, I can't get laid, why is she playing mind games!". Because you care so much about them, that's why. The fuck, you think women want a man who's so easily defeated? You think women are turned on by your sad story that you're struggling on being noticed? Grow the fuck up.

It's time to stop giving a shit about it, and start giving a shit about things that actually matter, like your one life you've been gifted, and what you can do to make the most of it. If you have a complaint, why stop there? You've acknowledge it's a problem, so why not move to step two and make a plan to improve it?

Ask yourself, would you claw at the promise of sex and validation from women if it put your life at risk? Even if you're ass fucking ugly, why the fuck would you do that shit? 

You know what women respect? What they find hot? Even in ugly looking dudes? Self respect. Goals. Saying no to women who don't fit your values or get in the way of them. Get off online dating and spend that time in the gym. Or better yet, go to school for a trade skill and make some money so you can flash that shit in a gold diggers face, and reject her greedy advances toward you. 

No women should have the pleasure of disrespecting you because you're horny. You should be critical and judgemental about which girl you allow in your life. Women should EARN your commitment. They should EARN having sex with you. Women do it to you, Because they have self respect and know the importance of filtering men. Why the hell would you not do it? Only good comes from being smart.

And before you stalk my shit and say "oh, but you're 6'4 and good looking". No. Stop that shit. It's not even about getting laid. This is about getting respect for yourself and everyone else. Women being attracted to guys with respect is just a by product. Men are the ones choosen for the front lines in war for a reason. It's us that have the responsibility to carry our family to victory in the face of danger. How are you going to be for enough to protect anyone including yourself when you're too busy spamming some e-girls chat on twitch? You could be using that time to learn something of value, or lifting weight so you can carry more things when shit gets rough.

It's time for men to be respected again by earning that respect back. And don't bother saying "you're toxic" or "you sound like one of those asshole guys". I don't care. I know what gave me results in my life, and I don't plan on changing any of it because I'm not politically correct and your feelings got hurt for no reason.For some reason I find myself in this situation very often, for example on a first date. See if you recognize this: you're talking, flirting, touching each other naturally, discussing sexually charged topics, making loads of sparkling eye contact, etc...

In other words, you have a feeling that you could go for the kiss, and she's very likely to reciprocate. But, both of you are *talking* all the time, and what's more, windows of opportunity for escalating don't last forever. Your rapport is great *now*, so you should escalate *now*. 

So what do you do, how can you force that magic moment where you gaze into each other's eyes, the world disappears, and you both go for a smooth kiss? In many dates/situations, there simply will never naturally occur such a situation. So here's my line preceding the kiss, romantic 'perfect' situation be damned:

***'Wait.'***

That's it. 

Whatever you're doing, be it walking from one venue to the next (as you should always try to do), or even simply happily chatting, or she's getting up from the table to go for a drink or whatever, just say *'wait'* as if you suddenly thought of something important, which will interrupt with a 'startle' whatever you were doing, then look her in the eyes, and kiss her.

Field tested at least a dozen of times, and it very rarely fails me, and it's great because that moment/feeling of 'damn, I'm pretty sure I could kiss her now, but I just can't find a good *moment* to do it' really can be quite dreadful. Not anymore. 

**EDIT:** *Whoa - apparently this step (which is often as difficult a hurdle as the approach itself) was a hole in the whole seduction process that had not been plugged as properly as most others. Brilliant comments in here, y'all rock.*Last year it finally just clicked to me what I was doing wrong. I was always so kind to girls hoping they’d catch feelings for me. Even the girl I’ve had a crush on for 12 years. How can she not like me? I’m so nice to her and treat her so well. Obviously now I know that’s not how shit works 99.9% of the time. 

Be decisive, be direct, be confident. That’s what it all comes down to. When you have those traits it turns out girls want someone who is kind to them.

I parted ways with my friend two years ago after I confessed my feelings to her (cringe). So I started to move on, go on dates ect but nothing ever clicked and I never knew why. 

Things changed for me at my best friends wedding. I was so hammered and I thought his wife-to-be’s sister was so hot so I just said fuck it and went up to her, told her she’s going to be my date for the night and the rest is history. She looked at my lips and I said “jeez I thought you were going to kiss me” and this girl grabs me and eats my face off. She lived far away so things didn’t work out but that was a life changing night. 

Not even a month later I meet my first girlfriend from a dating app and we lasted 6 months. She was a very attractive girl and during our relationship she told me I treated her better than anyone else. She broke up with me later on because she moved away for a career choice. I can respect that and she did always tell me it was a possibility.

So I recently messaged that old crush back. She was happy to hear from me. She told me she was bored and lonely so I told her to come over for a wine and movie night. She said yes and came over, eventually when we were tipsy I just straight up asked if she wanted to fuck and she said she doesn’t do that outside of a relationship, so I said “Then you should be my girlfriend.” she kissed me and now my lifelong crush is probably going to be the girl I marry. 

Tl;Dr - Be decisive, be direct and be confidentPornography, Hollywood, and other forms of media have deluded men into false perceptions of women think and how attraction works.

Porn is a falsified, artificially constructed representation of human sexuality, where attraction and arousal are instantaneous, easy and abundant without true effort. 

On the other side, mainstream movies, i.e. romance porn, often portray unquestioned dedication as the ultimate way to woman’s heart. Unremarkable, piddling men will win a beautiful woman over through some grand act of devotion, reinforcing that idea that men can be mediocre and still attract beautiful women solely through sacrifice.

Logically, we understand that movies and porn are fictional, but without experience or baseline knowledge, these misrepresentations become reality if reinforced early on.

These contradictory messages that women are owed to us (porn) and that they must be earned (mainstream media) have fucked up many men’s expectations and ability to handle rejection.

Men who are inundated in this mindset and who have experienced a series of rejections from women, begin to view women as a monolithic group that have rejected them in totality, who are looking down them from a pedestal. Rather than understanding that romantic/sexual rejection is something that happens frequently and is not a source of shame.

Red pillers, incels, and PUAs, are born out this. They blame women for being superficial or unattainable, they use band aids and tactics, rather than taking complete accountability an working to become an inherently attractive, interesting person. Even PUAs who achieve superficial success crumble when they encounter rejection, because their identity is largely predicated on acceptance from women.

Our society worships at the altar of the Victim. It’s difficult to take complete ownership of your faults and failures, I certainly struggle with taking ownership at times.

This is not a pro-feminist post.  This concept applies to both men and women. You and I completely responsible for our successes and failures, not anyone else.

Women are not owed to you, the same way your attraction owed to anyone else. Women did not have a secret global meeting and deem you unworthy. Everyone experiences rejection—those who imply that they don’t experience it are delusional or liars.

You are not victim.  Your attractiveness or any other facet of your personality is not static. Your success solely depends on personal accountability and willingness to experience discomfort in order to grow.

Edit: ‘fault’ should be replaced with ‘responsibility’, but the same concept applies

Edit 2: This post got me permanently banned from the social skills sub 🤷🏻‍♂️ 🥂Here’s a quick way to start a conversation with a stranger who is sitting near you. 

The other day I was sitting at a restaurant outside reading, wasn’t too busy. A girl, who I found attractive, had sat near me even though other tables were empty. I was reading a book at my table and decided to go use the bathroom, so I turned around and said “Hey excuse me. I’m just gonna use the bathroom real fast, do you mind watching my book for me?” She quickly agreed. When I got back, she asked me what I thought about the book and boom the conversation starts. 

If she doesn’t say anything, you can thank her for the favor and then start the conversation then by asking her about something.


This works great for coffee shops and other public areas where people chill at, if you ever need it.1. If you're going to use Tinder, use the app Photofeeler to get actual women to rate your pictures so you can find out which ones are attractive to women.
2. If you live in a big city, join your local game global group to find wingmen that you can go out with to meet women.
3. Make your intentions clear sooner rather than later. You can do this by simply saying, "You're actually kind of cute." at some point. This will prevent you from getting stuck in the friend zone and also shows a lot of confidence which is in itself, attractive.
4. To get good pictures for dating apps, go meet a friend for a photoshoot and take at least 100 pictures of each other. Most of them will suck, but a few will be really good. Most high-end phones from the last few years can take good enough pictures.
5. Don't leave meeting women up to chance. Set a goal for going out x times per week and stick to it. Treat this like you would any other skill you want to develop - fitness, learning an instrument, etc. If you don't make a commitment to yourself, you probably won't take any action whatsoever.
6. Remember that fortune favors the bold, every girl you don't ask out is rejecting you by default. Every girl you do ask out might say yes. 
7. Getting into better shape will be good for your self-image, and it definitely won't hurt your attractiveness to women. Just make sure you don't use "getting ripped" as an excuse to procrastinate on trying to meet women until you meet some mythical goal in the distant future.
8. If you feel proud of the way you're living your life, women will feel it too. Having hobbies and following your passions in life will change the way you carry yourself and make you significantly more attractive. Read good books, be physically active, learn new skills, these won't only improve your life in general, but they'll improve your dating prospects as well.
9. Join local groups on the website meetup.com as a way to socialize and meet new people. Some cities will have singles groups you can use as a way to practice flirting.
10. Pay attention to the way you talk to girls. You may notice that you speak in a higher pitch, and you talk faster. This generally makes you come across as less confident. If this is the case, make a point to add pauses, speak slower, and lower your voice. You can use the app Vocular to practice this consciously.
11. Read the Art of Seduction by Robert Greene. It's a dark book, and it has a lot of manipulation in it, but it also has many deep insights into the psychology behind what makes people fall in love. After reading the book, you will have a much stronger understanding of how to seduce someone.
12. If you have approach anxiety, start by simply saying hello to girls as you walk by them. That will be easier than a committed approach. Then, once you're used to greeting girls as they walk by, take the next step by approaching a girl and asking her if she knows anywhere good to get food nearby. Once you've done that a few times, you'll eventually reach a point where you're comfortable enough talking to strangers that you'll be able to approach a girl with a direct line like, "I thought you looked interesting, and I had to meet you."
13. Don't think you have to touch a girl or tease a girl to get a date with her. The only thing you need to do is invite her to hang out with you again; focus on doing that consistently before you worry about anything else.
14. If you approach multiple women in a short span, you will build something called social momentum. Social momentum is a state of increased confidence in which you stop overthinking and fully trust your instincts. Getting into this state can completely change your perception of yourself.
The next tips are key signs that a girl is attracted to you:
15. She laughs even when you don't say something very funny.
16. She fills in conversational gaps by asking you questions.
17. She talks quickly and with a higher pitch than usual. 
18. She touches her hair repeatedly. 
19. She touches you - this one is less common than the others, but it's a very good sign.
20. Being aware of the signs a girl will give you that she's attracted is helpful, but every girl is different, and the only way to know for sure if someone likes you is to ask her on a date, invite her back to your place, or go for the kiss.
21. You don't need to have a different kind of conversation with a girl to attract her. You can talk just like you would with your friends. The only difference is that you show your intent at some point and take the lead. 
22. Picking up women should be fun. If you're taking yourself too seriously, women won't find your energy attractive. Make fun of yourself. Make fun of the girls you talk to. Smile, laugh, be playful.k
23. Game is a skill, but luck plays a significant role, too. If you approach ten girls, there's a high chance that one of them will happen to find you charming, or maybe she just broke up with her boyfriend and is looking for a fling. The more charismatic you are, the higher the percentages will be, but luck will always play a key role, and it's essential to play the numbers game in your favor.
24. If a girl gives you choosing signals, make sure to approach her. But if, in general, you wait for women to give you clear signs of interest before approaching, you'll probably turn that into an excuse to avoid approaching anyone.
25. Women enjoy sex more than men. Don't think of sex as something you're trying to get; think of it as a type of value you're offering. This mindset will increase your confidence.
26. If you want to take online dating seriously, it's worth paying a professional photographer for a photo shoot. High-quality photos can make the difference between women rating you as a 4 and a 9.5. I'm not exaggerating; the difference between the best and worst ratings my pictures get on Photofeeler is more than 5 points.
27. If you want to become wittier or more charismatic, one of the best sources available is standup comedy specials. Watching them will help you understand humor on a deep level.
28. If you're struggling to get any dates, honestly ask yourself if anyone else would be getting dates taking the actions you're taking? Are you really trying, or are you thinking too much and not putting yourself out there enough?
29. Give yourself credit for small wins. A lot of guys think everything other than getting laid is a failure. This will lead you to lose motivation. Instead, be proud of yourself for approaching a girl, for making a woman laugh, for getting a number, every small step in the right direction is a win - it's critical to remember that.
30. Don't take the decision to get into a relationship lightly. Many men learn about pickup and get into relationships with women that they don't have a great connection with, and they end up getting married and having children with the wrong person. Have very high standards for yourself when it comes to making that commitment because you will spend much of your free time with your significant other.

If you liked this article, you can find more of content like this on my YouTube channel: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4kTcVi-b_9qQnMCRG9WggAI started trying to improve my “game” as a 17 year old ugly high schooler. Fast forward 7 years and I have an active dating and social life. Here’s how I did it.

I started out reading “seduction” books and dated a couple of girls that were complete messes. The lines I used from the books only worked because their self esteem was so low they accepted any musky positive interaction they had from a man.

Then I started realizing that I had a lot of fucked up inner demons. I saw a therapist, I finally acknowledged I was obsessed with women and that was turning all the healthy girls off, and I realized I needed to learn how to actually relate to people.

I started reading ACTUALLY HELPFUL BOOKS. I read Eckhart Tolle, Byron Katie and Vanessa Van Edwards.

I took responsibly for my health and focused on eating right and working out.

I started caring about what women go through. I began asking myself if those damned crazy feminists I always hated might have had some legitimate points (spoiler alert: they do indeed). 

Most importantly, I stopped being self obsessed. Negativity in your life is a form of narcissism. The constant “woe is me” feeling is a sign that you need to take responsibility for the hurt in your life and actually confront it. You wanna be a big strong man that’s tough enough for the ladies to love? Then be strong enough to admit you got actual deep problems beyond just women not being into you.

Stop reading or watching seduction channels or gurus. They are morons and have no clue what they are talking about. The only ones I would recommend are Mark Manson and Tucker Max. David Buss is cool if you like more heady stuff.

You don’t need magical fixing from some pickup artist. You are an incredible achievement of billions of years of evolution. So much shit had to go right for your daddy’s sperm to find your mommy’s egg. So quit ignoring what you actually need to do in your life and start doing the hard shit.

You will be glad you did.Some people are born with deformities and will never have chance to walk on their own.

Others are born without control of their bodies or minds, and will never know what it’s like to consciously feel or understand that they are alive.

If you can eat, breath, and walk on your own, if you have a mind that functions, you truly do not have any problem in life that you can’t recover from.

Be grateful for your mere existence next time you feel life is a series of setbacks, and that you have the actual ability and free will to change things.

Edit: Based on the comments, this appears to be a polarizing post, which is good. Definitely not expected, but glad it started a conversation.

https://www.reddit.com/r/selfimprovement/comments/mdpfy1/get_comfortable_with_people_disliking_you_if_you/Warning: This is going to be long. And it gets pretty dark.  

I have been going to a hair stylist for the past 2 months. The first time I walked in, she was really friendly and we talked while she gave me a hair cut. During the interaction I thought she was beautiful and had an amazing personality. I tried to gather the courage to say something to her but chickened out as she brought up a divorce she went through a year ago and the stress on her and her kids. I thought.... yikes, maybe not the time to say anything. So I saw her a second time a few weeks later and this time she seemed happier and we chatted and got along, but once again I chickened out and didn't say anything again. There's no way that a girl that beautiful would appreciate any compliments I could give her. 

Today (a month later) I went for a third time. I noticed that she wasn't there. I shrugged it off. Oh well, I guess she's off today and sat down to wait my turn with another hair dresser. As I was getting my haircut, the topic of Amber (random name for privacy) came up.

"Have you been here before?" asked the current hair dresser. 

"I have! Miss Amber saw me last time," I responded. 

The hair dresser went quiet as she continued to cut my hair. There was an uncomfortable silence for a bit. 

"I'm not sure if you know, but she passed away about two weeks ago," she sad as she continued to buzz away at the nape of my neck. 

I was dumbfounded. What in the world? This was a young vibrant women she was talking about. Did she get in a car accident? Drink and drive? Did her home get robbed?

"How did she pass away?" I asked. 

"She killed herself," the hair dresser responded. 

And for the next 20 minutes, I learned about Amber from my hair dresser. I learned that she was going through a lot of changes this past year. She lost her home in the divorce. She had to move where she now had an hour to an hour and half commute. Her days were spent waking up, getting her kids ready for school, commuting, working, commuting back, putting her kids to bed, sleeping, and starting it all over again. I learned that her ex husband had found a new girlfriend. I learned that she would sometimes confide in her coworkers about feeling alone. I learned that behind her bubbly and smiling personality was someone that was battling depression and loneliness for a long time. 

After my haircut I just sat in my car a few moments and thought: Fuck. Life is too short. I should have just let her know that I thought she was beautiful and that she was really fun to talk to. I regret being too self centered around my fear and not giving someone a genuine compliment. Not because I thought anything would have changed because of something I did or said. She was definitely battling this for a long time. It is naïve of me to think that one comment from a stranger would have changed anything. Maybe it could have made her smile. Maybe she would have thought I was dumb and awkward. Maybe it would have reminded her that she's pretty great and has a lot going for her. Maybe she would have thought that I was some guy trying to get laid. That's not the point. The point is that I saw the opportunity to give someone a genuine compliment and I passed it up because I was scared and made excuses. Today we live in a world where people are constantly plugged in and connected. So why are there people that still feel so alone? Next time I get the opportunity to connect with someone I will. Anyone. Age, gender, ethnicity; it is doesn't matter as long as I have something genuinely nice to share with them. There's no end goal except to make them see that they are pretty great. Because life is way too short to play these games in my head. Who cares if they think I'm weird, awkward, a loser, etc. I don't know what is going on in their life, and maybe what I have to say will be a reminder of what they have to offer to the world.One thing I see a lot on this sub is questions about interest : "I want to know is she is interested", "I think she was interested but I couldn't escalate", "How to make that girl interested ?" and so on. I feel like addressing that, and would welcome any feedback or comments.

Interest is mental. It's in your head, it's rational, it's in control. Excitement is in your body, you feel it inside you. It's a powerful force that you can't control. Imagine you're going to see a movie, one you tell yourself "oh I'm really interested to see that movie", and the other one "Oh I'm so excited to see that movie !". Do you feel the difference ? In your opinion, which one will you go for ?

I had a discussion yesterday with one of my LTRs. She was telling me about this guy she had a date with. She told me "It went very well. I want to see him again but I'm afraid he will think there is seduction going on between us". I was surprised, and feeling bad for the poor guy, so I asked "well what makes you want to see him again if you don't want any seduction ?". And she told me he was very interesting, a fascinating person and discussion with him was smooth and intellectually stimulating. She would love to see him again. Obviously I told her he would probably like more than that and any guy I know after a date that went well would not be happy if the girl said "Hey I would love to see you again as friends". 

I asked her : "but what's different with me ?" (our relationship is still pretty recent, we had sex on the first date and we connect very well physically). And she said something along the lines of "I don't know. I'm just so excited when I see you. I never know what will happen, and when we see each other I feel like my brain just melts and my body takes the lead".

I feel it's something that happens more and more often to me. I used to be all in my head, trying to show I was smart, funny, nice, interesting. I was focusing on looking good, demonstrate value, making money. And I didn't have nearly as much success as I do now. Now I have girls telling me that they have butterflies in their stomach when they think about me, that I'm always in their head. I just had a girl texting me three weeks after having sex telling me it was so profound that she made changes in her life and solved some long-lasting issues since then. So they talk about it to their friends, who obviously are very curious and interested when they meet me, and so on... So I never have to make an approach or use online dating, I just have an endless number of people wanting to meet me, interact with me, and eventually get into sensuality or sexuality with me, if excitement is there.

**So, how to generate excitement ?**

I think excitement goes in three steps : 

1. Connecting to your body
2. Building a safe environment
3. Being in the flow

**Step 1 : connecting to your body.**

First paradox, you can't generate excitement if you're looking for excitement. Why ? Because "looking for something" is already being in your head. Right now, reading that text, picturing how it would fit in your life, what plans you can do about it, it's all in your head. You're probably asking yourself "is this worth it to read that wall of text ?", "Is this guy bullshitting or is it really an effective method ?". It's all mental. 

What you need to look for is connecting to yourself. It's being inside yourself. Not only when you're with that girl, but all the time. Just noticing what goes inside you, without trying to change anything. When you have an emotion, observe how you feel. Don't rationalise, don't avoid it, just stay with it.

Go for yoga, meditation, massages, anything that gets you a connection to your body and sensations. Hug deeply the people you meet, friends and family. Get used to eye contact, be at peace with your body and your nakedness (yes, by that I mean being naked in front of people). Dance, move, let your body decide what is right for it. Danse in the streets, take care of your posture, take time to close your eyes and feel your breathing. Observe the little things around you like the wind in the trees, like children having fun.

When you're with a girl you like, shortcut your thoughts into your body. If you hear a voice telling you "oh my god, I wonder if she wants me to go for the kiss ?", focus on your breathing and sensations. If you tell yourself "oh shit I don't know what to say, she must be bored right now", just breath and put your consciousness in your body. 

You're there right here and right now. You're perfect the way you are at this exact moment. Life is an experience, you can sit inside of you and enjoy, look at the movie that goes in front of you, and be present with any emotion or sensation.

**Step 2 : Building a safe environment**

You know what is preventing most girls to be in their body during interactions ? A perception of danger. During a first date, most guys will be stuck in their head trying to get laid, while most girls will be stuck in their head trying to protect themselves from getting in a situation they don't want.

Anxiety is the number one excitement-killer. It's the best way to not be in your body and even to dissociate (it's when you get completely disconnected from your body because the sensations are too difficult to handle. It's very important you know this so you can identify it and prevent it in yourself and the person you're with).

Number one safety-builder is consent. Basically the girl should feel at any point that she can decide what she wants and nothing is forced on her. There is no pression, no expectation other than for her to choose what she wants. It's especially true in the first steps of the interaction when there is still a bit of tension. Asking "can I touch your hand ?" instead of touching it directly will reassure her. Maybe she will be surprised, telling you "well of course you can, you don't have to ask !", but deep down she can rest a bit a be a bit more in her body.

Ask for questions that have yes / no answers. Like "do you want us to go to my place ?" and not "Where do you want to go ?". If she hesitates, diffuse the tension "Ok, I feel that's a maybe, so maybe we can take it as a no right now and see if that changes at some point". Just let her know that she can take her time to decide, and that anything that is not an enthusiastic yes is a no. That's what safety is.

Final tip for consent, the "thank you for you no" method. Whenever you hear someone declining your proposition, look at her in the eyes and say from your heart "thank you for your no". Why ? Because saying no is hard. Many girls are afraid to say no to guys because they don't want to hurt their feeling, they don't them to be frustrated, they don't want to argue. By saying that you put value on her being able to say what is right for her and affirming her boundaries. That's also great for you because you don't want anyone to do something with you they don't want to do, right ? I can't overstate how powerful it is and how I have seen some girls completely drop all their mental barriers after hearing that. Of course you have to really mean it, if you ask again 3 minutes later or if you show frustration, it doesn't do any good ;) 

Another way to build safety is to have emotional and vulnerable discussion. The question "how do you feel ?" (and NOT "are you okay ?") is your best friend. You can ask it at any moment about anything. Go deep, don't stay on the surface. Learn to be vulnerable. Vulnerability is the most attractive trait in a human being. Scientific experiences have been made that show that we connect through our vulnerabilities (look at "the power of vulnerability" Ted Talk if you haven't already). The more you'll be able to talk about your emotions, your fears, your struggles, your emotional wounds, even your relationship to your parents, the more quickly you will build a deep sense of connection and security. Whatever is shared, especially if that's something emotional, welcome it and don't judge it. Listen attentively, and thank her for being herself in front of you. Most people never hear a thanks for just opening to someone, but that's very courageous. Be willing to show who you are, even the parts you struggle to love, and be open to welcome fully that person.

I need to precise something : you're not trying to please her. If you try to please her and agree with everything she says because you fear she will not like you, you will end up in the "boring zone" (which is the real name of the friend zone, being friends is great, being boring is not). Be honest and don't try to be liked, just try to integrate that person into your world, to make her feel at home in the interaction with you. Like she would with someone she has known for a long time and feel intimate with.

**Step 3 : being in the flow**

Ok so now you're able to connect to your body at will and are not intruded by self-judging thoughts. The beautiful person in front of you is completely secure and ready to abandon herself to her sensations. So what should you do ? 

Nothing. There is nothing that *should* do. Don't try to impress her, don't try to "demonstrate value", don't try to escalate, and don't try to have sex. Instead, allow yourself to be who you are. What do you feel like doing ? Express what goes trough you. Be vulnerable, be authentic. If you feel awkward, say it, the other person probably feels it too. If you are afraid, share it ! If you want to touch her, ask for it. You want to be with her in a more intimate place ? Propose. You don't have anything to say ? Just contemplate the silence. You feel good ? Just say "I feel good when I'm with you". Smile if you feel like smiling, let spontaneity express itself through you (but don't ask yourself to be spontaneous !), be present and follow your intuition.

Being with the flow means not resisting to anything that life trows at you. She is expressing some negativity ? Don't consider it as a "shit test", it's just the expression of some insecurity. Take care of it. Be caring with everyone, but do not care about anything. Caring about someone is being present for that person, it's being deeply committed to make the experience as truthful and meaningful as possible. Caring about something is taking things personally, it's taking a no as a rejection, it's trying to make the person like you, it's putting expectations on what should happen.

When you're in the flow, you never know what will happen. This is something that I hear all the time "wow, I didn't expect us to have sex / to spend the full day together / to feel something so intense / to have so much fun". Why ? Because I didn't intend for any of those things to happen. I just tried to be present in the moment, listening to my desires and acting on them without expecting anything from the other person. Fulfilment doesn't come from reaching objectives that only generates more objectives. Fulfilment comes from loving the experience no matter what happens and feeling gratitude for being alive right here and right now.

Here are a few words I would advise to get rid of because they all put your power on external forces. You're better off without them :

* Shit test : No one is testing you. You're yourself, there is nothing to test about that. Some reactions can generate anxiety inside you, and it's fine. Accept it as any emotion, smile, and stay connected to yourself.
* Being rejected : you can't be rejected. You're a complete human being, nobody has the power to reject you. But they can decline your propositions. Start conversations with a closed question : "can I talk to you for a minute ?", "Can I sit with you ?". If you hear a no, just say "thank you for your no" and move on.
* Cockblock : You can't be cockblocked if you're in the flow. The situation can change, people can interact, but it's not about you. A few days ago I was about to have a threesome when one of the girls' roommate got in the apartment in tears because of a break-up and we spent the evening giving her emotional support. Was I "cockblocked" ? No, I just adapted, took the change of situation as an opportunity to bring support to someone and made a deeper connection with three people. Use the word "opportunity" instead, it will change your mindset.
* Physical type, as in "I'm not her physical type" : There is no physical type. Attraction is not about putting people into boxes. When a girl is attracted to you, she is not having a checklist of things you have and don't have, giving you a grade and then telling herself "hey, that's good enough for me". That's just mental bullshit. Attraction is about what you feel, what goes in your body. No matter how you look, you can still connect with anyone. You can build excitement, you can have a meaningful moment with no expectation.
* League, as is "she's out of my league". There is no league. The most attractive guy I know is very average-looking. He's just magnetic, because he loves himself, he connects to his body, he builds the most amazing sense of safety and he is so much in the flow it's like he's synched to the other person. When he listens to you, it's like nobody has ever listened to you before. When he touches you, it's exactly the way you want to be touched. And there is never any pression to go forward or to do anything that is not right for you. The only important thing about appearance is that you love being in that body and you take care of it.

The more you practice being in the present moment, the easier it gets. After a while you'll realise that the girls you find the most attractive are also the ones that you connect with the most intensely. Why ? Because once you're not in your head, you will see beauty as something authentic and personal, not "this girl is pretty because she has nice make-up and good symmetry". You will go for physical features that appeal to you, that make sense to you. And your intuitive mind knows what is right for you.

It was a bit longer than expected, I hope it will help some of you. I can assure you that once you get into that authentic and mindful connection, seduction becomes like a dance. You let your mind go and deeply connect to yourself and the other person. You will see girls having a huge smile whenever they see you, you will have much better sex whenever you want and you will feel love and gratitude in your body and can share that feeling with the world.

I wish you all a wonderful journey.Wholesome alert 🚨 Not sure if this belongs here but my grandma is in ICU with covid and I FaceTime with her today (she is getting better everyday). 

She was asking me about my dating life and I told her I have a new girlfriend and she said 

“Don’t love her too much, let her love you” 

Maybe a little cheesy for this sub but pretty sound advice from my 85 year old grandma. 

Edit: Thank you everyone for the kind words and well wishes, If my grandma could I’m sure she would make dinner for all ya’ll. 

Edit: She is home now!! ❤️As a guy who grew up watching the cool kids get the hot girls, I grew envious. I was the fat kid that nobody knew. I started reading pick up at 18. Naturally being quite a scholar, I understood seduction perfectly from a theoretical point of view. Being the risk adverse anxious pussy that I was, after being neck deep in books for about a year, I decided to start putting this theory into action. Very very quickly did I come to the realisation that a lot of these over analytical pick up tactics were complete garbage. 


Looking back at it, all you really needed to do was be confident. It took me about 2 years of trial and error (and complete humiliation) to figure out game. I started to just lower the suave facade and be myself, which is a complete goofball. Naturally, females started gravitating to me. I didn’t even use any pick up tactics. All I did was get ripped and throw myself out there and be a normal human being. Sex started to pile in out of nowhere. All these females were crazy over me. (Well about 30 over 2 years which is a lot for a male) At first it was as if I had won a  $100,000,000 lottery. 


At 22, I took a hard look at myself. I realised I had spent the last few years of my life chasing women, and I had not achieved anything else. Don’t get me wrong, sex is fun, and getting women is better than not getting women, but you will eventually find out the hollowness that comes with it. If I could tell any lost teenage virgin anything, I’d purely preach inner game and nothing else. I’m not saying you shouldn’t address the lack of vagina on your life, just don’t make it the pinnacle of your existence. A high healthy sex drive is a part of feeling optimal. But There’s bigger fish to fry in your life. Think about your spirituality. Your financial stability. Making a difference in the world. Feeding your soul. Priorities that and put your desire for females a bit lower on the to do list.35 year old male here, recently divorced. This weekend I was going on a trip to the middle of nowhere in West Virginia. And while I was bored in my hotel, I finally installed tinder to see what would happen.  That night I swiped on a couple women around 5:30ish and then I went out to dinner and beers with my brother.

I get back to the hotel around 9ish feeling tipsy, get ready for bed, and turn tinder back on in a horny mood. I start swiping again, this time without reading profiles and without much physical discrimination. Match Match Match Match Match. Holy shit these women have been busy tonight! I had about 30 matches waiting for me of all shapes and sizes. 

I say the same thing to each one because I'm old school, "Hey, I hate typing, can I call you real quick?"  Several send their numbers, some don't respond, some want more banter before they let me call.  I ignore all but the first category.  

I start calling them in descending order of hotness. The first girl I call starts talking about how there aren't any good men anymore, nobody goes to church, they just want a quick fuck, and she ain't like that. I told her "whoops, that sounds like me, so I guess you're not interested in having an orgasm in my hotel room?" She hangs up.

I call the second girl. I ask her all about herself, make some jokes, make her laugh a couple times. Tell her some bullshit about how "I travel for business, women don't seem to like that. But I always told my last girlfriend, 'just come with me! I'm going to New York for three days, I only have to meet with my client for one hour then the rest of the time I'm yours' but they always whine about how they can't get off work." This lie has thrilled my target because we've already established that she doesn't work but is a "fitness instructor" looking for clients. 

She agrees to meet me in a dinky bar that is attached to a bowling alley across from my hotel. Apparently she comes here all the time, knows everybody. She's hotter than her pictures (I'm a leg guy and the pics didn't show how sexy her legs were).  I order two pitchers of beer and I give her one, I start chugging right out the pitcher, she makes an amused look like "WTF?" I say "I thought you rednecks are supposed to know how to party??" I have a thick New York accent bordering on Joe Pesci.

She slams her pitcher, I slam mine. The DJ plays some song she likes, she starts grinding up on me. We dance. 

I go to the bar and order two shots of Captain and coke chaser.  We do a toast, she knocks it back. I can tell that one was the silver bullet. She's pretty drunk, I'm pretty drunk. She agrees to come hang out in my hotel room. I hold her hand and we walk to the hotel.  my hand is sweating profusely because it's like 90 degrees.

As soon as we get in the room, she says she has to go to the bathroom.  This is when a woman goes to check her pussy, wipe up, make sure everything looks ok. When a woman takes a while in there, you know she's getting her pussy ready. 

She comes out of the bathroom, I am sitting on the bed. I pat the bed creepily for her to sit down.  She sits and I immediately start making out with her. I start feeling those legs I've been dying to touch. A little stubly :( oh well what do I expect from a girl I essentially downloaded off the internet. I start fumbling her complicated dress, I tell her, "Will you take this damn thing off?" She laughs and strips.

I diddle her clit a little, she gets super wet and starts moaning. I stood up on my knees and fed her my disappointingly sized cock to suck on. It's a little soft due to being nervous and I haven't done this type of thing in 10 years.  She sucks me sloppily and seems pleased when it inflates to its max thickness. Her pussy tenses up and she cums from my fingering. I made sure of it because I knew what was coming next.

I throw on a condom and put my dick in her and I came after about three strokes (it's been ten years fellows, go easy on me). We both pass out. I wake up the next morning to the sound of her getting her shit together. I give her a ride home, she lives in some horrible apartment.  I feel terrible, almost want to offer her money but don't want her to feel like a hooker either. Felt bad about the lies I told.  But as always... that feeling is always replaced by a different one.

For you see, that ride home down through the mountains of WV back east was probably the best part of the whole experience. The moment when I got to relax back and reflect on all that had transpired.  I downloaded a girl of the internet, she fucked me, it was easy. This. is. the. fucking. future.  

I roll down my windows and let the wind whip through my hair. I get an insane level of hyper energy that can't be contained, and I have a tourettes moment where I slap the side of my car and scream "FUTURE!!!!" out the window repeatedly like squidward. 

I stop at a little roadside diner and I see an older gentleman sitting there alone at the counter. I sit down next to him and order a coffee and bagel. I talk to him... he's just come from church.  He asks me how my weekend was. I'm not religious but I told him, "Sometimes when you ask God for rain, he makes it pour all over your garden." The old man wanted to know more, so I show him the Tinder app. I swipe a few girls and I show him the chat feature. 

"And what happens when you meet these young women?" he asked. 

"Well," I told him, "That's the part where I ask God to close his eyes for a while." The old man laughed so hard I thought he would have a heart attack. I laugh maniacally as well. I throw $40 on the counter and pay for the old man's eggs and coffee. 

What a time to be alive lads.  What a time TO BE ALIVE!!!!!

FUTURE!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!Last week I made a post about my 6 years of experience with women which got quite some positive responses so here's a follow up on what I learned from going on all those first dates. There's some mindset tips and some more practical tips.

1. You're probably both nervous. You're both hoping it's gonna be a fun date if you show up and want to have a good time. While you're nervous the other person is secretly also your cheerleader cause that person also wants you to be fun.
2. Try to do something a bit more fun than drinks at a bar. I used to go for picknicks, slacklining or other sports if she was sporty. Else there's also options like going to a boardgame bar, airhockey, an arcade. Just something that's a bit more fun than the usual bar which most people use for first dates. Do something where you can connect with eachother, don't go to the cinema or something where you're just silent together.
3. If you do go to a bar, make sure you're at a spot where you don't have to sit directly facing eachother. Find a bar with sofa's where you can chill on or go to the psychologist seating of 90 degrees. Feels a lot less confrontational.
4. When talking during a first date make it fun! Don't go into interview mode. Don't ask her lots of questions. Also if she asks you a lot of questions, same problem. Make it chill vibes, like you'd have with a good friend. If you're with friends you also don't tend to fire questions at eachother. Something I used to do was create stories about the other people in the bar with my date which was a fun way to set the vibe.
5. Know what your goal is of the date, do you want a quick lay? Do you want a relationship? Do you just want to have fun? Do you want to practice dating? There's many options, but be aware of that. Different kind of goals have different date approaches, plan according.
6. Is your goal a quick lay? Plan a date close to your house, I had a few bars around 5 minutes walking from my house so I went bar hopping and ended in my house if that was the goal. Also, late night dates tend to work better for this.
7. Is your plan to get a relationship? Find a spot that's not too loud and where you can hear eachother properly.
8. Want to have fun? Just pick something to do that you think is cool. (This also tends to work for all the other options though.)
9. During a date you're both figuring out who the other is and if you're gonna choose for her or him. Have some standards, you're not getting lucky if you get a lay. You're BOTH getting lucky.
10. If your date keeps asking questions and the date becomes quite stale because her questions are only about very basic stuff. There's 2 options to solve this, 1 delve into a story so you can get a better frame and set fun vibes. Or option 2, a tip I give often  when I train people who appear in front of the press, answer the question you wished you asked. It might feel weird a bit, but just look at politicians, they do it all the time and most people don't even realise they do it.
11. Show passion, if she asks what you do in life and you say "well uhm, I do computer stuff, I work in IT you know?" Screw that, you choose that career for a reason, show how enthusiastic you are, that's a lot better. Passion and enthusiasm are contagious.
12. Making the paying moment less awkward with a sentence I used a lot was: "I'll pay for this date and you'll have pay for the next" Quite often there wasn't really a next date (either side didn't want to) but it made the process really chill.
13. Dress like yourself, don't dress down, don't dress up. Let her get the real you. Do please groom though, she probably spend quite some time in front of the mirror. Reciprocate atleast a bit.
14. Don't go for expensive dates like restaurants, that generally shows you value her a lot and want to invest a lot. Unless ofcourse you want to date girls that have that mindset and want guys that spend a lot of money on her.
15. Keep her warm before the date, send some fun texts. The days before, you can't just set up a date, be silent for 5 days and then expect her to show if. She'll probably find a reason to not come if you didn't make her feel comfortable in the days before. The day self I usually send a text along the lines: "This is prettylittlepenguin's secretary, confirming our date for tonight at xx:xx. Wear something cute so we match."
16. Be doing something when you're waiting, I used to have a few places where I was a regular so I chatted with the staff working there. If I went to a new spot I generally took a book with me and read it if she was later than I was.
17. If you're more in college vibes, parties can be a good first date aswell. Especially if you host parties yourself. I had a few roommates and quite some parties back in the days. Just invite a girl, tell her a lot of random people are coming and tell her to bring a friend which makes it more low key for her.
18. No phones on a date, I can't believe I have to type this. But quite some of my less experienced male friends randomly take out their phone on a silent moment. Just embrace the silence which is okay because you're both a tad nervous and pick it up with a new topic.
19. Instead of asking questions you can sometimes use the statement game, don't overuse it. See if you can guess correctly what she does or a part of her to let her open up. "You're probably the oldest of your sisters right? You seem like a more caring mature person" Can be a way to compliment her and get her to open up more, ofcourse make your own observations which you feel are true and don't use that canned line.
20. Don't go all aboard on the alcohol, a bit is cool but don't drink enough to become drunk. That tends to massively kill the vibe.
21. Don't go for the kiss on the good bye. Go for it earlier on the date or don't. Going at the last moment is a sign of weakness. It communicates: "we had a date, I will now go for the kiss in the hope you like me, if you don't go for the kiss I can quickly walk away and say bye, hoping to save a bit of face" During the date there never will be a perfect opportunity for a kiss but if you feel the vibes are somewhat there, go for it.
22. Things that were fun as you were a kid are still fun now. Thumbwrestling, silly games and all that are good ways to have some easy fun. Try to segment them in, not gonna tell you how, find your own way.

And there's probably a lot more tips, please add to them in the comments!Reminders for some, advice for others. Add on to this, elaborate on it or rebut.

* "If you're in a group of people and something funny happens, take note of who looks at you while everyone is laughing. That person is attracted to you. They don't consciously decide to look at you. They do it because they want to know that the person they care about is enjoying the same thing as them." ([RobertLobLaw2](http://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/17eqoa/reddit_whats_the_most_useful_fact_you_know/c84u7hx))

* "Smart girls want to be told they are pretty. Pretty girls want to be told they are smart." ([chumpylumpkins](http://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/17eqoa/reddit_whats_the_most_useful_fact_you_know/c84wrof))

* "Women and men are not as dissimilar from one another as the media, pop culture and common knowledge pursuade us to believe." ([yeah_right_bruh](http://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/17eqoa/reddit_whats_the_most_useful_fact_you_know/c84vidq))

* "people will tend to like you more if you ask them to do you a favor. It's referred to as the ["Ben Franklin Effect"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ben_Franklin_effect). Win-win!" ([Hungry_Hobo](http://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/17eqoa/reddit_whats_the_most_useful_fact_you_know/c84uqkw))

[(via)](http://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/17eqoa/reddit_whats_the_most_useful_fact_you_know/)"Life doesn't end at 23. 30 isn’t old. Fetishizing youth as the ultimate desirable characteristic in a person is actively harmful to both young and old people. Some of us lost our teenage years to abuse and recovery, and can only begin living when we’re at a different life stage."

Source: a tumblr posts I once read.I've been getting this from a lot of women recently.

"You had the courage to come and talk to me, I could never do that".

Women do not get cold approached at much as you think. At a bar? Sure, plenty. During the day? You're the 1%. 

Just a reminder to go for it. Women will admire your courage. I think this is a beautiful thing especially if this approach turns into a relationship. Do you know how masculine this is? 

"Yes my boyfriend had the balls to come and talk to me. He just approached me in the street and told me I was cute". 

You are immediately more attractive and confident in her eyes. This is the beauty of day game.

#GO FOR ITThis is a community that I first found about 8 years ago. It started when I read The Game, as it must have started for many of you guys too. It’s been a wild ride and as I’ve grown older I’ve learned quite a bit about picking up girls, and respecting myself. But there’s one thing that I think this community gets wrong, something that is unhealthy for both the PUAs and the girls we try to pick up. Here are some simple ideas about how to maintain your self-respect, your respect for women, and still get laid.

1.	Women want to have sex with you.
2.	Not every woman wants to have sex with you.
3.	It’s fine if a woman doesn’t want to have sex with you, it’s not your fault.
4.	You can build a small relationship with a woman without any tricks.

There’s the most important things you can take away from this small piece I’m writing. Let’s get into it.

A tiny bit of backstory on me: I could never get laid for the life of me even in college. I’d consider it lucky if I had sex more than twice a year. I joined a frat, I asked friends for help, I did everything I could but nothing seemed to work for me. Eventually I read *The Game*, and started using some of those ‘tricks’ to get girls to not only pay attention to me (that was always easy since I’m a jokester) but to actually be attracted to me. 

A revelation hit one day when I gave a girl – who was way out of my league –  a genuine compliment and then walked away from her. Thirty minutes later we were making out on the couch. Since then I’ve been trying to find out how to find my own style of building attraction with girls; one that doesn’t involve me asking ridiculous shit like what color cube she is, or making sure I stand on my back heel and only give her eye contact when ‘she deserves it.’

Lately I’ve been traveling around a lot, and while that certainly makes it a lot easier to meet girls naturally and hook up, it’s not everything. Now I’m going to tell you the biggest secret I’ve learned in the last 8 years, and it’s something that I’ve verified time and time again in the past few years:

**Pay her a compliment she’s never heard before, and make sure it’s genuine.** I’ve told a girl that her eyes turn into really beautiful crescent moons when she smiles; I’ve told a girl that she has Hayden Panietierre’s eyebrows. I’ve told a girl that she dresses like a badass; that she has an eye for color and she’s definitely an autumn; that I’ve never met someone who has so much confidence behind her smile. 

All of these are out of left field, and if you take this approach you’ll often get, “Um, thanks? I’m not sure if it’s a compliment.” **Just assure her that it is, and then leave it.** Go back to talking about the weather, go back to playing with your phone or reading your book or whatever it was you were doing before you said that. After a few minutes she might come up to you, she might not. Remember the four points I made at the top of this list. After a while you might say something else to her, ask her what she does for a living or if she’s just in town visiting.

The important thing is, this puts you two into a certain kind of relationship off the bat. You’re not some dude who’s acting friendly to put the moves on her later, so she can put her guard down. She knows what you want, and how she responds to this will let you know what she wants.

Remember the numbered take-aways. Rule Number One means that you don’t need tricks to get women to like you. You just have to let them know that you’re attracted to them, in a real way. The genuine, off-beat compliment does just that. It shows that you’re attracted to her, it shows you have some personality, and it shows that she’s worth more than a “How much does a polar bear weigh?” style of pick-up line. You are attracted to **her.** You’re not just some dick with a body attached looking for a hole to plow into. You paint yourself as a human being, attracted to another human being. That’s important.

Rule Number Two means that she might be weirded out by it, and that is completely OK. Maybe she went out with this guy last week that she’s head over heels for; maybe she’s just getting over a break up and wants to drink her coffee in peace. Maybe she doesn’t like your haircut. Whatever. It's OK. It’s all OK. 

Check this out: she lives in a world with almost infinite choice. As an attractive woman, she can go up to almost any guy at any time and get a date – or get laid if she’s in a hurry. Now imagine a realm in which you have infinite choice: Netflix. You scroll through shows and movies that look interesting or not based on very superficial things: The title, the cover art, the category that you place it in. If something looks decently interesting (maybe one in ten) you’ll read the description. Maybe you’ll watch an episode and decide if you want to watch another. You have so much choice in the world that you get to be selective about how you spend your time. **Now imagine if dating was like that.** Imagine if you got to be that choosy about girls. This is the world that women live in. You are a movie in their Netflix queue. If they skip over your movie, that’s completely fine. She knows she doesn’t like mysteries. It doesn’t mean that your movie sucks, or that nobody will ever watch you. It just means that she’s not interested in you today, for one of a hundred million reasons. It’s totally fine, and you’ll find a girl who wants to watch your movie if you just keep putting yourself up in the queue. That sums up Rule Number Three.

Now for Rule Number Four. It’s important to keep the first three rules in mind as you go. Some women won’t want to talk to you, some will. You’re valuable, but not to every person at every time. By paying her a genuine compliment you can determine if she’s interested in you just by the way she responds. If she gives you consideration and starts a conversation, there you go. Keep it going. If she looks at you sideways and doesn’t reply, no follow up needed. Go back to playing on your phone. Keep the first three rules in mind and respect the unspoken boundaries that are developing naturally between you. Don’t try to force anything to happen and don’t get mad at yourself for whatever does happen. Don’t get mad at her for skipping over you based on the name of your movie and your cover art. Maybe she doesn’t know what she’s missing, but maybe she’s genuinely not interested in what you’re able to offer her.

Drop the compliment and go from there. Be personable, don’t go overboard, and don’t assume anything too quickly. Escalate. Practice the art of small talk, of flirtation without degradation or tricks. You don’t need them.

This is how people have flirted for centuries. Nobody says it because the ones who know this, don’t think it needs to be said. The ones who don’t know it obviously can’t say it. I learned it the hard way, through trial and error and a lot of periods of VERY difficult self-reflection (and sometimes self-hatred, both because I couldn’t get laid and because I got laid a lot but for the wrong reasons).

You’ll probably read this and see its truth but have a hard time really internalizing it. That’s completely fine, nobody expects anything else from you. Try to see its truth and gradually adopt it into your mindset toward women and toward yourself. You’ll get more genuine relationships, you won’t grow to swallow ‘the red pill,’ and you’ll respect yourself and the women you meet much more than with any PUA method.

TLDR: Pay women genuine compliments and drill the four listed rules into your mind.It is something that I rarely see being elaborated on in this subreddit. People talk about the importance of looking good, confident, good career, a good physique, etc, and although these are all important in having a fulfilled (romantic) life, having friends is often ignored or understated. Your social circle is the number one indicator for your chance of finding a GF. The quality of your social circle is the number one indicator for the quality of your GFs. It is a truth that you are the average of 5 people closest to you in life. Become the person who is interesting enough so people of higher calibres want to talk to them or befriend them. Being high-value is not enough in itself though. You should also be able to initiate talking to people, making them feel important and at home, and help them grow in their own lives as well.  You might be a successful and decent person but if you do not talk to people and make an effort to expand your social circle, you may end up with people below your level in terms of success, ambitious, drive, and interest in life.Had a lot of success with this pickup line the past year. Thought I’d share!

Go up and say “Excuse me, I need a girl’s advice about something”. They’ll say sure, then you ask “Let’s say I see a really cute girl, do I go up and talk to her or is that too direct?” Most of the time they’ll encourage you to go approach said girl (keep in mind most girls WANT to be approached). Then you introduce yourself and start the conversation from there! 

Put your own twist on it and once she realizes that you used her own advice on her she’ll be flattered! Plus it puts her in a position to not contradict her own advice 


Edit: grammarThere were several girls in college that I spent far too long being fixated on, girls who weren’t even that spectacular or beautiful as I look back now. However, when in the haze of lust (which guys will confuse with love), these girls were the end all-be all.

With some life experience behind me and some wisdom, it seems insane now to focus your emotionally currency on one single person for a year or more, especially when you’ve never been in a relationship with that person.

However, this is undoubtedly the biggest mistake men make when it comes to attraction and dating - we deeply invest our emotions far too soon with someone we don’t know well.  We fantasize about a life with them and our perception of their good and bad traits are misaligned with reality. Putting it simply, shit gets too serious, too soon.

If you are invested too heavily in someone, and they aren’t as receptive, it’s easy to fall into the trap of chasing this person, or an idealized version you have of them in your head.

If you are on this path, visualize yourself over the next few years being devoted to this person who does not value you. Imagine yourself finally coming out of the fog, while they’ve disposed of you emotionally long before.

Think of all the amazing people you could have met, the happiness and emotional freedom you could have enjoyed in that time period.

It’s a cliche, but time is precious. Your time should be valued more than any idealized, emotionally distant person that treats you as afterthought.  Only spend your time and energy on those who value you.I (26M) have slept with 70+ women over the past 6 years and last year I finally have found the one that’ll be my wife. Here are some dating tips I’ve learned over the years that helped me thrive in the dating world and led me to dating some seriously beautiful girls on campus and in life. I’m talking about girls that turn heads everywhere.

**First Date**

1.) Have fun! 

Don’t take yourself too seriously. 99% of the time, the girl WANTS you to succeed. She wants to finally find her Prince Charming. Relax and don’t be so tense.

2.) DO NOT place women on a pedestal. 

I don’t care how attractive she is or you think she is. Act like a fan, you’ll get treated like a fan. Act like a king, maybe you’ll find your queen. This means, she is your equal. Personally, my standards are high. So she better meet or exceed them or I’m placing her into the fwb bucket if anything. 

3.) Don’t answer questions so seriously. 

You’re going to be asking each other open-ended questions. If she asks what you do, you don’t have to tell her right away. Make her guess. Make it a game. Give her clues. Joke with her answers. 

Example (Her): “So what do you do for fun?”

(You): “Have you heard of lemon fishing”

(Her): “wtf is that?”

(You): * make up a quick fake 30 second  story about “lemon fishing” and then at the end joke with her that she actually believed that. THEN after she inevitably laughs, you tell her. *

4.) Listen!

Don’t just ‘hear’ the words she’s saying while thinking of what to say next. Actually **listen** to her and remember what she says. It will come in handy on later dates or even that night. She will be amazed at you remembering little seemingly unimportant details. 

5.) Eye Contact

Look deep into her eyes while she’s talking. I’m talking about seconds at a time. She should feel like your fully engaged, and your mind is focused on her completely. This one is hard, because you feel uncomfortable when first learning but trust me it’s one of the most important things.

6.) Know your worth

If she’s super late, if she’s on her phone constantly during the date. If she’s essentially not respecting your time and your presence then you need to realize that no matter how she looks, she’s not worth your time. My date better treat me with the same respect I treat them with or I’m ending it quickly. 

7.) Does she offer to pay?
Look, if you asked her out to the date you should pay fully. But if she doesn’t at least offer to split or reach for her wallet, or express gratitude…that’s a see you later for me. 

8.) Awkward Silences

Embrace the awkwardness, because believe it or not those little breaks between conversation are actually your friend. If you look deep into her eyes during these silences and just look at each other, instead of getting flustered or reaching for your phone…this will lead to a kiss most of the time. At least by the end of the night the sexual tension is very high. 

9.) Touch

If she’s laughing, if your leading her somewhere, you gotta touch her. Not inappropriately, but rather light touches on the hand or elbow or shoulder. Then as you notice her not reacting or continuing to enjoy and affect the touch, you can start escalating the touch to a hug or brushing your foot on hers or touching your hand to her thigh. If she at any point looks uncomfortable, tone it down a few notches. 

10.) Be confident

Don’t put down yourself or others for the sake of a joke. Don’t judge or talk down about others. You should be positive at all times, and be confident without being arrogant. Essentially, my mindset when walking in somewhere is that I own the place. I feel at home. 

11.) Act like you already know her. 

Get deep with the questions. Once you have done the surface level questions with your humor injected like above, then you gotta find out who she really is and what does she want in life. What’s her passion if money was no object and WHY.

**Conclusion**

Remember above all else that you are the one who is also qualifying her. Make sure that she meets your standards. Make sure that she doesn’t have red flags. 

Most of the girls I’ve dated are VERY hot. But other than the 4 girls I’ve dated officially, none of them met my personal standards of what I was looking for in a relationship or wife despite their looks. So, the rest I mentally placed into a fwb or friend zone bucket where I don’t actually go out on dates with them or spend money on them. And I do this with honesty, I’m not shady with it. I let them know that I just don’t see them as a fit before they ask or get too deep.

All coming from a average looking Indian guy with a 10/10 personality and 10/10 confidence level.Yes, all the advice and books on seduction are important and hold golden information, but all of it comes second to the greatest advice you will ever hear. "You are nothing. Everyone is basically nothing." You are just smaller than a grain of sand in the time of the universe and everything you do will be forgotten in the infinite time of universe. No one really cares what you do and we are just biased. Go out and ask the woman you find attractive out, be super confident, if she rejects you, then who cares, it is NOT that important. Learn from your mistakes and move on. One day you will not be here. Use your time as most effectively as you can and enjoy the hell out of it.A problem lots of guys have is they fall madly in love too quickly. This often makes them needy and weird around the girl and they push her away. Being in love is largely self-hypnosis. Guys usually fall in love because the girl is pretty and nothing more. Guys, for the love of God, if you meet a girl you're interested in, ask her out asap. Don't get emotionally invested in someone you don't have any real relationship with. Save love for when you're actually dating and you've actually gotten a chance to get to know them.I'm always amused by the guys who come to this forum everyday (as revealed by their comment history) with the purpose of trying to tear down others and to argue why nothing will ever work for them. Their dedication reveals just how terrified that they are of discovering any real solutions to their problems. 

God forbid that they discover that there is something within their own power that they could do to improve their lives. That would be unacceptable, since it would require them to take some personal responsibility and stop identifying as a victim. (btw, I'm addressing what I assume is just an overly vocal minority of the members here, and not the average person.) 

The internet is already full of enough haters and places where people spend all their time complaining  and shitting on others. Let's try to keep this place for constructive advice, since it seems like one of the only few resources left for people.

A victim mentality comes with resentment and anger. You attract what you are, and as a person filled with resentment and anger, those are the type of people (if any) who you will bring into your life. You become a drug addict to these negative emotions. They provide short hits of validation, vindication and tribal belonging, but in the long run poison your soul and move you further away from feeling any type of lasting fulfillment.

In contrast, an empowered person who does not let victimhood fully define them, can find great joy, hope, and excitement in taking personal responsibility and working to better themselves.

Link to Full Video: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F23Qu4hvMY8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F23Qu4hvMY8)I’ve noticed a lot of people on here are looking for ways to engage flirty conversations with the same or opposing sex and I figured I’d give you an idea or two. 

He was working on his laptop and I was working on mine at the table right next to him. He smiled at me once, he didn’t hover nor did he stare at me to try and get my attention. About an hour and a half in, he stood up to get a tea and left a note on my table and walked off. 
On the note was a game of tic-tac-toe and a message that said something like “you could be the real black widow” and then proceeded to ask my name. 
It was as simple as that, we went through three, 6x6 pages front and back writing to each other until I told him I was in a very happy relationship and he was incredibly respectful. He then proceeded to ask if he could sit down to talk face to face and then we talked for maybe another 20 minutes. 

Push yourself to do something that makes you stand out, it shows confidence and it’s memorable. Not every person will be interested, point blank. People have their bad days, but don’t let rejection stop you. 

There is someone for everyone (:

Edit : 
1. I am allowed to engage in conversations with another man.
2. I told my boyfriend immediately. 
3. My boyfriend was not upset due to the fact he is secure with himself & our relationship. It may seem like a shock but, some people are not controlling. 
4. I have been hit on by people who are far too aggressive and figured this was a cute approach to spark ideas for other people. 
5. The conversation was simple things. I’m not going to be an asshole and say I’m taken at the moment a guy asks my name. I actually enjoy talking to people.Son,  you owe no one an apology or explanation for living the life you want  to live. Whatever the hell you want out of life, go out and make it  happen, don't waste the time you have now out of fear of failure and  rejection.

Who decided that you aren't allowed to date that cure girl you're eyeing up?

Who decided that you aren't allowed to go out and live your passion?

Who decided that you aren't allowed to make all of your goals a reality?

**You** decide that, no one else.

**You** decide where you limits lie, no one else.

**You** decide what you want to get out of life, no one else.

**You** decide how you're going to make it happen, no one else.

“Fear defeats more people than any other one thing in the world.” - Ralph EmersonI was meeting some friends for a coffee. This gorgeous girl 5'11 blonde girl  walked in and I was like shit. I am 6'1 myself so I have a thing for taller girls. My friend had to leave and I was like I really want to talk to her. I went to the bathroom and my heart was racing. I told myself what's the worst that could happen. That every beat of my heart was pure confidence. Eventually it settled and I did the approach. I just said hey I thought you were cute so I'd figured I would say hi. She responded really positively for a while before saying "You are lovely but I have a boyfriend." I took it on  the chin and said "No worries" and left her be.

I walked away feeling more confident than ever. As I overcame my fear took her off a pedestal and realized that I left there with no regret or what ifs. Where as before I would have beaten myself up about not taking action. I realize if I always approach my ideal type, say it's 1/10 success rate eventually I'll get her. If you are ever in this situation always do the approach. You will feel more confident and happier with yourself. Where as normally you walk away feeling diminished and regretful.After going out multiple times in the past few weeks alone, I haven’t found my way into any groups. I’ve been walking up and talking to many different people at this venue. Unattractive women, hot women, their boyfriends, etc. People have seemed generally closed off here. However, last week when I was leaving that venue, I gave this fairly hot girl my number. I didn’t expect her to text me as most don’t. However....

Fast forward to last night, she texts me out of the blue. She asked if I was going to the normal venue and I said yeah. So in a nutshell, I met up with her and her friend group that night. I engaged with everyone (not just her) in the group asking questions, getting into more deep topics, etc. I think because of some of the things I’ve learned on here and practiced, I had something great happen to me.

Showing a little bit of vulnerability, I told a couple people in the group my birthday was coming up. I basically said I have no plans for that day but they said they’ll include me in their plans. I haven’t had friends for my birthday in years. I’m just happy with my progress.**THE ULTIMATE TINDER CHEAT SHEET** 
     
    
**UPDATE:** I'm quite aware some of this info is old and overused, if you have something new/creative/funny that you'd like to add to any of the below categories please post it and I'll add it (you'll be credited of course). I'm extremely surprised this thread has gotten as big as it has, it would be a shame not to build on it and make it better.
    
     
**HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE** 
  
You should use these types of things as a template. Not copy. Much like taking notes for study, change it and make it suit you, learn from it, don't learn it. - /u/Juridical_Fuck
  
  
**INTRODUCTION**  
Before we get started please read this excerpt on conversational threading which covers the fundamentals needed for engaging in conversation with women. Since you’re using Tinder and you’re not dealing with women face to face you have an advantage that gives you time to analyze what they say and then articulate a suitable response.        
    
 **CONVERSATION THREADING**     
 *"When a girl is telling you her problems, she isn't looking for solutions."*    
    
Women use conversation to bond. That’s why you’ll see women on the phone with each other for literally hours. They’ll keep swapping stories and talking about what seems to us as pointless things. Therefore, for women, conversation itself is the goal.
    
  
Woman: “I love going to the Paris. It’s so romantic”  
    
You: “Paris is my favorite city. I love the laid-back nature of the people” 
     
You: “Yeah as soon as you arrive in the city you can feel the romantic energy”  
    
You: “What is it about Paris that you especially love?”  
     
I came up with these sentences in literally a few seconds. How? It’s quite easy- let’s look at the woman’s sentence one more time.  
     
Woman: “I love going to the Paris. It’s so romantic”  
     
In this sentence, there are at least three ‘threads’. These are parts of sentences you can talk about. In this case the threads were:  
     
1. I love…  
2. Paris  
3. so romantic  
  
So you can talk about:  
1. Things you love  
2. Paris  
3. How you find Paris/other places romantic  
   
Read the full article here: http://www.reddit.com/comments/ovaar/since_seductionreview_went_down_i_thought_id/  
     
**PHOTOS**     
     
• All men should watch this video before they take their tinder photos: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qe3oJnFtA_k  
      
• Wear nice clothes (see a stylist if you need help with colors and shades)  
     
• Get an  nice/expensive haircut.
    
• Then take some clear photos, photo shop and filter them if you want. Every girl you’re swiping for is doing the same thing.  
       
• You can take a photo rock climbing to show you’re adventurous if you want (I never have).    
     
     
**ABOUT ME (BIO)**  
        
In my opinion your About Me should have some humor, no one likes a guy who takes himself too seriously. Your bio should also include some truth for example, if you’re tall you should add your height, if you’re a quarterback maybe include that too.    
     
   
 *When I was young, girls didn't like it when I pulled their hair... Funny how things change.*    
    
      
*It's hard being a single dad. Or so I hear. I wouldn't know. I don't have kids.*    
   
    
**OPENERS**  
    
Here are some openers that have worked well for me in the past. The last opener is something I made up today and it’s got the best results. I really encourage you to come up with your own opener as well. Using an over-used opener shows a lack of originality and she won’t be impressed.    
   
  
1. Your parents will not like me. I will fall short of almost all of your expectations. I will ruin your credit score. But if you let me have sex with you I'll make you the happiest woman in the world for an entire night. Or 15 minutes. Actually probably more like 5.    
   
  
2. I don’t normally give out compliments to girls I just meet but you have great taste in men.    
   
  
   
     
**TRANSITION**      
   
  
If possible make an observational comment on her photos or bio. If you can’t think of anything worthwhile to say. Ask her a questions about her. People love to talk about themselves but they also don’t want to be barraged with questions. Ask one or two questions now and save the rest for later. **REMEMBER: Pay close attention to how she responds and refer back to conversational threading.** The aim is to turn this into a free-flowing natural conversation between potential lovers. You could even transition into the question with a ridiculous statement like this:   
     
      
“There is something you should probably know about me before you get too attached. I have a vested interest in global domination and I’m a major distributor of methamphetamine. But that’s not important let’s talk about you…”
    
   
**QUESTIONS:**    
   
  
What are you most passionate about?    
If someone wrote a biography on you what would the title be?    
If you could go anywhere in the world, where would you go and why?    
What clique did you hang out with at school?  
If you could meet anyone alive or dead, who would it be?  
  
  
Later on in the conversation when you’ve started to reach a deep emotional connection, you might ask these questions.  
   
  
**DEEP QUESTIONS:** 
     
If everyone looked the same what would make you stand out?  
If you could change one thing about yourself, what would it be?   
  
    
To keep things fun and exciting why not play a game, crack a joke or try a riddle. Here are some examples below.    
    
   
**The Truth Game**  
   
   
Keep asking questions back and forth and the other must answer truthfully. This is your chance to get things sexual. Feel free to use these questions….  
   
  
What is the craziest place you’ve ever had sex?  
What’s your favorite place to be touched?  
What’s your favorite sexual position?  
Have you ever slept with a co-worker?  
When was the last time you had sex?  
    
**5 QUESTION GAME**  
     
For this game you tell her you’re going to give her 5 questions and all she has to do is give an incorrect answer for each. For example you might ask, ‘What colour is the sky?’ and if she says, ‘Pink’ she wins the round…  
   
Ok let’s start…  
    
1. What country do we live in?”  
[HER ANSWER]  
2. What app are we using?  
[HER ANSWER]  
3. What day is it?  
[HER ANSWER]  
4. Wait, how many questions was that?  
(More often than not she will say, “3” and you’ve won because she answered correctly.  
5. If she’s smart and catches the 4th Question say: “Oh, you’ve played this before, haven’t you?” When she says No, she forgot to lie and failed.  
  
**FUCK, MARRY, KILL GAME**  
    
You name three celebrities and she must decide who she will Fuck, Marry and Kill.  
    
   
**MASTURBATION JOKE**  
     
Did you know that 93% of all women masturbate in the shower?  
(They respond.)  
“Do you know what the other 7% do?”  
(They say no)  
“Oh…so you’re one of the ones… who…”  
    
    
**BANTER LIST**  
    
When she says something funny:   
You are the 3rd funniest person I’ve spoken to today.  
     
When she compliments you:  
Is that what you say to all the guys?  
Is that one of your pickup lines?  
      
When you have something in common:  
We have too much in common. We’d fight all day long. And I’d win.  
     
When she’s angry:  
You're so cute when your angry  
      
When the topic of your relationship is brought up:  
We would be bad together, all fights and makeup sex.  
     
Backhanded compliment:  
Out of all the [first name] [last name]'s I know, I think you're my favorite.  
      
When she’s misbehaving:  
My mom warned me about girls like you.  
       
If she slightly overreacts:  
Whoa you need to calm down, you are out of control.  
       
When you’re feeling insignificant:  
When are you going to take me to dinner and buy me fancy things?
Disclaimer - I'm just a newbie and I'm still learning. I have read and seen a lot of stuff both here and in real life, so I thought I'd compile a post with the best tips I've come across; Particularly for those like me who may fall somewhere on the autism spectrum, or just didn't have this type of stuff "click" with them growing up. I actually got called charming/charismatic a couple of times (despite average looks) so I figured I'd share what I found to be the best advice I've gotten. This is either behavior I've read, done, or seen done by likable/confident men that I've tried to replicate and work into my interactions. 

&#x200B;

1. Eye contact and shutting tf up when she's talking

This is maybe the most common advice given (eye contact), but for good reason. The importance of listening skills and eye contact cannot be understated. For years and years I was the guy not able to hold eye contact with anyone, let alone girls I found attractive. I would also be too jumpy and cut people off in conversation (without even meaning to be rude) just because I was nervous.

Ever had a conversation with someone who does this, though? It sucks. Nobody wants to converse with someone who just wants to hear themselves talk. So, DON'T DO THAT. If she's talking, be an active listener, stfu, and look her dead in the eyes. **You can also gauge her interest if she's looking back in your eyes or not**. That alone was one of my biggest takeaways from upping my eye contact. For some reason, as "easy" as this is, I see a lot of guys suck at it, and I can tell when a guy knows what he's doing or not. 

Real life example: I got a job at a big store a couple of years ago, around the time I started reading up on seduction because I was so pathetic with it. I decided to practice my eye contact with everyone there (considering the volume of the store), but particularly the girls my age who worked there. This actually worked so well in a couple of cases that a couple of the girls got crushes on me and/or I just generally found them talking to me a lot over other people. I really trace it to the eye contact and listening as that was the biggest change I made. 

&#x200B;

2. Teasing and disagreeing with her

This is another huge one and something I didn't really understand until I tried it myself. I used to always put off teasing as pointless, but it's honestly so effective in getting interest and having a fun conversation. Always being "nice" and super agreeable isn't as exciting and drys up pussy like nothing else. It's actually funny, because watching TV and movies, it's a common trope to see the guy on the first date try to find stuff in common with the girl and change his personality/interests in order to agree. Now, of course, having stuff in common is a good thing, but having some of your own opinions that may clash is great too, provided it's actually fun and not you dishing out your political views.

Of course, you gotta be a bit playful with it and not too serious, but if you do it right I honestly think this works better than anything else. Doing this too much is just weird and I've seen people take the teasing way too far to where it's just cringe. So, don't be that guy either. If you're familiar with push/pull techniques, it's really about that. If I'm disagreeing with her about something, I'd ideally try to come back to something positive so I'm not that guy who finds the negative in everything someone says. That's the last thing people want to be around either. 

Real life example: Just the other day I had met a new girl (friend of friend basically) and I made a comment about how I hated rum (that was on her counter). This got her interest quick and I was able to tease her about it, and she went along too (jokingly flipping me off and defending it). Really quick and easy way to build a connection.

&#x200B;

3. Using inside jokes

I'm going to go off the previous example here with the rum, but say you get some joke like that going between the two of you, then you could go off of that at some point later and tease her about it, or even tell her "you have to make me one of those rum drinks you say are so good". I actually might try this if I see that girl again. It could be anything, though, but having something to call back to builds rapport and creates relationships. 

Like disagreeing with her, this is something that can be overused and made cringey if you take it too far. If I keep forcing rum into the conversation because that's the one thing I remember about her, it ends up getting ridiculous and not funny anymore. I mention this because I've actually seen this sort of thing happen.

&#x200B;

4. Having solid introductions & speaking to people like you know them

This really applies to meeting anyone, but having a solid introduction without being nervous/awkward is a great skill to have. What helped me a lot here is thinking back to people that made great first impressions where you look back and think "wow, that dude/girl was super cool". I've even had conversations about new people/coworkers/whatever with others where I've said "yeah, that guy was super chill" and everyone else had the same opinion, simply because he had a great introduction. All that really takes is looking people them the eye, giving a handshake/fist bump/whatever, introducing yourself, and coming off as approachable. 

Sorta like eye contact, this really isn't even difficult, but it's surprising the amount of people who make a lot of awkward introductions. Also, use her name when talking to her or getting her attention post introduction. I really like using fist bumps/some sort of touch, as I think it comes off as a little more genuine and friendly. 

&#x200B;

5. Use statements instead of questions

"Is pink your favorite color?" vs. "You really like your pink"

"What's your fav type of music?" vs. "You're probably a billie eilish fan"

"What's your astrological sign?" vs. "I bet you're a pisces" (for some reason the astrology stuff almost always gets a good reaction)

These examples are kinda ass, but still. This is something I'm still working on & also didn't used to do much, but the statements over questions thing (like teasing) is just so incredibly effective in building tension. What's great is you could be right or wrong and either way you're getting the answer to the question you could have otherwise asked. So, try to avoid asking questions if it can instead be replaced with an assumptive statement, especially if you can get her on the defense about something she likes! This makes for a more fun conversation and destroys the job interview vibe. 

Bonus tip I really like: If she asks you something where she could potentially guess, tell her to guess instead, or tell her you want to guess something about her. This is perfect for something like trying to figure out her major, star sign, or hometown. Then you can also get her to do the same for you.  

&#x200B;

6. Getting in her personal space bubble/the power of touch

Ok, so big disclaimer here: DO NOT CREEPILY GET UP ON AND CROWD A GIRL'S PERSONAL SPACE. Especially if she's not giving you IOI's. Like most of this stuff, it's very circumstantial. Sexual assault isn't a joke. I've actually gotten close to girls at concerts and made awkward and terrible conversation, and probably came off as super weird, so don't do this!

But say you're talking to a girl at a loud venue and you move in closer, or, she takes a step towards you... KEEP YOUR FEET LIKE CEMENT AND DON'T FUCKING MOVE. This is one of the best tips I got from my old coworker who was a big smooth talker. If she wants to get some more space from you, she's obviously more than welcome to, but there's absolutely no reason why you should be fidgeting or moving away from her and killing the tension. This is something I would often screw up and just back off to be "polite", but really, you're just screwing yourself doing that.

Sometimes, you can test it by getting a bit closer and if you notice she moves back, she's obviously not feeling it. Again, though, don't be a fucking weirdo and make girls uncomfortable. At the same time, you basically have to figure out if she's feeling you or not. Fortune favors the bold, and there's no way of finding out if she's into you unless you try. Expressly asking her "mind if I touch your shoulder" or something stupid like that is a vibe killer like no other. A lot of this is using your best judgement, which I know is tough if you're lacking social skills, but watching interactions and having more helps with this.

Real life example: I was at a restaurant earlier this summer and for my order, the waitress got maybe 12 inches from my face when I was ordering. Even though they work for tips, I found it a bit out of the ordinary as I'd never had that happen. I didn't move back or fidget, though; I just stayed still and continued to hold eye contact. That's actually a small story of its own, but still, a perfect example of staying still and making eye contact, and where she could have easily moved away if that's what she wanted. 

&#x200B;

7. Making her laugh

This is pretty lame and generic, to be fair, but damn, if it isn't effective. I've found that being "witty" is actually better than being "funny". Most of it really does come down to comedic timing. If you can work an inside joke into a witty comment about something - that's absolute gold. It's always a good feeling, too, if you can make a girl (or anyone) legitimately laugh and not just a fake one to be nice.

Tip: watch comedy. Whether that's stand up, movies, tv, etc. I actually get a ton of my humor from years and years of comedy that I watched growing up. And shit, if I'm being totally honest, I've actually stolen some jokes and used them in conversation.

&#x200B;

8. Complimenting clothes/shoes/accessories

I've found this is the best thing to compliment, even better than saying "you're really cute". Commenting on style or her vibe is much better than her face or assets. Hair and voice is ok, too, but that comes off as a bit more flirty, especially voice. I like complimenting stuff like shirt, jewelry, shoes, tattoos, etc. Then work in statements about her, some teasing, maybe light touch, and repeat. That's basically the flirting system. 

Note: At the same time, don't be super afraid to comment on appearance, especially if you've already talked a bit. You shouldn't be ashamed for being attracted to a girl or calling her cute. I went a long time afraid to ever say something like that because I felt like it was wrong for me to say something like that to a girl. Fact of the matter is it's ok to be attracted to her and don't be shamed into feeling otherwise. 

&#x200B;

9. Being positive about others in conversation

This is another thing I picked up from my old coworker, but I noticed he'd often reference others in his conversations, and say something positive about them. It's a super likable trait to have if you're always bringing other people up and being a positive person to be around. A lot of people do the opposite (and I've been guilty of this too) in making fun of strangers, saying negative stuff, etc., and that's simply not a person others want to talk to. Venting is cool, if you know them, but there's a line. 

&#x200B;

10. Talking slower

Don't be a speed demon trying to get sentences out. This, again, is something I super struggled with, and still do to some level. Slowing tf down makes you come off as less nervous, and shit, the reason for me talking fast is often because I am nervous! Slower and more deliberate speech, with pauses, is honestly much better. Not being afraid to have a moment of silence and eye contact is great too. This is perfect if a girl asks you a stupid question or something too personal. 

&#x200B;

Ok, that concludes my list of the things that helped me most. I'm still learning, like I said, but maybe some of this stuff will help someone else. I found all of these things to be super helpful techniques/tricks when it comes to flirting and being a more sociable and likable person.Imagine you’re on a date and you sit down in the nice restaurant. You order wine and check out your companion. She’s really cute and has a nice smile. After a few moments, the smiling turns a tiny bit awkward and since you don’t know what else to ask, you blurt out “So…. Tell me about yourself.”


**No. No. No**. This is waaay too much of a broad question. She will feel on-the-spot and will probably mumble something along the lines of “I like reading” – an equally boring answer that tells you NOTHING whatsoever about her. 


So how the hell do you assess compatibility, find out her interests, passions, aspirations and personality traits? Through kickass first date conversation starters that are really fucking engaging. **Here’s 30 to get the ball rolling**:


  **Who is your favourite Disney villain?**

•	*More exciting than asking who her favorite Princess is. Does she sympathize with people portrayed as villains and see that good and evil are not simply categorized?*

  **Who are three of the most important people in your life?**

*Learn why she values people*.

 **What are you watching on Netflix right now?**

•	*Find out whether she likes Netflix and what kind of things she likes watching*.

 **What is the worst thing someone could do on a date with you?**

•	*Find out what she hates on dates – so you don’t do the same*.

 **What is your biggest fear?**

•	*Find out what makes her feel afraid and be prepared to see a more vulnerable side to her*.

 **How do you like to spend your day?**

•	*Find out what she prioritizes and what daily things make her feel happy*.

 **Do you work best in the morning or the evening?**

•	*Find out about her routine and body clock*.

 **Do you keep in touch with people you no longer see regularly?**

•	*Learn how much she values relationships and loyalty*.

 **What did you want to be when you were a child?**

•	*This will make her think deeply about their life and remember good times, hopes and dreams etc. You can also learn about her childhood*. 

 **What is a skill you wish you had?**

•	*See what skills she already has  and what she think would be important*.

 **What is your family like?**

•	*It’s important to see how functional/dysfunctional her family is and what the dynamics are*.

 **What has been the best part of this year?**

•	*Make her reflect and think positively. Find out what she thinks makes a period of time good*.

 **If you were given a lump sum of money to start a business, what kind of business would you start?**

•	*Learn how creative, intelligent and ambitious she is and possibly what kind of a leader she’d be*.

**What does your dream home look like?**

•	*See what kind of an environment she’d like to live in*.

 **If you could pursue any career, what would you choose to do?**

•	*Find out about her talents and ambitions*.

 **What is your Myers Briggs type?**

•	*See how compatible she is to you and how she solves problems*.

 **Are you an introvert or an extrovert?**

•	*Find out about how she deals with events and communicates*.

 **Do you think that money makes the world go round?**

•	*Find out what value they place on money and what they think of the wider world*.

 **If you’re in a team-working task, what role do you take on?**

•	*Finding out how she works in a team will allow you to get an idea of your compatibility*.

 **What is your favorite drink?**

•	*Find out about her taste with this easy first date conversation starter and possibly order that drink to set a positive tone to the date*.

 **Do you like tattoos?**

•	*See if she’s artistic, a bit badass or has different views on tattoos*.

 **Have you ever read a book that changed the way you thought?**

•	*Find out if she enjoys reading and how she analyses things she reads*.

 **What is a saying that you try to live by in life?**

•	*Find out what motivates her and her morality*.

 **If you had three wishes in life, what would they be?**

•	*Find out dreams and priorities and pretend to be a genie*.

 **If you won the lottery, what would you do with the money?**

•	*Again, dreams, priorities and ambitions. See if she’s a giver as well*.

 **If you really like something on the menu, do you always order the same thing?**

•	*See how much she values ingrained habits*.

 **What is the best thing about your personality?**

•	*Give her a chance to brag and tell you why she’s great. It will make her happy and you can see what she values in herself*.

 **Do you find it easier to gain knowledge through books or hands-on experience?**

•	*Find out how she learns new information best*.

 **If you could invite anyone in the world to a dinner party, who would you invite?**

•	*See what kind of people she respects and what qualities she admires*.

 **What is your favorite way to stay healthy?**

•	*A more subtle and positive way of learning about her health and fitness than “Do you workout?”*


You’re welcome 😉. Some key points to remember:


-	**Listen** and try and turn these questions into conversations; don’t just fire them at her non-stop like an over-zealous interviewer. Good conversation releases oxytocin in the brain and makes everyone happy and more likely to empathize. Bad conversation, well, doesn’t. Build a flow.


-	Some of them, e.g. the ‘biggest fear’ one require for the date to warm up a little, so while it’s a conversation starter, it’s **NOT the first question** you ask on the date. 


-	These questions aren’t all about you passing some sort of ‘test' to not look awkward. It’s also about assessing how compatible your date is with you. **The power lies in your hands**. 


If you found these helpful, I actually compiled a list of **101 first date conversation starters**, with more like these, plus deeper questions to ask as the date progresses. There’s more tips and the questions are colour-coded in [**this link**](http://tinderellaworldwide.com/101-first-date-conversation-starters/) 😊. Let's make the world a better place for first dates. 
["Seconds" Short Film](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AdymCQ5PXrs)

This is why getting rejected is a good thing, you have increased your potential for happiness by taking a chance. I think every guy should be rejected at least ten times, to diminish fear of rejection so much that he can ask out any girl. One day the girl you talk to is a conceited cunt who calls you a creep, the next day, she's a lonely sweetheart who wishes so much that a guy would ask her out. She hates feeling so alone and would do anything to make a guy happy.

Go on, go get some numbers. If you get rejected, just put another coin into the arcade machine and try again with a different girl. 3 billion girls, 3 billion chances for happiness.

I love you bros <3**What do I say?**

How do I keep the conversation going?

What if I run out of things to say?

I’m sure all of those questions have gone through your head before approaching women you find attractive because they use to go through mine. It took me YEARS of failure to figure out what truly works. Once I figured what to say but how to keep the conversation going and make it interesting my results with women improved 10 fold.

Before mastering conversation with women my results were hit and miss. In order to keep a woman engaged you must be able to occupy her mind and spike her emotions which great conversation does. In the community it is called having the “Million Dollar Mouthpiece.” Once I started to get the million dollar mouthpiece women were more attracted, flaked less and I got laid more. There is a saying that goes, “Men fall in love through their eyes, and women fall in love through their ears.” 

From my 9 years of experience in the game I have found that to be very true. The reason being is that women are emotional BEINGS thus if you make them FEEL a certain way you can get a lot of women. That is why looks don’t matter because if you can make a women feel good emotions she can’t help but be attracted to you.
I’m going to give you conversation tools you can go out and use tonight or tomorrow when you are on your lunch break and you see a girl you want to talk to. 

**Top 4 Attraction Bits**

You need to be able to spark attraction with women before they will comply with any of your request, i.e. give you her number, go on a date, have sex with you, etc. 

Attraction is the fundamentals of the game and if you don’t know how to spark it your efforts will all be in vein when it comes to approaching women. You can’t skip the attraction phase if you want to get and keep women in your life.

Attraction is something that is ongoing and not a one-time phase that once you know you have attraction you stop displaying an attractive personality. 

A lot of guys make the mistake of generating attraction and then going back to their needy and clingy behavior a few minutes after sparking attraction. That will lead to flakey numbers and repelling every woman who initially was interested in you.

There are more than 4 attraction bits but I’m going to give you the top 4 so that you can put them into practice immediately. If you want all 7 attraction bits, qualification bits and comfort bits send me a Private Message and I will give you the entire document. Ok now let’s get into the 4 attraction bits.

**Attraction Bit #1- Observations** 

Observations are great way to generate attraction for two reasons. The first reason is that they are all about her. The second reason is that it shows that you pay attention to detail and that is attractive to women because most men don’t pay attention to detail when it comes to women. 

Men pay attention to superficial details like a woman’s ass and tits but those aren’t the type of details that are going to spark attraction in a woman when you initially meet her. Those type of details work during foreplay and sex but not when you approach a woman that you don’t know on the street. 

The type of details that I’m referring to are things like her hairstyle, purse, dress, shoes, nail and toe color, her walk, etc. Those are the type of observations that are social connectors and will come off as genuine when you approach a woman on the street. 

**There are 5 different types of observations. Here they are.** 

1. **Her Hairstyle.** “You have such a cool hairstyle it reminds me of Halley Berry’s look.” 

2. **Her Style.** “You style is very unique, it’s very 80s retro.” 

3. **Her Walk.** “You have such a determined walk; it reminds me of the way models walk down the runway.” 

4. **Unique Items.** “Those are some bad ass shoes, the spikes and the black strap make you look like you are in a rock and roll band.” 

5. **Matching Items.** “I just noticed how your hair matches you’re the color of your glasses and your dress and your shoes, I can tell you are a color coordination freak.” 

You are going to say your observations after you do your opener. Just as a side note about observations, you can combine them. 
Let’s say you observed a woman’s style you can then go and observe the unique items. 

That is what is known as observation stacking which you can do however be sure to let the woman respond when you are doing your observations; you don’t want to be the observation dancing monkey. 

Now you may look at those observations and think that there is no way that saying that will generate attraction inside of woman but it will. I have been using observations for years and they are very effective. 

Think about it, have you ever been out in public and a stranger men or woman observes something about you that you took pride in? How did that make you feel? If it was an accurate observation I’m sure it made you feel good, special or made you laugh. 

For example, let’s say you are in shape and you go to the gym 3 or 4 times a week. Now let’s say a stranger comes up to you and says, “Man you are in great shape, you must live in the gym with a physique like that.” That observation is either going to make you feel good, special or make you laugh. 

There are no bad emotions associated with that type of observation. The same thing goes for when you observe something about a woman that you just approached. Even if she isn’t interested most women will appreciate that you noticed the little things about her. 


Some women won’t appreciate it and that is fine also not every women is going to like the fact that you want to seduce them. So what, next! 

**O.C.A.P.** 
This is an exercise that will help you sharpen your observation skills with women dramatically. It will also help you sharpen your assumptions skills with women, which is the next attraction bit I’m going to cover. 

The O stands for Observation, the C stands for Comment, the A stands for Assumption and the P stands for Projection (Related projection of the assumption you made). 

Let me give you an example of how O.C.A.P. works; 
“You have such a cool hairstyle it reminds me of Halley Barry’s look (observation). I bet you took a photo of her with that hairstyle when you went to the salon (comment). You seem like the type of girl who likes to keep up with the latest hairstyles (assumption). It’s interesting that people never want to feel left out so that they don’t miss out on something great (topic).” 

**Exercise** 
Use Google images to do O.C.A.P. Go to Google images and type in, “Street Fashion 2016”. Have a notebook just for this and every day for 30 days use the O.C.A.P. formula on the women that come on. All you need to do is 1 woman a day and in 30 days you will notice your ability to do O.C.A.P. on women you speak to will dramatically increase. 

**Attraction Bit #2 – Assumptions** 

When it comes to assumptions, there are only 3 types that you can make. Here they are.

1. Where she is from. “You seem like you are from the Midwest.” Or “You don’t seem like you are from LA.” 

2. What she does for a living. “You seem like you do something creative.” Or “You seem like you do something business related.” 

3. What type of person she is. “You seem like you are a very laid-back, chill person.” Or “You seem like you're a very outgoing, life-of-the-party type of person.” 

Assumptions are great because they do a couple of things for your conversations with women. They make you interesting because you are talking about HER. 

Also, when you do assumptions, women say things in response to your assumptions that will be more conversation material, thus making it nearly impossible to run out of things to say. 

For example, let’s say you said to a woman, “You seem like you are a very laid-back, chill person.” In response, she says, “Yeah, I am. Ever since I was a kid, I always liked to just go with the flow.” 

What she just said is conversation material to improvise off of. 

So in response to that, you can say, “So you are more of the in-the-moment type of person. You like to focus on the now and not worry too much about the past or future.” 

Now you have a whole other type of direction you can take your conversation. When you make assumptions, you will come across these type of situations all of the time. 

**Exercise** 
I want you to come up with 3 assumptions that you could potentially use when you are out approaching women.

**Attraction Bit #3 - Teasing** 

Teasing is a very powerful attraction bit because it takes women off of their pedestal and it shows that you aren’t intimidated by them. Attractive women never or rarely get teased by guys because most guys kiss their ass. 

When you tease a woman it shouldn’t come from a place of animosity or seeking her approval, it should come from a place of messing with her for your own entertainment. 

Also if you tease her too much and you never show her the real you then you come off as the dancing monkey and dancing monkey’s make women laugh but they don’t get laid. 

When it comes to teasing you always want to have a balance with it and that goes for all the concepts within this book because too much of anything is never good, unless it’s pussy LOL. Let’s go into the different types of teasing. 

1. **Push/Pull aka Takeaways.** 

The purpose of push/ pull teasing is to keep the woman that you are interested in guessing whether you like her or not. This is a very powerful form of teasing because it keeps the attraction going. 

From my experience when you first met a woman if she knows that you like her 100% I have found that it kills that attraction and she loses interest rather quickly. 

However with push/pull your showing your interest put you aren’t putting all your cards on the table. That keeps a woman you just met interested in you enough to want to continue to hand around you until you have sex or set up another time to meet her. Here are a few examples of push/pull teasing. 

Just when I thought you were cool, I find out you can’t cook….nice meeting you (back turn). 

You won me over until you said that (look away). 

I thought we would get along now I know we would fight like cats and dogs. This isn’t going to work for me. 

Now come up with 3 of your own push/pull teases. 

Attraction Bit #4 – Physical Escalation 

Touch also known as kinesthetics which is also known as physical escalation. Physical escalation is used to do three things. 

1. **Create attraction.** Once you verbally spike a woman’s attraction for you touching her will amplify her attraction for you. Ideally you want to verbally spike her attraction for you and touch her at the same time. You can’t always do that as a lot of women won’t be comfortable with you touching them until you spike their attraction verbally. 

2. **Screen out the women who aren’t sexually available.** Once you have spiked a woman’s attraction verbally physically escalating on her will tell you if is she is available and how attracted she is to you. A lot of women have the tendency to talk a big game. They may say they like you are and are attracted to you but once you touch them that will tell you everything. 

It will let you know if she is single or if she is taken and she lets you physically escalate on her that mean she is willing to cheat on her boyfriend. I remember one time I was at this bar that I go to frequently and I approached this chick. I was spiking her attraction 

verbally and then I went to touch her and she freaked out a little bit. 
The reason being, her brother’s boyfriend was standing a couple of feet away from us and she didn’t want him to tell her boyfriend about letting another guy touch her. Touch doesn’t lie! It will save you a lot of time with girls who aren’t available. 

3. **Get women use to your touch.** Once you have screened the woman you are interested in and you know she is sexually available via touch you want to continue to touch her in order for her to get use to it. You want to physically escalate in a way that is calibrated and not the creepy guy who hasn’t touched a woman in years even if that isn’t the case. You must keep your cool. 

The reason why you want to get her use to your touch so that when you go for sex touching her isn’t a big to her because you have been doing it all night. I’m going to share with you the 10 types of physical escalation. 

10 **Types Of Physical Escalation** 

1. **Handshake.** This is most common form of touch and you should use it. Now I want to utilize the handshake is that once a woman shakes your hand hold it for an extra 30 seconds longer than normal. As you become more advanced you will be able to hold woman’s hand for much longer. Always do this in a calibrated manner. 

When you are holding a woman’s hand and she pulls away from looks at you holding her hand for too long say, “I’m sorry I’m the 
romantic type.” You will have some women who will say, “I don’t shake hands or I have a thing about germs.” 

All that means is that they aren’t attracted you. Some of these women you can win over by spiking attraction and going for the handshake at a later point. If you try to spike attraction and she still won’t shake your hand or let you touch her in any other way just move on as that woman isn’t interested. 

2. **High Five.** Giving a woman a high five is like a handshake but it has more energy behind it and is more engaging. When you are talking to a woman you want to give her a high five for a reason. So let’s say she says, “I love pizza.” You can say, “I love pizza too, high five.” Just like the handshake you can hold her hand while giving the high five and bringing it down to both you guy’s side. 

3. **Hug.** A hug is a little more intimate then a handshake and a high five and gives you numerous opportunities to escalate. You can give the woman you’re attracted to a hug for any reason. If she says, “I love blue” you can say, “Come here that deserves a hug.” Once she gives you a hug you can escalate in many ways which I’m going to touch on next. 

4. **Whispering in her ear.** Once you are hugging her you can start to whisper in her ear. Whispering in a woman’s ear is very seductive. It’s something that lovers do and it will turn her on. While whispering in her ear you can say, “You smell so good, you are so 


sexy, and you have sexy lips.” Always say something that you like about her in a sexual way while whispering in a woman’s ear. 

5. **Hand holding.** Handing holding is great because it is what lovers and it allows you to screen a woman as far as her sexual availability. A great way to hold a woman’s hand is to hold onto it after you gave her a handshake, high five or just simply ask to see her hand. 

6. **Arm around waist.** You can put your arm around a woman’s waist after you have given her a hug; it’s a good way to transition from one to the other. You can also just put your arm around her waist after you have built enough attraction. Again this is something that boyfriend and girlfriend do and almost automatically puts her in the romantic mindset. 

7. **Arm around shoulder.** You can transition from a hug to arm around the shoulder also. This again is something that boyfriend and girlfriend do and will put her in the romantic mindset also. 

8. **Light hair pulling.** This is very sexual and can be done as you are hugging a woman or whispering in her ear. If done correctly this will turn a woman on. Remember you want to pull her hair lightly because if you do it too hard it will hurt and make her angry or freak her out. Light hair pulling is about seduction not pulling her hair out LOL. 


9. **Ass grabbing/smacking.** This can be done when a woman is really attracted to you. You must calibrate as to when you can do this. Some women will love when you do it and some even when they want you to do it will call you out on grabbing their ass. 

When they do just say, “Shut up, you like it” with a smile on your face. Some women will freak out but very few will. If they do just say, “I can tell you aren’t ready for it yet.” Never apologize for being a sexual being. However if you calibrate it and do it at the right time when the woman is attracted to you most she will not freak out. 

10 **.Putting her hand on your private part.** This is an advanced more and should be done only when you are in isolation. You want to do this move once you know the woman is really attracted to you. This move will move things close to sex and it also shows that you have balls which will turn her on if she is truly attracted to you. 

11. **Putting your hand on her private part.** This is also an advanced move and is something that should only be done while you are in isolation with the woman. After you put her hand on your private part and she likes it you get the green light to put your hand on her private part for the most part. When you do this move at the right time this will turn her on even more and probably make her wet. 

A thing to say to her before putting your hand on her private part is, “You know how I know you want me?” She should say, “How?” You will then say, “Because your p**y is wet.” Then put your 
hand on it. After this move taking her home will be a joke, she will be down to go home with you.

**Qualification**

Qualification is a way to demonstrate to a woman that you have standards and that you won’t just accept her because she is attractive. It’s the flip side of attraction because showing that you have standards is attractive and is what high value people do. High value people don’t just let anyone into their life because they value their time. 
Qualification also lets you get to know a woman for more than her physical qualities which in turn will help you build a connection with her also known as comfort which I will discuss in the next chapter. 

Using qualification will make a woman went to live up to your standards granted she is attracted to you. She will want you to like her and she will want to prove that she has the qualities that you seek. That amps up attraction and puts her in your frame which will cause her to chase you. 

You should use qualification once a woman is attracted to you. Without attraction trying to qualify a woman will only cause non-compliance because she doesn’t like you yet. When a woman isn’t attracted to you she will have no reason to want to qualify herself to you. Starting out with a non-compliant woman is just an uphill battle which you don’t want to fight. 

Even though qualification should be used as soon as you have attraction it doesn’t end once you go into comfort. Qualification is something that you want to use throughout the entire interaction until sex happens. The reason for this is twofold.  The first reason is that you never want a woman to feel as if she won you over easily once you have qualified her. You want her to continue to win you over i.e. prove herself to you. 

The second reason is that continuing to qualify keeps her in your frame and in control of the interaction. In order to have major success with women you have to always have the stronger frame as the saying goes, “He who controls the frame, controls the game.” 

When it comes to actually qualifying women there are two ways to do it. 

**In The Moment Qualification**

In the moment qualification is when you qualify a woman from things that she says or information you find out about her during your conversation with her. 

Here is an example of in the moment qualification.

You: You have this very business-like manner about you. I feel as if you do something very professional.
Her: I’m a lawyer.
You: I can’t talk to you anymore (Disqualification), are you one of those lawyers who tell your clients the truth or are you one those lawyers that tell your clients whatever they want to hear in order to get their business? (Qualification)

Her: No, I’m honest with my clients even if they don’t want to hear the truth. Trust me some of them don’t want to hear the truth but I tell them it so they can never call me a liar.
You: I like that (Qualification) but I’m still not sure about you (Disqualification). 

**Default Qualification**

Default qualification is canned material that you use when can’t think of anything to qualify her on or you are stuck in your head. You also want to have canned material to fall back on just in case you are having a night off. 
Your default qualification is going to come from the 5 non-physical qualities that you truly want in a woman. Before we go into the formula for default qualification quickly write down the top 5 non- physical qualities that you want in a woman.

Now that you have listed your top 5 non-physical qualities I want you to put it in this formula. Let’s say one of the non -physical qualities you like women is that she is spontaneous. Here is the formula.
1.	Assume/State your non-physical quality about her.
2.	Explain why you like that quality.
3.	Ask her a question about that quality that makes her invest. 
4.	Show interest with IOIs and IODs.

You seem spontaneous. I like a woman who is spontaneous. There is something about a person who doesn’t always play by the rules and is open to new experiences. 
What is the most spontaneous thing you have ever done? I like that but this isn’t going to work we are too similar. 
Plug that formula in for any non- physical quality you like in a woman and go out there and start to use it in field. 

Comfort 

According to Webster’s dictionary comfort is to cause someone to feel less worried, upset and frightened. Now taking that definition and applying it to women, your ability to make women feel less worried or frightened is what is going to play a MAJOR part in whether you get laid or not.

Comfort is important because women will not have sex with you if they don’t feel somewhat comfortable with you. A woman can be attracted to you but if she doesn’t feel comfortable with you (i.e. she doesn’t feel as if you are going to rape or murder her when you guys are alone) she won’t go home with you, go on a date with you or return your text or call. 

For example, imagine a total stranger came up to you and asked to borrow 100 dollars from you. What are the chances that you are going to give them the money? Slim to none. Why? You don’t know that person. You don’t know where they live, what their number is, what their name is and even if they have a job to pay you back! 

In other words you don’t feel comfortable; the same goes for a woman when she first meets you. She doesn’t know you yet so why would she see you again? She has to get somewhat comfortable with you to even consider seeing you again. 

You should only start building comfort once you have sparked attraction in a woman. Trying to build comfort with no attraction puts you in the friend zone almost immediately. The reason being is when you are attempting to seduce a woman there has to be SEXUAL tension between you and her. 

Tools you can use to build comfort. 

**Here are the topics;**
•	Her/Your passions.
•	Her/Your childhood.
•	Her/Your sibilings if you or she has any.
•	Her/Your parents.

You should ALSO talk about those topics in story form and get her to share some of those topics in story form with you. It will make the conversation more interesting and get her to open up more to you. Remember women are emotional beings so you never want to be super logical with them because they find it boring.

Make sure all of your stories are true and happened to you. There is no need to steal somebody else’s stories that you find online. Here is the formula you can use to tell a story.  

1. **Hook the listener (strong opening)**
Hooking is where you open something that instantly gets the listeners attention. A good hook needs to pack a punch, a one liner that will intrigue… shock and spark curiosity. 
For example you might say “I was actually with a friend the other day and something happened which pretty much changed his life…” 

2. **Pausing and pacing**
Any good storyteller will tell you that the pause will create anticipation (this keeps them listening) and the pacing injects emotion/feeling into the story. By using both together, you’re dealing with a magical combo.
So make sure you slow down when speaking and pause from time to time. 

3. **Bridging the story**
Each story can be broken down into segments, let’s say for the sake of this example that you have a story with 5 segments. With each segment, you need to bridge the gap with a cliffhanger, otherwise it will seem as though your story doesn’t have any substance and just goes on and on.

A cliffhanger is something TV shows use to keep people watching and not changing the channel. You HAVE to keep watching otherwise you’ll miss the good bit. You need to do the same thing with your stories.
To do this, just say something like “…You’ll never guess what happened next…”.

4. **Be personal**
One of the key things you want to happen during your story is for the girl to trust you and feel more comfortable in your presence, which leads to attraction.

So by you telling her about something that happened to you, she will be able to relate to you and will instantly feel more trust. This means you need to use reference points from your life like I mentioned earlier. 

•Eye contact – By keeping strong eye contact, you’ll evoke trust quicker and you’ll keep the girl engaged in your story.

•Touching – Touching her at the right moments will spark feeling and emotion, so use kino when you can. It also allows you to be more sexual.

Using comedy – Obviously by using humor in your stories you will create attraction spikes throughout, so make sure to insert comedy in your stories. If you aren’t naturally funny take an 8 week improve comedy class.
Remember when you are building comfort you don’t want to do ALL of the talking. 

In the beginning stages of comfort you want it to be 80/20 where you are talking 80 percent of the talking about you should be talking about HER.

Then after you get her to open up the comfort conversation should be about 50/50 with you leading the conversation. You know a woman is comfortable with you when she starts to share personal things about herself without you provoking it. She has essentially let her guard down and that is a very good thing when it comes to seducing a woman. 

Now you never want a woman to feel totally comfortable with you, there needs to be some sexual tension between you and her mixed in with comfort. If a woman is totally comfortable with you that will land you in the friend zone. This is why breaking comfort is important. 

Breaking comfort is when you build comfort with a woman then you break it throughout your conversation with her in order to maintain sexual tension and not come off as always seeking rapport.

When you break comfort with a woman it shows that just because you build comfort with her it doesn’t mean that you are going to agree with everything she says. You are your own man and have your own opinion and say what you feel. 

It also shows that you aren’t afraid to lose her and you say what you truly feel and you don’t filter yourself just because you are attracted to her. One thing that really attracts women rather they know it or not is a man who really doesn’t care what she thinks about him and breaking comfort is a way to show that. 

You should break rapport throughout your entire conversation while building rapport. You need to intertwine it in your conversation while building rapport with her. The reason for this is if all you do is break rapport or go long periods in the conversation of just breaking rapport then you come off as an asshole, which will turn the girl off.
 
You have to find a balance with building and breaking comfort and that comes with being out in the field. Once you practice it enough you will start to get a feel of just the right balance of building and breaking comfort.

Now let me give you ideas of what to say to break comfort with women. Breaking comfort consist of 3 things; disagreeing with her, disqualification and push pull. 

1.Disagreeing With Her. You have to disagree with her at some point during your conversation with because if you don’t you will come off as a yes man. 

When it comes to attraction always agreeing her will kill any attraction because you will come off as not having a backbone. Women simply aren’t attracted and don’t respect man with no backbone. 

Now when it comes to disagreeing with the woman you want to seduce don’t disagree just to do it. When you disagree just to disagree then you are just being childish. If you disagree about everything she says she will see that you are doing so just to get a rise out of her and that will kill any attraction or comfort you build with her.

Here is all you need to say when she says something you don’t agree with, “I disagree.” Then say why you disagree. When you say why you disagree there is no need to get into a long explanation about why you disagree. 

Say your peace and change the conversation topic, ideally a topic that is going to help you with the seduction. Whatever you do don’t start to argue with her about what you disagree about. NEVER ARGUE WITH WOMEN, NEVER! 

Say what you feel and if she tries to argue with you say, “We just agree to disagree” then change the conversation topic. 

2.Disqualification. When you disqualify her you are showing her you have boundaries and you are making her come into your frame. Women are attracted to men who have strong boundaries and frames. 

You can disqualify her on things she says, likes or the way she is acting. Here are examples of what to say when disqualifying her.

Her: I love watching Keeping Up With The Kardashians.

You: I can’t stand that damn show. I can’t believe you like that show and I had such high hopes about you. 

Her: Like OMG I totally love the color blue.

You: Wow you should like a straight up valley girl, I’m done. 

Her: Rolling her eyes.

You: Don’t tell me you are one of those girls who constantly roll their eyes at everything. If so we should just end this right now. 

Just as a side note when you are disqualifying her you want to say it in a PLAYFUL way in which she doesn’t know if you are kidding or if you are serious. It will keep her on her toes and disqualification isn’t meant to be super serious.  

3.Push/Pull. Push pull is the male version of being hot and cold just like women can be at times. Remember women love drama which is why the watch soap operas, read romantic novels and gossip. 

Push pull gives women enough drama to pull them in and keep them hooked. Just like disqualification it makes women come into your frame. Here are examples of push pull.

•	Just when I thought you were cool, I find out you can’t cook….nice meeting you (back turn).

•	You won me over until you said that (look away).

•	I thought we would get along now I know we would fight like cats and dogs. This isn’t going to work for me. 

You also want to do push pull in a playful manner also. Just like with disqualification you want the woman to guess to whether or not you are joking. 

 How To Consistently Hook Women

This is a simply formula that can be used to consistently hook women also known as attracting women. This is a formula that comes from the movie Glengarry Glen Ross. 

RSD Todd was the first one I know of to steal the formula from the movie and apply it to pickup and now I’m doing the same LOL. You can use this formula and apply the attraction bits you learned into it. The formula is A.I.D.A. which stands for; 

**Attention** – Get her focused on you. You do this by opening strong and direct! When you open like this you will get most women’s attention. Go to the chapter about opening to get the openers you need to accomplish this. 

**Interest** – Make the conversation relevant to her. The most interesting topic to most people is themselves and the things they are interested in. You make the conversation interesting when you talk about HER. You can do that by using attraction bits such as observations, assumptions, push/pull. 

**Decision** – Engage her emotions and make it about you. Now that you have her interest you want her to make a decision as to how much she really likes you. You make it about you and engage her emotions by using the attraction bit physical escalation. 

**Action** – Turn her interest tangible. You want to get her invested and get her to take action to prove her interest. There are two ways to make a woman’s interest tangible. The first way is to get her to verbally say that she likes you which taps into her logical side. You can get her to admit she likes you by saying, “Aww you like me. How long have you liked me?”

Now getting a woman to admit she likes you verbally is good but the BEST way to turn a woman’s interest tangible is to get her to MOVE with you. During the day getting her to go on an instadate with you is a huge way to turn her interest tangible and during the night getting her to isolate is also another way to turn her interest tangible. 

Alright I know this post is long but I’m confident if you go out and apply this information consistently you will get results. Again, if you want all 7 attraction bits and my free texting guide to get the women to want to see you again send me a private message. 

**Wishing you much success with women and dating.** 


**The key to an attractive personality is not to try to manipulate other person's reactions.** It is as simple as this. Have you ever was in a situation when you "don't know what to say?" What to say to achieve what exactly? A positive reaction, that is. Stop chasing reactions. Stop treating people as Pavlov's dogs. This is the thing that makes you frustrated, not rejections. You approaching a person to manipulate them into reacting a certain way, it makes you nervous, it makes you desperate. And if you fail, it makes you miserable. Just stop doing it. Instead, show people who you are, express yourself, your personality. And allow them to decide by themselves if they like you or not. Don't try to manipulate their decision or decide for them, it doesn't work well.

I know why you try to manipulate, because, otherwise, you think that they'll consider that "real you" isn't good enough for them. You try to compensate by using pickup and seduction, or maybe by trying to be a good friend and a nice guy. But why? If someone is really considering you as "below them", then you should be offended by it, not trying to please them. Where is your self-respect? Moreover, in most cases, you just decide for others that you are below them, so, instead of showing "true yourself" to them, you try to show them what you think they will like. You searching this sub to learn what other people want you to do to please them, so they could give you their approval. You trying to find something that will help you to get up on their level. Even if you were the one who put yourself below them in the first place. If someone considers that I'm not good enough for them, then they can go find someone else. I only want to be with people who are able to recognize my value. I'm not gonna try and convince anyone what "I'm good enough" or show them a false image of myself that I think would help me "win them over". Why? Because I have self-respect, that is why. **If you aren't valuing yourself, then who will?**

&#x200B;

edit. To prevent anyone from misunderstanding my message I want to add that you shouldn't stop improving yourself or working on your conversation skills if you find them lacking. There is no contradiction between improving yourself and not putting yourself below others by default.

edit2. I decided to add the answer on "how to start to express yourself?".

  
"It would be easiest to understand if you have some close friends or relatives with whom you could just say things without putting much thought behind them. Just saying what pops up in your head, not expecting any particular answer. Each person has their own desires and thoughts, but when we try to manipulate reactions and turn on our social fake persona we start to hold themselves back all the time. It could take you some time to start to express yourself freely, just do it step by step. The main difference isn't what exactly you do, but why. For example, you can tell a girl that she is cute because you think that she'll like you more for that. Or you can tell it just because you think this and decided to share your opinion. In the first case, you'll wait for her to react and her answer will determine how you feel. In the second case, you'll feel comfortable even if she didn't appreciate it. Instead of thinking that there is something wrong with you, you'll assume that a girl is in a bad mood or just too wary of strangers - and it would be the case in most cases. When you start doing things like this, step by step, sooner or later you'll start to completely let go and allow yourself to express your inner thoughts, opinions, and desires freely. To speed up this process start to talk to new people, you can even start doing it online if it is hard for you to do it IRL from the get-go. Eventually, you'll gain real confidence in yourself and it shouldn't take too long."   
**This may seem like obvious advice, but I see it happen far too often not to say anything.**

If you’re online dating and you find that you’re the only one asking questions with a woman you’ve spoken to a few times, it's time to end the conversation.

# Generic example:

**You: Hey, how’s it going?**

Her: Hey. Yeah, I’m good

**You: Good to hear. What are you up to today?**

Her: Not much. Watching Netflix.

**You: Cool. What are you watching?**

Her: Queen’s Gambit

**You: Oh nice. I’ve heard good things about it. Has it made you want to get into Chess?**

Her: Yeah, kinda. Haha.

&#x200B;

If this looks similar to many of your Tinder conversations, you need to stop while you're behind.

And not just because these opening questions are too run of the mill.

The more you question her, the more dismissive she’ll become and the more frustrating if will feel trying to continue the conversation.

Next time it happens, you need to close it off politely but definitively (for now) and move on.

# Try this instead:

**You: Hey, how’s it’ going?**

Her: Hey. Yeah, I'm good.

**You: Good to hear. What are you up to today?**

Her: Not much. Watching Netflix.

**You: Cool. Enjoy.**

Back and forth engagement requires a willingness from both parties.

# Also... ‘U?’ Is not much better.

If she responds to all of your questions with a brief response and a ‘U?’ It’s also time to end the conversation.

# Generic example:

**You: Hey, how’s it’ going?**

Her: I’m good, U?

**You. Good thanks. What are you up to?**

Her: Not much. Watching Netflix. U?

Be careful of these conversations. While her responses aren't completely dismissive, they’re barely any more enthusiastic than her not asking a question back at all.

Either she’s not interested, she’s not in the mood right now, or she’s a terrible communicator.

Whatever it is, you are doing yourself no favours trying to continue the conversation.

Responses like these don’t mean you’re completely down and out; they just means that for the moment, you need to stop.

*Disclaimer: Some women require a couple of questions to 'come out of their shell' a bit, but three or more unresponded questions is enough to know you're almost certainly flogging a dead horse.*

Happy New Year.

[Here's the original article.](https://www.menwithmanners.com/advice/end-conversation-online-dating)Hey y'all! I lurk on this sub a lot just to get a man's perspective and thought I'd share my point of view as a woman. I hope it helps. 

Many men tell me things like "You're so beautiful, I'm sure you're beating them off with a stick", "Guys approach you all the time", "You probably have a date tonight".  And the answer is always no. I don't get approached, I wish I were beating them off with a stick and I wish I had a date tonight. 

I spend a lot of time out in the world by myself .. At bars, coffee shops, restaurants and parks hoping to strike up a conversation with someone (still working up the nerve to approach guys). But the truth is, no one ever approaches me. I don't know if I'm not giving the right vibe or what but I write this to say don't assume anything about anyone. If someone came up to me and showed me a bit of interest I'd absolutely welcome it. 

Sincerely,
Lonely girl eating dessert at the barNever act needy towards a girl.
She didn't reply your messages, then don't message her again to ask why she is not talking to you.
Move on to the next girl.
She said no? Then move on to the next girl. 
Only engage with women that want to engage with youand disengage from those that don't want to engage with you.
There are alot of women out here to be stuck on a single girl!!!I'm seeing lots of posts about girls flaking and guys trying to get her interested again (or at all) somehow. That's a bad mindset.

If someone flakes, it's a sign they're not really interested and don't even respect you enough to just tell you. So how about we follow this simple rule. If someone flakes on you, you move on. You don't text again to see what's up. You don't call them out. You just move on and date other people.

If they are interested, they will get back to you.Be comfortable with yourself.

Do your inner-work and find yourself. You have to become okay with rejection and not needing a women. If you you can "take it or leave it" and still feel complete on your own, that energy definitely radiates off of you and makes you very attractive to women. And if you're desperate and feel like you need women to like you to feel complete, women will pick up on that energy instantly and it pushes them away very fast.

That's exactly it. Accept yourself. You don't have to meet up to any ideal. You don't have to be the typical 6'3", ripped, rich, chiseled jaw, emotionally vacant chad that treats women like objects to get women. 

People think that nice guys finish last and assholes always pull the girls. Yes, to some degree that is true but people don't realize *WHY* it's not because being nice is a turn off and being a a dick is attractive. That's only the surface level but most people don't see the real reason and whats going on underneath the surface.

It's quite simple: a lot of guys that treat women like shit do so because they don't care if they actually get the girl or not. They're okay with simply moving on and not looking back. They are confident in themselves so they don't feel the need to act like somebody their not to get someone to sleep with them. On the flip side, a lot of "nice guys" are only actually being nice because they're expecting something out of it. They are desperate and women can sense it. They aren't being nice because being nice is good and feels good. As you can see in r/niceguys a lot of them are actually bitter on the inside and cannot handle rejection, because they are not okay with themselves.

That's it guys. Seriously. You don't need to follow some guide or rule book to swindle women. Its not a step by step mechanical process guys, attraction and chemistry is something that happens naturally and spontaneously, you won't have to force it. Its the greatest feeling in the world to engage in the dance of love with another person without having to think twice or being something you're not, and not expecting anything out of it but just letting it happen.

You don't have to be strictly masculine, you don't need a giant cock, you don't need to treat women like shit. You have to be comfortable being yourself. You're short? Embrace it. You're feminine? BE FEMININE. Being comfortable with your feminine side is the most chad thing you can do. Accept your insecurities. It's okay to be insecure, it's okay to have weak spots. But don't be insecure about being insecure. Show them to the world anyway. You get rejected? Tough luck, you cannot avoid it. You simply can't attract everyone. Sorry, doesn't matter how many redpilled people you follow or books you read, you aren't God. Move on. You don't need another person to complete you.

It's really that simple. The key to winning is being okay with losing.I've been a member of this subreddit for a couple of months now. I took a lot but never gave back, so I hope this makes up for it. (Not a native English speaker, so I apologize in advance for any grammatical or spelling errors you may encounter). This is going to be a long one so I'll make sure to include a TL;DR before the lessons part.

**INTRO**

Alright so I'm just an average-looking 20 year old guy, sophmore in college. Never been a player or confident enough to hit on whatever girl I want to hit on, which is why I joined this subreddit. But I've been around a lot of girl-friends and got to understand how they think, and I've come across a stunning scientific anomaly: THEY ARE HUMAN BEINGS, JUST LIKE US! I've had girlfriends before, and actually one of my relationships lasted for more than one year.

**THE CRUSH**

A month ago, I developed a crush on this really cute beautiful girl (probably a HB9) from my class (let's call her "crush_girl"). She's the kind of girls that always seemed unreachable to me and way out of my league. She's always surrounded by the same group of friends, avoiding and rejecting random guys who try to hit on her, the usual..
I thought about her all the time, and I even started taking better care of myself hoping it would make her notice me

**THE OTHER GIRL**

Two weeks ago, as I was sitting alone in some lecture, a random girl came and sat right next to me (let's call her "new_girl)". She didn't seem attractive or anything to me, but I didn't allow myself to feel flattered. I thought that she probably didn't find any other seat and sitting next to me was her only choice. But then it hit me, I had promised myself to change, and that was something that the "old-me" would have thought. So I thought "just fuck it, even though I have a huge crush on the crush_girl, I should probably talk to this one. She's sitting right there, next to me, I should at least practice what I learned from reading dozens of articles and FR's and prepare myself for the day I'll talk to the crush_girl. At least I'll have someone to talk to during the lecture instead of just sitting there awkwardly, trying to get the crush_girl to notice me as usual. What the hell am I gonna lose?"

So I assumed attraction and just went for it. I started talking to new_girl as soon as she sat next to me. A simple "Hi I'm .. " was more than enough to start a conversation. And then I tried to keep it going by asking her questions like what she was going to major in, where she's from.. Then she waved at some guy that I also knew "Oh you know him? Yeah he's a cool dude bla bla. How do you know him bla bla".
I honnestly wasn't trying to get anything out of this, I didn't even ask for her number. I walked her to her car after the lecture. A couple of friends saw me with her and came to talk to me as soon as she left. Apparently they were surprised to see me talking to a "chick as hot as she is". Of course at the time I was so blinded by the crush I had on crush_girl, thinking she was "the one" and all that kind of crap, that I hadn't even noticed that new_girl was a pretty attractive girl.

**ESCALATING**

Then I started getting to know her even better. I tried all the kind of games and tricks I read about. Some of them lead to awkward moments and silences, others got her laughing or punching me in the arm. I tried this little game with her: You ask the other person a question (any question), they have to give an honest answer. But then, you have to answer your own question too. It escalated things pretty fast and questions went from "Did you ever get caught cheating in a test" to "Would you let me kiss you if I tried". The reason why I was so comfortable talking to her right from the start was because I thought she was just a regular nice girl, I was still under the charm of crush_girl. My friends would see us talking or walking together and then tell me that I looked really "comfortable" and "incredibly self-confident". 

I got to a point of comfort where I would tease her about anything and manage to deal with her shit-tests:

- "Oh thank you you're a life saver". The "old-me" would've said "Yeah sure you're welcome, any time". I'd say "Yeah I know, sometimes I wonder how you survived this far without me" or "Pfft yeah well don't get too used to it"

- After an original compliment/witty reply "Hmm how long did it take you to come up with that?". The old-me "Hehhehe I just thought of that I dunno I .. ". The new me : "Woke up 5am to practice it in front of the mirror".

- "Ugh do you actually say that kind of stuff to girls?". Old-me : "What? No that's not even.. I .. ". New me: "Nope not really but I thought I'd practice on you" (I know, the irony is strong in that one)

- I would say random shit and get away with it "Yeah if you could just stop staring at my penis that would be great". "Ugh oh my god I wasn't I was just looking at.. Ugh oh my god" *punch in the arm*

**THE CENTER OF ATTENTION**

She introduced me to her two best girl-friends, and just like that, those two girls became my friends. At this point I had started to feel attracted to her, but I didn't feel nervous as I usually would, because this time, she's not a stranger, we know each other, and I've already gone through the hard part. I felt that I was somehow falling for her and forgetting all about the crush_girl. (New_girl confessed that she was really into me as well and we'll be starting to go out right after the exams. Right now we're just busy studying and texting all the time. We really make each other happy and like each other a lot, and that's just what I've been looking for this entire time)

We would spend a lot of time together, the four of us, especially during lectures, just talking joking around and having fun. The funny thing here is, crush_girl started to notice us, and especially me. I went from being the random loner geeky guy to being the guy who's always surrounded by 3 cute girls, just laughing and having a great time. I would catch her staring at me, because I suddenly became this interesting mysterious guy who is the center of attention. I was having much more fun than her, and she was as usual surrounded by the same small group of friends who had apparently run out of things to talk or joke about.

******
**TL;DR:**
Had a huge crush on an unreachable girl. Practiced on another girl and felt pretty confident because I was only thinking about the crush (didn't care about what would happen with this other girl, only cared about the crush). Ended up seducing the girl without even meaning to. And now the crush is interested in me.
**********

**Lessons:**

*1)The crush:*
--------

"When you put someone on a pedestal, they have no choice but to look down upon you". I know you're extremely attracted to your crush and feeling that she is the one, but don't think of her as some untouchable princess that will never notice you. In this very subreddit, a guy once told me "imagine her taking a fat steamy shit". It may sound gross, but what he's trying to say is that she's just another humain being. She's just like you. And who knows, you might even be more self-confident than her.

*2)She's not the only one:*
--------

I've had a lot of crushes, and I know how frustrating it can be (and how cliché it sounds) when someones tells you "There are plenty more fish in the sea", but they're absolutely right. I understand why you would feel that she's the one, and that no other girl in the world could change your mind. And you know what? That's fine. Whatever. I'm not telling you to forgot about your crush, keep pursuing her, but in the meantime, don't forget to look around you. You never know when you might find another girl that could make you forget about her. Try to meet new people, hit on random girls. What the hell are you going to lose? Think of it this way: You're improving your game, you're just practicing on other girls, you don't have to go out with them or ask for their numbers. Just practice how to start a conversation, how to come up with witty and smart-ass replies, see which lines/tricks work and which ones don't..

*3)Hit on other girls:*
--------

As I explained in the previous paragraph, you should practice on other girls. You don't need to escalate, just try to get used to talking to girls and being around them. You shouldn't also completely forget about a girl you've just met. Keep in touch, you might end up becoming good friends. And then you'll probably get to know other people through her. And the best part about hitting on girls when you already have a huge crush on someone: you will probably only care about what the crush thinks, and feel that you don't really need to be accepted by other girls. Even the beautiful ones will probably look kinda "regular" to you because you are so blinded by the crush. All of this will give you a huge confidence boost when you're talking to them.

*4)Become a more sociable person:*
--------

No you don't have to become the most popular guy ever, just try to meet new people. Even guys! Some guys out there are really good bros and will help you meet more people and more girls.

Usually girls don't like loners and socially awkward guys. Being in a group of people (and if possible, the center of attention) whenever your crush sees you will definitely help.

*5)Take good care of yourself:*
--------

Girls are sensitive, loving and caring beings. No girl will completely ignore you just because you are not good looking enough, as long as you have a certain amount of self-confidence. (If they do, they're probably shallow bitches who aren't even worthy of your time anyway). BUT! That doesn't mean you can hit on girls with a 2 weeks old beard, wearing pyjamas, smelling like sweat and expect them to not reject you.
Shave. Get a good haircut. Dress properly (Check [MFA](http://www.reddit.com/r/malefashionadvice/) for help). Get rid of the bad smells. "Never expect people to treat you any better than you treat yourself".

*6)Don't forget that girls are human beings:*
--------

They are human beings and you shouldn't feel stressed when you're around them yeah we have covered this already. But what I want to say here is that if you hit and practice on other girls, keep in mind that they are people, with feelings. If you're practicing, don't escalate things too much, don't let them think that you're really into them and would like to take them out if you're not really interested. It's okay to practice, but don't hurt people, and never game a girl too hard, [you never know what the consequences might be](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/14qyxo/fr_met_a_girl_on_the_street_three_days_later_i/)


*7)It doesn't matter what you say:*
--------

I thought about dozens of openers and lines to use the day I'll have enough courage to talk to the crush. But when it came to a random other girl, I just said "Hi I'm .. ". That's it. Openers don't matter, you can still use them, but they're not that important. Say whatever you want, as long as you look self-confident when you do it.

You're not self-confident? Well then fake it! Don't look at the floor, look up, try to maintain some eye contact, and assume that the girl you're talking to is as much into you, as you are into her.

Here are 2 of my favourite threads about openers [[Buttcheese](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19g9so/field_report_challenge_given_by_a_redditor_to/)]
[[Spoons eh?](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/197aqt/a_little_advice_for_those_of_you_struggling_with/)]

**Ending:**

Well, that's it! I can't really think of anything else to say. If I remember something I'll add it later. And just keep in mind that I'm not some professional pickup artist or player. I'm just a regular college guy who has finally decided to change his life and put everything he has ever learned into action.

I'd like to think that everything I said here can also help girls.

Alright now, I'm gonna stop here. Any feedback/criticism is more than welcome!

Edit : Spelling

Edit2: Wow this is definitely much more that what I was expecting. It feels so good to know that I'm actually helping people. All the replies and comments are great, keep them coming! And to think that I was gonna give up on this post when it first got caught in the spam filter. I'm glad I messaged the mods. Thank you guys!

Edit3: Alright I'm going to bed. I'll be back tomorrow!

Edit4: I'm back. If you're looking for more tips and ideas, there are plenty in the comment! A lot of them are much better than mine.

Check the sidebar if you haven't already. That's how I started as soon as I subscribed to this sub. You can also find a lot of good posts in the [top Seduction posts of all time](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/top/?sort=top&t=all)

There are some pretty good Youtube channels like [Simple Pickup](http://www.youtube.com/user/SimplePickup/featured) (These guys will show you how you can still get a girl's number no matter what you say or how you say it. It really helps for people who suffer from approach anxiety). There is also RSD but I only watched the videos that got upvoted here. 

Some of the best comments I've seen in this thread:

[[About shit tests 1](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19s2zw/how_i_seduced_a_girl_without_intending_to_if_you/c8r1jc1)]
[[About shit tests 2](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19s2zw/how_i_seduced_a_girl_without_intending_to_if_you/c8r7boq)]
[[Practice what you preach](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19s2zw/how_i_seduced_a_girl_without_intending_to_if_you/c8qv2mj)]
[[Better explanations for stuff I've already mentioned](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19s2zw/how_i_seduced_a_girl_without_intending_to_if_you/c8r67ya)]

**Edit 5: May 2014 UPDATE:** I've been getting some PMs over the past few months informing me that this thread is still in the top 10 of all time of this Subreddit, and asking me for an update so.. [here it is, in another thread](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/255151/update_for_the_8_most_upvoted_rseduction_thread/), because it's too long to be added to this text post (15000 characters limit).
Somehow I matched with a solid 9.5/10 on tinder, and we met up last night. She’s half German half Filipino, and quite a tall girl — about the same height as me at 5’10”. She basically negged me the whole night — I played it off like I didn’t care and she ended up kissing me and asking me out again. Here’s a list:

* We sit down at a street food stall to get some dinner, and the conversation is going great. When we both stand up she looks at me and says “Oh my god am I actually taller than you?”. I just reply “you’re not tall enough, I like to rest my head on my girl’s shoulder”.

* We get onto the topic of Muay Thai (we both compete) and she says in a surprised tone “you’re quite a skinny guy though, most Muay Thai fighters I know are more muscular”. I didn’t really have a comeback for this one, I just talked about the fact that I fight at lightweight.

* She says I’m too young for her when she finds out I’m 23 (she’s 20). I just comment that I usually only date girls who are 26+ (this is true).

* We’re waiting in line to get something to drink, and she starts stroking the palm of my hand with her fingers. I go to grab it and she pulls away saying “uhhh did you try to hold my hand?”. I make some comment saying sweaty hands are nothing to be embarrassed about.

* She’s teaching me some Filipino words, and I ask how to say “I’m handsome”. She tells me but then follows up with “you’re not really a handsome guy though”. My response is “Bullshit, I can tell by the way you’re looking at me now that you think I’m handsome”.

Eventually she calls a taxi home, and I walk her out to the street. She grabs my arm as we’re walking, then before she gets in the cab she turns around and kisses me on the lips. Then she texts me about half an hour later saying she had a fun time, and we agreed to go out on Thursday.

Going out with this girl has helped me prove to myself that I’ve reached the point where I’m secure about myself without a girl’s validation. I think 2 years ago I would have nothing to say when she started shitting oh my physical appearance, then just never see her again and spend 2 months feeling insecure af. 

I don’t this this girl is gf material, but she’s very beautiful and I want to see her again. Only thing is she’s hot enough that she definitely could get any Chad to chase her. I guess I just need to play to my strength, and keep up the high social value.If you try to convince others you're good with women, you will then need women in your life for your identity and self-esteem. This has the negative effect of making you more dependent on women.

Women unconsciously sense you need them, and they lose interest in you.

But if you're humble and don't talk about how good you are with women, and don't have your identity and self-esteem dependent on whether women like you, it makes you less needy and you get better results.

This was one reason the PUA movement failed. Those men needed women to like them to validate their identity, and this desperation made things a lot harder for them.

Find something else for your identity, like focusing on your career, hobby, etc. Or improve your self-esteem so you don't feel you have to impress others. But never use women to get others to respect you.Building sexual tension and anticipation, teasing, and stimulating her without intercourse is crucial, not just for her enjoyment, but for the overall experience of everyone involved during sex. 

Sex and intercourse are not one in the same. Intercourse, which involves penetration, should be viewed as only as a part of the entire act of sex, which involves foreplay—kissing, touching, oral sex, and stimulation with fingers.

Often times, guys will rush right into penetration without the gradual building of sexual tension, without going down on her or using fingers to get her closer to orgasm. They are too influenced by porn, or they let their ego too involved, and believe that jabbing  their dick in her pussy in a straight forward motion is the only way to get her off.  Some important things to remember—

Fingering and outside stimulation with the fingers: All female orgasm and physical pleasure during sex is derived from the Clitoris, which is a network of nerves throughout the vagina, not just the ‘head’, the piece of flesh near the ‘hood’ of the vagina. 

The ‘G-Spot’ is an overly-mythicized cluster of clitoral nerves that is on the upper ‘roof’ of the inside of the vagina (for example, if she is on her back facing you).  Using your index and middle finger you can stimulate this area using a ‘come here’ motion, while making contact with this area with your fingers. I’ve also found if you use the same fingers, but use an upward, pulsating motion where you press against the area, like a rapid heartbeat, it works as well. 

Combining these ‘G-Spot’ motions while performing oral sex on her while fluttering your tongue on the ‘head’ of the Clitoris give her multiple sensations at the same time and will drive her nuts. 

Also, kissing or sucking on her breasts, and kissing her neck while you rub her in the general area around the head of the Clitoris is incredibly effective with building anticipation. Rub your index and middle fingers in a broad semi-rapid clockwise motion around the area, or use the same fingers in a vertical motion. 

Getting her close to orgasm or thoroughly stimulated before intercourse occurs is key.  Even if she asks for you to penetrate her, wait a few minutes longer. Tell her you’re not done yet. This will benefit you in the end. She will be wetter, more passionate and less inhibited when intercourse occurs.

Focusing on pleasing your woman and embracing foreplay is not ‘simp’ behavior. Guys who say this have no clue about seduction and are posturing to sound dominant. Take your time, and the sex will be better for both of you."The first type of guy is someone no one wants to be around. He is needy, insecure, and reaction seeking. He will suck your energy dry in his quest for validation and approval.

The second type of guy is easy to be with. He radiates charisma and positive energy. Women enjoy his company, as do their friends, and they want him around all the time. They trust him, feel comfortable with him, and end up at his house at five o'clock in the morning wondering where all that time went."

This is the best part of that book in my opinion.

Edit: People have been asking about this book. I do NOT recommend buying or reading it. I only posted this quote here because Neil Strauss was one of the people who played a big role in creating the old PUA movement (that's thankfully dying), which was very unhealthy, and based on seeing women as objects guys use to boost their ego. So it's interesting that here he says this is not the correct philosophy to have. I wanted to show that even a guy like him realised not to use girls as objects to impress others or give us our identity. So everyone should realise it. But the rest of this book is useless in my opinion.Like really, there is absolutely no reason for anyone to feel ashamed for feeling sexually attracted to a woman/man and to want or have sex with them.
Sex is as natural as breathing, drinking and eating.
Embrace this sexual energy, let it make you feel good and relax.**Relationship Manifesto**

Hey guys. I’ve been in the community for a while now (I’ve deleted my FRs because a few girls know this account, but I’m sure many of you remember me). I’ve used what I learned mostly to find great girlfriends, not to get laid hundreds of times. I just enjoy relationships. I've had a string of happy, healthy relationships that have all ended by my choosing and on very friendly, adult terms. I’m currently seeing someone new, and that is going great, too. 

Since relationships get almost no press in the community, I wanted to share a few insights. Please feel free to add on as you see fit. 

**Contents**

1. Is she having fun?

2. Does she feel sexy?

3. Does she feel protected?

4. Does she feel loved?


**INTRODUCTION**

Relationships are like the Big Bang of pick-up. All the rules break down. There are no routines to fall back on, and you are forced to reveal your truest self. What follows is a short list of principles I’ve found to be true in most relationships and for most (healthy) women. They are not rules. Think of them more as guidelines that can help you stay healthy, positive, and open while keeping things in perspective. Bombs away. 


**1. IS SHE HAVING FUN?**

The old song is true. Girls just want to have fun. If you and your girl don’t have fun, don’t expect her to stick around. This is why, in surveys, women consistently list a sense of humor as the most desirable trait in a partner. It is really difficult to overstate how much this is true. 

**1a.** Here’s what this means for you:

Learn to have fun at any time, no matter what you are doing. And don’t do it for her. Do it for yourself. If you can develop a sense of self-enjoyment, you will never be bored. For example, if you and your lady are walking, and you see a jungle gym, and she squeals and makes a break for it, don’t sulk and quietly wait for her to finish playing. Instead, run as fast as you can, push her out of the way, climb to the top, rip your shirt off, and scream, “I am the king and this is my kingdom! You will never defeat me, infidel!” And when she tries, pounce on her and tickle her until she pees in public. It doesn’t have to be that extreme, of course. Throw popcorn at her during a movie. If she drags you into a women’s clothing store, pull some shit off the rack, try it on, and ask the clerk’s opinion. Tackle her into bed. *Smile. Laugh.* Make some memories, for fuck's sake. Be playful, and never, ever say no to fun. 

**2. DOES SHE FEEL SEXY?**

This seems like an easy one, but there’s a little nuance to it. Making a woman feel sexy is more than just complimenting her physical looks, although that’s part of it. Rather, it’s a mix of four things: 1) being interested in her mind, 2) complimenting her, 3) teasing her, and 4) having good sex. 

**2a.** Be interested in her mind.

If you aren’t interested in what your lady thinks, you are either too boring yourself, or you need to find someone with more similar interests. Have a good, long conversation once in a while. Ask her what she thinks and take her seriously. Again, don’t do it arbitrarily. Date women you are interested in. 

**2b.** Compliment and tease her.

Make it unique, sincere, and playful. Don’t get super emotional and tell her her eyes are like the sunset. Instead, when she walks away in that skirt you love, tell her you are about to have a stroke and you’d prefer if she just wore moo-moos from now on. Or whisper in her ear that her shoulders are giving you a boner in church. Say what you really think, and frame it in a way that’s fun. 

**2c.** Have good sex.

I’m no sexpert. I have a lot to learn myself. But having great, mutually fulfilling sex goes a loooong way toward making a woman feel sexy. If you need a starting point, read *The Sex God Method.* Some of the rhetoric is a little much (seems misogynistic at times, although it's clear he loves and respects women), but overall, it's a great book that focuses on the female psyche instead of bullshit “hum the ABCs” techniques. 


**3. DOES SHE FEEL PROTECTED?**

Since you will almost never run across a situation in which you must actually protect a woman from harm, you need to find other ways to trigger the psychological response that makes her feel protected. 

Most of the time, this is pretty simple: maintain an attitude of confidence and control. This means acting like a happy, healthy, passionate man who is not pushed around and is generally unaffected by bullshit (even hers). It also means—and this is very important guys—finding and pursuing your own passion; if she doesn’t see that you are a man who is confident enough to do things on his own (and to let her do her own thing), she will never believe you are confident enough to protect her. 

**3a.** Real-world examples:

*Pay for her. She is your girlfriend. You take her out, not the other way around.

*Let her pay for you if she wants to. A confident man is secure.

*Decide. Be the decider, but be open to suggestions and/or changes of mind.

*Physically lead her. Take her by the hand and walk through crowds. Order first (better yet, order for her if you know what she likes). Walk into unfamiliar places first; open doors and guide her into familiar places. 

*Stick up for her. No one gets to talk shit to your woman. 

*Allow her to stick up for herself while supporting her with the quiet, physical presence of a confident man.

*Show her you have her back by empathizing, not by trying to fix situations. 


**4. DOES SHE FEEL LOVED?**

This is the most straightforward and natural for most of us. However, there are still a few things to keep in mind. Expressions of love should happen in an exchange. They should never be used to win favor, to manipulate, to apologize, or to otherwise reconcile a power imbalance. Exchanging expressions of love should be happy, spontaneous and genuine. 

So, if you love a girl (and only ever say you do if you really do, obviously), and she loves you, tell her during positive emotional spikes. Say it when she makes you laugh or when she does something amazing. Say it when you are proud of her. Tell her you love her often during sex. The only real “rule” is to not say it to her more than she says it to you, but this is not due to some sort of misguided score system; it is simply because if she is not telling you she loves you as often as you are telling her, something in the relationship needs to be tweaked. 

Lastly, do thoughtful stuff. Buy good, thoughtful gifts for her birthday. Teach her something new. Make her breakfast. These are all expressions of love, and they really go a long way. 


**CONCLUSION: A BRIEF NOTE ON BEING ALPHA AND MYSTERIOUS**

It's true: you must be alpha. But don't think of it like you did during initial stages. In a relationship, being alpha more or less boils down to this: retaining your sense of self. A woman does not define you. A woman deserves a man with his own identity. Stay confident, positive, and passionate, and keep the above in mind. "Being alpha" is the natural result of being comfortable and healthy. 

*Mystery.* I've re-written this tiny section several times, but ultimately, this is what I came up with: surprise your girl once in a while and, again (and most importantly), retain a sense of self. 

Edit: Formatting; added the last section after a few PMs. Thanks, lads. :)

**tl;dr: See table of contents**

P.S. I'm pumped I was able to help so many of you guys -- here and via PM. Put some of this into eBook form [WooMe](http://woome.org). Most of the info is already in this post, though, so no need to buy it. Just FYI. :)
**Fitness** - not only is a fit body nicer to look at, but it conveys a lot of subconscious information like good diet, strong character, persistence.

**Fashion** - shows that you care about how you look, that you pay attention to detail, and also reflects your own sense of self-worth.

**Grooming** - displays that you make time for self-care and that you care about the comfort of others around you.

**Posture** - nothing says more about your confidence and self-esteem than how you hold yourself.

**Eye contact** - not the bullshit IOI you kids think some woman gave you on the bus, I'm talking about looking into someone's eyes when you speak to them and when they speak to you. Shows attentiveness and investment when listening, and adds strength and power when speaking.

**Humor** - not being a clown, but definitely making occasional jokes, or using a funny voice, makes it clear that you are not overly intense or taking life too seriously. Shows that you can be fun to be around.

**Daringness** - doing things that shy or timid people are afraid to do, like giving a speech or singing a karaoke song, approaching and talking to a stranger... and definitely DANCING. It shows that you're confident, comfortable with yourself, and unconcerned about the opinions or judgments of others.

**Speech** - And a huge one that very few people think about is how you speak. People who use pause words like "um... uh... like..." and "know what I'm saying" sound less intelligent and less confident, while people who use a firmer, tighter language and who can simply, comfortably pause silently — without a filler word — really project a great sense of always having their thoughts well-collected and a great deal of confidence in every thing that they say.These games are a great way to hone basic social skills, all of which are critical for success in seduction. They're really easy to do in the course of your daily life, fun, and immediately rewarding. 

I love doing this shit so much. They keep me in state during the day, and help build my library of reference experiences. Here's a list of the ones I've played before, and I'd love to hear seddit's ideas of course! 

1.	**Peacock** -
Straightforward and exhilarating. You have to wear something ridiculous, and wear it proudly!

2.	**The eye contact game** -
This one is kinda addicting. Make an attempt at eye contact with every stranger you pass by all day—if you establish eye contact, *hold it*--THEY must be the first to break off. Challenge yourself to "win" this game more than 90% of the time.  

3.	**“Hello”** -
Also known as the “newbie mission”, you merely say “hello” and smile at every cute girl you see. Don’t skip any!

4.	**Asking strangers for directions** -
This is one of the most under-valued social games out there, in terms of raw humor. You will not believe how ridiculous it is to watch people struggle to come up with directions on the spot, especially if you already know where the place is! EXTRA CREDIT: when they are done explaining, go the exact opposite way that they said to go. 

5.	**Elevator challenge** -
*Level 1*: Get closer to the other people than you normally would (but not quite invading their personal space). Stand confidently in your spot—don’t lean on the walls/rail, don’t put your hands in your pockets or look at your phone! 
*Level 2*: Every time you’re in the elevator with someone else, make some remark. It can be anything (weather, elevator speed, recent sporting outcomes…), but you have to say something EVERY time.

6.	**Odd conversations** -
This one is best done with a buddy, although it still works solo. Come up with and exchange ridiculous conversation topics: each of you has to insert your topic into some conversation you have that day. For example, dinosaur metabolism….norwegian politics….anal fisting….

7.	**Numbers game** -
Friends heavily recommended for this one. Walk up to chicks and try to get their number right off the bat--no prior conversation allowed! This game is awesome because it forces you to focus explicitly on your physical and emotional calibration. Don’t be surprised if you and your friends actually do get several numbers; see who can get the most!

8.	**House party scramble** -
You and a friend compete to see who can meet everyone at a house party the quickest. Don’t be too fucking obvious about it (or do, and see what happens). 
Level 2: You have to remember all their names too. 

9.	**Freestyling**
That’s right. You’re going to try and come up with raps on the spot, and say them out loud. Even if you sound like a complete idiot and can’t rhyme at all, doing this boosts the fuck out of your mojo. Even better if you can do it around some friends. 

Feel free to post your own! 


This morning, I was working out at the gym on the smith machine doing squats, and there was a guy at the bench next to mine doing bench presses. He approached me and asked me to give him a spot.

When I walked to his bench, he asked me "Do you want to make a deal? If I can bench press 5 reps of 315 lbs, you have to give me your number. If I fail, I'll give you $20."

I accepted his deal since I figured it would be easy money.

So when he started bench pressing, he couldn't even manage a single rep. His arms were shaking and I had to help him carry the bar. I was laughing my ass off because he acted like such a tough guy but he was weak af. I gave him my number though since he made my day, but you men should learn from this lesson and don't make deals unless you know that you'll win.Dating is one of the most confusing aspects of life that’s out there. In a world where you can get tips and perspectives from anyone or anywhere on the Internet, there’s no shortage of advice.



And a lot of it flat out just…doesn’t…work.



There’s good intentions in the advice but when it comes to real-world practicality, men are still having to try hard to get the connection they want…



Which personally I believe should be easy and effortless, not confusing and difficult.



When I was younger I really wanted to understand women and relationships. I was a computer programmer, web designer, avid video game player. But I felt clueless when it came to women.



Like most guys connected to the Internet, I went searching for help. Unlike most guys, I invested over $20,000 into different bootcamps, seminars, products, and coaches into learning this stuff. Not to mention the thousands of hours I put into applying the advice I got.


I first started off 7 years ago with an e-book on how to date girls in college. It’s been a journey since then – I’ve had one-night stands, polyamorous relationships, monogamous relationships, and everything in-between. I’ve battle-tested all the different techniques, perspectives, and paradigms that I could possibly find when it comes to dating and relationships. And at the end of it all, here’s what I realized…

What actually works is completely counter-intuitive and contrary to the advice I had been given. Even from the professionals, the gurus, and the “best of the best”.

And so my intention with this post is to share with you the wisdom I’ve learned through my own personal experiences, to the best of my ability, in the hopes that it will simplify your dating life completely so that you can move on towards growth in other areas of your life.

I spent countless nights suffering in confusion about this stuff, when deep down I just wanted to have a stable sense of how attraction, connection, and relationships worked. I hope this post can save you the time I spent and offer some perspective that can lead to an amazing relationship in your life.

Here’s what you’ll learn in this post:

* How to develop attractiveness towards women on a fundamental level, beyond the need for pickup lines, trying-hard, or approaching
* How to get to a place where women approach you and pick you up, not the other way around
* One widely-applicable exercise that you can do anywhere, any place, that will improve your connection to women over and over again.

**About The “Anti-Method”**

My approach with dating can be summed up as follows: “The Anti-Method”.

It’s basically the complete opposite of what guys are taught. Here are some real-world examples, of my own experience, of how the dating game using this way of operating has worked for me.

**How I Met “Jenny”**

I was eating dinner by myself at one of my favorite restaurants. It was a casual night where I spent time chatting it up with the people next to me and enjoying my time.

I walked out of the restaurant, and while I was half-way down the sidewalk, a woman comes out of the restaurant and runs after me shouting.

“Hey, hey!”

I turn around.

“Haven’t we met before?” she says.

I didn’t talk to her in the restaurant, nor had I met her before, nor did she look familiar.

But she was cute, and I was intrigued that she came running after me, so I continued chatting with her.

She went on to tell me that she didn’t know what came over her and that she just felt compelled to leave the restaurant and come talk to me.

I asked why and she said “I don’t know, there was just something about you.”

We went back inside for a drink, hit it off, and started dating seriously a few weeks later.

Turns out she was an artist and was in a feature film that was released in theaters. Not only was she a badass with her work, but she had an incredible heart and dating her was healing on so many different levels.

This wasn’t the only time I experienced this.

**Getting picked up at the bar**

I went to a bar with a friend, and about an hour later, a woman bumped into me.

She looked at me and said “excuse me”, but had a coy look on her face that told me that it really wasn’t an accident.

She scurried off, and 10 or so minutes later I walked to go to the bathroom.

She came and found me, asked me if I was single, and told me I was cute and that she wanted my number.

We went on a date a couple days later, with only one text-exchanged, which was “Bitter bar at 8pm?” (a local bar here in Boulder, Colorado).

Super simple, no pickup lines, no trying, super simple.

And this pattern wasn’t just happening to me…

**The time I took a friend to a bar**

I took a close friend to a bar to show him how he could apply my viewpoint on dating, and also to see if it was just me that women were responding to.

I was wondering if it was just me or if this is something that could be taught.

I rarely go to bars, and my friend doesn’t go to bars either. Especially not just to see how women responded to him. This was a first-time experience for him.

After a couple of hours, a cute hippie chick approached him and wanted to dance with him.

They danced for a little, and as far as I could tell, didn’t really exchange many words. They stopped dancing and he came to join me, saying that that was an “interesting” experience.

(He later told me that she whispered in his ear “I don’t know why but I feel like I can trust you.”)

A few minutes later the girl came back up to him, asked him to hold out his arm, and then she wrote her number on his arm with a sharpie she had in her purse. She said she was having a party later and to text her for the address.

We both went to the party later that evening and had a great time.

**How I Met “Alex”**

When I moved to Boulder, Colorado a few years ago I hardly knew anyone outside of a few friends that I had when I moved. So I took the opportunity to go to as many events as possible, and when I was invited to something, I’d attend.

One of my friends threw a barbecue every week during one of the Summer’s. There were always new people there and so I went regularly to get to know them and tap into the community around me.

I had one conversation with one woman about some hobbies, for a couple minutes or so, and didn’t really think of it that much.

A week later I get a message from the woman that said that I came up a few times in conversation with other people and asked if we could get together.

We got together to grab a tea and instantly felt chemistry that went on to form the longest relationships I’ve ever had.

**“I’ve been thinking about you”**

I’m going to throw this story in here because it makes me laugh every time I think about it.

I met this woman over 7 years ago when I was deathly afraid of women. She was super cute, and I at the time thought I wanted to marry her…but regardless, I was too nervous to ask her out and didn’t have the confidence that the pick-up stuff I was reading told me I needed to have.

So I let it go and beat myself up for it.

A year after I met her, I ran into her again through a mutual friend. I was still crushing on her, but with (still) no confidence, and the fact that she had a boyfriend, I let it go and forgot about it.

A few year after that and a text exchanges during that time period, I get a random message from her that said something along the likes of “Hey, my little secret but I just masturbated to the thought of you and it was fantastic.”

We met up a few months later when we were in the same city and had a fun time in the backseat of my car.

**Holiday shenanigans**

Over the holidays, I went to a bar in a local town with a few friends. I don’t know anyone in the town, but I wanted to spend some time with my friends so I went.

At the bar, a couple of girls approached us and sparked up a conversation. We talked for 10 minutes or so, and because they were with some guy friends, they left to go to another bar.

A few minutes later, both of the girls come back, and one of them tells me “I really wanted to give you my number so I came back. Can I put my number in your phone?”

I gave her my phone and she put her name followed by “Cute chick you met at the bar who’s super cool”.

I couldn’t help but laugh because that was the same technique I was taught in some pick-up book years ago, and now the woman was using it on me.

**Notes on the experiences**

The aim of sharing these experiences is to show you the range of experiences that can happen when you apply the principles that I’m going to teach you in this post. You could end up meeting a woman you date seriously for a few years, have a one-night stand, or meet some pretty cool women that you’re friends with for the rest of your life.

Now, it’s important to note that while I spent 7 years studying the whole pickup stuff, it wasn’t until I started applying the “anti-method” that all of these experiences happened. It was like a light-switch turned on, where seemingly random and amazing connections happened consistently, over and over again.

And it’s not just me.

I’ve had friends and clients tell me similar stories where before they’d never had any real consistent success before with the other things that they’ve tried. It’s been proven to me that when a man has a full understanding of the “anti-method”, he doesn’t have to spend years learning pickup, approach 1000 girls to get their confidence up, or learn to say the “right thing” or anything like that.

By the end of this post, you’ll be able to apply this methodology as well to have an effortless dating life and begin to create the relationships that you want without trying hard at all.

Ready to dive in?

**How It Works**

The common element in what caused all of the experiences I previously mentioned to happen is that I fully understood and applied the energetic dynamics of how attraction works.

It’s a myth that attraction happens externally with the things that you say and the things that you do. Attraction happens underneath the surface, at a subconscious level, when a man’s energy and a woman’s energy are correctly polarized. I’ll get into that in a minute.

First, I want to make it clear that this isn’t about quick fixes or temporary solutions to the dating game. Once fully understood and put into practice, these energetic dynamics will be embedded into your body and will improve your level of attractiveness in permanent way, without you having to think about it.

At this point you may be asking…how does it work?

Let’s get to it.

**Dating Energetics Explained: The Gravity Metaphor**

To increase your level of attractiveness in a permanent way, the first thing to understand is how your energy works.

The best way I can explain how this works is with an analogy.

Think of yourself like the Sun. You are the center of your solar system.

There are planets orbiting you, like Mars, Jupiter, etc.

These planets represent the people in your life – friends, family, women, etc – all orbiting to various degrees of depth in relation to you.

How people interact with you is much like how planets interact with the Sun. The Sun’s gravitational pull affects each planet differently and how they orbit the Sun.

It’s why certain planets are closer than others and why some aren’t in its orbit and reside in other solar systems. Their magnetic fields either line up, or don’t.

They’re either polarized or not.

This video by NASA does a good job of explaining how this works:

[NASA Video: Understanding the Magnetic Sun](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2g1epPppIOM)

To make this happen, the Sun isn’t really doing anything. It’s just burning, doing it’s thing. It’s not saying “I need to attract these planets into my orbit” or asking “how do I bring them closer”. It’s simply being.

The process of planets orbiting the Sun is naturally-occurring process of life.

Relationships with women work the same way.

The only big difference is that people have an ego.

The ego is an attraction destroyer.

It serves its purpose, and there’s nothing wrong with it, however when it comes to attraction the ego gets in the way of the natural attraction process between men and women.

It’s de-polarizing.

With the ego, the dating game feels like an uphill battle where you can never seem to go on a date with someone, or they always flake, or they want to be “just friends”. A romantic relationship is always out of reach, or at least the one that you’re truly wanting is always one step away.

With less and less of it, women in your life operate like planets to the Sun – they start to orbit you. They’ll orbit in your physical space, through social media, through friends-of-friends, through work, etc.

They could be close or in a different solar system, but they are in fact there.

How close they are in your orbit is dictated by the gravitational field that you have. Your energy.

The stronger your energy is – the stronger your gravitational field is – the more naturally attractive you are. Meaning that as your gravitational field becomes stronger, you have to work less in order to connect with women in your life.

Less effort. Less trying-hard. Less games.

But how do you upgrade your energy? How do you upgrade your gravitational field?

How To Upgrade Your Energy and Improve Your Gravitational Field

**Principle #1 – Releasing Expectations and Agendas**

The first thing that any man needs to do to upgrade his gravitational field and improve his natural polarity with women is to learn to relate to women without expectations and agendas.

What are expectations and agendas?

An expectation is any place in which you are attempting to force your external reality to get a specific result.

With an expectation/agenda, there’s a concrete notion of “I want things to happen this way and only this way” or “This is what I want so I have to go get it.”

This is the ego talking.

For instance, most men are trying to figure out what to say to ask a girl on a date…

How to get her to be his girlfriend…

How to attract THAT girl…

And to fulfill that expectation, most guys go and do something about it – like approach multiple women at the bar.

Again, expectations can show up as: “this is the result I want” + “what do I need to go do externally in order to get it”.

When actions are rooted from that type of mindset of expecting a certain result, which often happens subconsciously, it destroys the natural attraction process and reduces the man’s energy field dramatically .

Has a woman ever flaked on you and you got pissed or down on yourself? Has a woman ever told you one thing and then did another and it upset you? Has a woman you thought was attractive flirt with some other guy and you got jealous or even depressed?

If so, these are prime examples of your expectations getting broken.

Here’s the thing about women.

In the dating game, they will continue to break your expectations over and over again until you can learn to let go of them.

If you go to bar trying to pickup women, two things will either happen:

1) you won’t pick up a woman because she can feel like you’re trying to pick her up, or 2) you get REALLY good at saying the right thing to “disarm” her natural defenses, and manipulate her into sleeping with you…but not only does this feel shitty for you (and her) at the end of the night, but it’s a LOT of work!

But as you let go of your expectations of trying to pick-up women or get them to respond in a certain way to you through external means, you become MORE attractive…AND…you become MORE attracted to women.

Your ability to FEEL becomes heightened, you become more sensitive to your environment, and the amount of connection that you can have with women becomes exponentially higher.

This is because as you let go of expectations, you give yourself an opportunity to need nothing from women and live in a state of unconditional love.

This is very attractive to women, and feels very good for you.

**Principle #2 – Handling Insecurities and Processing Emotions**

When a man lets go of his expectations of trying to do anything specific with women (like pick them up, try to sleep with them, or figure out how to ask them on a date), it puts him into a state of raw vulnerability.

As his expectations leave, his ego leaves. His heart starts to open and he will start to feel emotions that have been buried up for years.

This process can be scary and very confusing.

Expectations in the dating game, from a core level, are created when there is a feeling of fear underneath. An insecurity.

This could show up as feeling like you aren’t worthy of love, feeling like you’re doing something wrong, feeling like you aren’t enough.

They are also created from past relationships when things ended badly, or if there are misunderstandings about yourself or women in general.

It’s beyond the scope of the article to go into detail into why those expectations are created, however what you need to know for now is that as you release expectations, or as they get broken, the insecurities that created those expectations will surface.

It’s important to stay with your emotions and feel them in the moment as they arise.

Like I said, this can be extremely confusing. How to navigate your emotions is highly situational and circumstantial…and it’s not something I can cover in one article.

**Principle #3 – Trust**

Finally, when a man is releasing his expectations and staying current with his emotions, the final part to upgrading his energy and gravitational field is to TRUST.

Because it is vulnerable to not have any expectations with women, it can seem like initially that you’re getting further and further away from women.

Let this process unfold, and stay trusting that once things settle and the insecurities underneath the expectations are handled, women will be attracted to you more than ever.

It’s important to know that as a man continues to let go of his expectations and address his insecurities, all of the typical dating problems fall out the window.

You don’t have to think about when’s the right time to text her. You don’t have to think about what’s the right thing to say. You don’t have to try to be confident.

You just have to be…you.

Your gravitational field will upgrade moment after moment, and at a certain point, a woman will come into your orbit like I demonstrated in the stories at the beginning of this article.

The beautiful thing about this methodology is that when a woman comes into your orbit in this way, the bond between you is based on your GRAVITY.

It’s based on reality without any external effort from you.

When that happens, you can viscerally feel and know when there’s chemistry between you and a woman.

You can know that when you feel that chemistry it’s not because you’re trying to force it, but because the woman is actually attracted to you for who you are, and not what you’re saying or you’re doing.

That’s why in my example above I could just text the girl one line to meet up, and she met me there. No pickup lines or anything fancy.

I could feel the energy between us and it was undeniable.

That feeling is based on the energy of who you two ARE, and that is impossible to fake or lie about when you sense it.

Watch the video below for a visual representation of how this works.

[Anti-Method Visual Explanation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=irFeWGJB6Xw)

**Putting The Anti-Method Into Practice**

The following exercise is something that you can go do immediately to start understanding how your energy affects your environment. Keep in mind that this isn’t a “one-off” exercise. This is a continual practice that shows better results over time.

The more you do this and the more you gain an awareness of the energetic dynamics, the more natural this process will become and it will eventually become a habit.

**Step 1.** Go to a public place – a coffee shop, a strip mall, a friend’s party, a bar, etc.

**Step 2.** Find a place in the middle, or a place that has the highest traffic. For instance, when I went to the bar with my friend, we stood right in the middle where the most people walk/hang out at.

The reason for this is that in the spot with the most attention you can gain more awareness to the expectations in your field, that once broken, would expand your field of gravity.

**Step 3.** Make a choice to yourself that although you could leave this spot, you want to stay put and do nothing. The reason for this is that when you’re continually moving, it’s hard to see what your orbit is looking like and very difficult to sense what you’re gravitational field is doing.

**Step 4.** Wait. Do nothing. Notice the places in which you’re drawn to do something externally – like talk to someone, get a drink, go to the bathroom, check your phone, and start to notice the place in yourself in which that’s coming from. It’s very easy to rationalize “I need to get another drink” but if you pay attention to your emotional state, you’ll start to be able to see that it could be a coping mechanism to prevent yourself from feeling awkward or anxious.

The rationalizations are a clue that expectations are in your field – the very things that are stifling your attractiveness. Rather than avoiding them, stay in the same spot and see what emotions come up underneath.

**Step 5.** This is where things may start to get uncomfortable, as the insecurities in your body will start to surface.

Do you feel anxious being around people? Are you afraid that people are looking at you? Afraid that you might be creepy?

What’s there?

Start to examine your fears with a lens of objectivity, and let yourself feel anxious, nervous, fearful, sad, angry, whatever comes up.

Sit in that emotion for a while.

**Step 6.** Hold your ground and stay in your spot. People may try to push you around and get you to move off center or something may try and distract you. This means that it’s working, stay with it, and don’t move off your center.

**Step 7.** As you’re feeling whatever emotions are coming up, continue to let yourself feel them until your body relaxes. This usually comes right after you’re feeling the most awkward, anxious, sad, whatever…which is why it’s important to stay in it.

But at a certain point, you’ll feel an energetic “pop” or simply feel more relaxed, or at the very least more present, even if it’s just a tiny bit.

**Step 8.** Now that you’re present and current with your emotions, you can go with the flow and follow your natural desires.

If you want to talk to someone, talk to them. If you want to go to the bathroom, go to the bathroom. If you want to grab a drink, grab a drink, whatever.

You’ll start to notice who’s orbiting around you. If you think of yourself like the Sun, different people will start to sit around you, chat it up with you, interact with you. At this point simply be yourself, remain open, and go with the flow.

**Step 9.** If a woman comes into your space and you’re talking with her, just be yourself without any type of agenda or expectation on what your connection with her may look like.

The mindset around this if you’re wanting to attract a woman is the one of “we’ll see what happens”.

**Step 10.** If there’s an opening, feel free to take it if you’re digging her. Over time you’ll learn to sense the energy of the woman – if she’s attracted to you, if she’s trying to play games with you, if she’s open to connecting with you.

A woman might just bounce and leave your orbit, but if she’s sticking around she’ll make it pretty obvious if she wants to keep hanging out. She may invite you somewhere, ask you what you’re up to later, give you her phone number, etc. Just relax, take it easy, and take the opportunities if you’d like to connect further with her (again without expectation).

That being said, women have different energies that can be hard to read. If you stay in the realm of observing and paying attention, through your experiences you can begin to feel out what a woman is saying to you with her energy.

**Step 11.** That’s it. Continually practice – this is a continual process as there are always more fears and expectations that are coming up. It’s a practice that once ingrained in your habitual structure will provide massive amounts of love and connection in your life.

**What To Do From Here**

After applying this method over and over again, women will start to become attracted to you in various ways. Some will feel friendly, others will feel attracted to you, others will feel overbearing, others will feel uncomfortable. You’ll start to notice a lot of different behaviors with women.

But when it comes to connecting further, keep apply the same methodology.

Remain stable, release your expectations, feel what’s underneath, act when things “pop”, and notice what happens in your orbit.

Don’t worry about what to do say, or over-think your actions. When you’re working on your energy with the “Anti-Method”, your being speaks for itself.

If you want to ask a girl out, do it. If you want to text a girl, do it.

Don’t worry about the “how”.

Your experiences from this point on will dictate how women respond, and as long as you stay with the process, you’ll start getting positive feedback from women.

TLDR; If you learn how to properly shift your internal state by understanding the energetics of dating, dating will become easier and easier as you won't get flaked on, get rejected, etc. Read from 'How To Upgrade Your Energy' for the how-to, but the stuff above that is helpful to understand what's going on with masculine/feminine dynamics.

TLDR2; Do nothing. Feel your emotions (anxiety, anger, awkwardness) until they "pop". Release expectations. Get approached. Have a good time.

EDIT: First of all, thank you all for chiming in your perspectives in the comments. I'm glad to see that this is making sense to a lot of people, and helping men understand previous experiences that have went very well for them. I can also see how this can be confusing, or not much make sense at all, or seem "woo woo" or whatever. 

EDIT 2: Almost 3 years later, I’m still getting messages and questions from you guys, so I’ve decided to open up the Anti Method FB group again. Here’s the link: https://facebook.com/groups/antimethodI just finished Models for the 3rd time, but decided to write down everything I wanted to reinforce on a daily basis in a small notebook.  Feel free to bookmark this thread and read through before you go out and face the world.

1. Social status is determined by how you behave around others, how others behave around you, and how you treat yourself.

2. Sacrificing your own thoughts, feelings, and emotions for a woman is needy if she wouldn't do the same, or more.

3. Don't derive happiness and confidence from often you're getting laid.

4. Strong, independent, and high-status in public, depth and sensitivity in private.

5. The more nervous it makes you the better, because it means you're being authentic and making yourself vulnerable.

6. What you actually say doesn't matter, **why** you say it matters.

7. When in doubt, check your intentions.

8. The biggest aphrodisiac in the world is someone who genuinely desires her.

9.  The reality of incompatibility defines your entire strategy of dating women.

10. You cannot be an attractive life-changing presence to some women without being a joke or an embarrassment to others.

11. Every miss gets you closer to the mark.

12. Approach women looking to see if they fit your values.

13. Success = Maximizing happiness with whichever woman you prefer.

14. Assume attraction and assume women are not playing games.

15. Shoulders back, chin up, eyes straight, feet straight, shoulders swagger, arms swing.

16. Always make other people break eye contact with you before you break it with them.

17. Speak deeply and slowly.

18.  Every woman's first impression will be colored by how you carry yourself and how you sound.

19. There has to be **something** to every form of art, otherwise it wouldn't have a following. 

20. Ask yourself, "How do I feel about that"?

21. As a man, your role is to always take action.  It's all on you.  It's always on you.  You move things forward.

22. To improve, you must take full responsibility and accountability for results and actions.

23.  Competence transforms fear into positive behavior.

24.  Courage is a form of discipline.

25. At a bare minimum, ask 10 attractive women for the time every day.

26. When in doubt, be aggressive, or attraction will dwindle.

27. Laughter and human compassion are the highest forms of human understanding.

28. Women don't see your features or hear your words, they see how you present yourself and hear your intentions.

29. Be attractive in an unconventional way that turns some women way off but turns some women way on.

30. Universal emotions are ambition, shame, alienation, loneliness, achievement, regret, hardship, friendship, love, and heartbreak.

31. Open up about it, go one level deeper.

32. The most important rule of emotion connection is to relate to feelings, not facts.

33. Be aware of your own emotions, motivations, and life story.

34. Take the lead by sharing those emotions, motivations, and life story first.

35. Harsh tease & sincere compliment = Turn on.

36. Flirting: Teasing and leading, expressing your sexuality in a non-needy way, eliciting her to become more attracted to you.

37. The basis of all female attraction comes back to security.  Non-neediness and congruency are the basis for security.

38. First Impression: SMILE.  Nice friendly person smile.  Lean back.  Stand up tall.  Speak loudly, yet clearly.  Make strong eye contact.  Introduce yourself and stick out your hand.  Give a firm handshake.

39. Remove "um", "ah", "uh", "like", "you know" and focus on using STATEMENTS.

40. Other than starting the interaction, avoid QUESTIONS at all costs.

41. Cold-read: You seem creative, I bet your job is interesting... etc.

42. Don't ask the question you want to know, make a mild prediction. 

43. The only thing people love more than talking about themselves is hearing about themselves.

44.  Instead of fishing for new conversations from generic questions, comment about something or observe something.

45. Cold-read + create threads from statements + jumping-off = Conversation skills.

46. Set-up + conflict + resolution = Story

47. Making a connection requires three steps.  Be open. She open. Relate to her experience.

48. Make a list of your passions, life goals, dreams, ambitions, favorite activities, best/worst life experiences, childhood, and upbringing.

49. Get her to talk about her passions, life goals, dreams, ambitions, favorite activities, best/worst life experiences, childhood, and upbringing.

50. No matter the outcome, always ask **What if it was a gift?**
Hey r/seduction,

Backstory: Imm in relationships for 1.5 years, 30M, and had trouble giving my gf orgasms.  and it was causing me a deep insecurity and loss of interest in sex (watching  porn, masturbated by myself).

I hated it and wanted change so I started reading everything I could find on how to fix it, and this is what worked the best.

Let me know if you have any other ideas, thoughts, suggestions :)

But I did give this for several women to read (including my gf) and they said all was accurate ;)

So there you go:

*(note: this is an excerpt of the full article. Check the full one with gifs and images* here:

[https://sexualalpha.com/how-to-satisfy-woman-in-bed/](https://sexualalpha.com/how-to-satisfy-woman-in-bed/)

...

## #1 — Foreplay: How To Make a Girl Horny For You WITHOUT Even Touching Her

...So, yesterday was not like other days. 

I used to be really into the game before I got into a really great, loving relationship two years ago. Unfortunately, I had to break up with my girlfriend one month ago. She didn't trust me, even though she never had a reason not to – I really am an honest person and I would never betray my partner's trust.

So yesterday I went out for the first time after my break up. It was strange being on the dance floor again at first (we didn't really go out during our relationship) but I felt really comfortable soon enough. I had  had a one-night-stand a week after the break up and even though it was okay, it somehow just didn't feel right. So when I was dancing with my friend, a cute girl actually approached me. I remembered her right away – she went to my school about 8 years ago and she was just as beautiful as back then. I used to be really into her. She introduces her male roommate, I introduce my friend and we have an awesome evening together with lots of talking, drinking and dancing. Eventually, everyone leaves but her and me. We start to make out.

We move the whole thing to her apartment that's just around the corner. I feel good, confident and we're having a great talk. Up in her apartment we drink something, talk, sit on her bed, talk some more... until she mentions her holidays in March. I ask her who she's going with, when she tells me that she's taking her boyfriend.

I couldn't believe it. I just sat there. Asked her again if I understood that correctly. She repeats and nods. I ask her about the relationship and she says that they've been together for 1.5 years and that they're actually doing great.

Then I said "Okay, so listen... I'm gonna go now."

She brings me to the train station, I give her a kiss on the forehead and I leave her there.


So, why do I tell you this story? Because I want you to remember one thing: Whenever we're out there looking for that girl to approach, that k-close or f-close... we're dealing with people. These people have feelings and also the people they share their lives with. And even though I have no obligation whatsoever towards her boyfriend, even though I simply could have slept with her in her own bed, a bed they share twice a week... I just couldn't do it. I still have my values.

I guess I just want to say: Sex is awesome. Approaching and talking to girls is awesome. But never forget that there are more important things.


EDIT: Two years on my regular account didn't bring me reddit gold. Thank you, really. I'm glad this kind of content is appreciated.Being good in bed is important. Not only are your sexual encounters going to be far more enjoyable for the girl (and for you) if you know what you’re doing, but **if you fuck a woman well, she’s going to want to see you again**.

In fact, the simplest way to get a girlfriend is to be great in bed. If you’re better than anyone she’s ever been with, she’s going to become addicted to you like a drug.

What you do while fucking a woman is important, but what you do immediately before fucking her is just important. In many cases, you can give a girl an orgasm (or several) simply by fingering her and performing cunnilingus.

&nbsp;

##Fingering/Cunnilingus

###Fingering

&nbsp;

Tempo and variety are the two most important aspects of fingering. Start slowly and gently rub her clit (and the surrounding areas) with your fingers, as she gets wetter, intensify the stimulation.

As you do this, pay close attention to how the girl is responding. If simulating a particular area or a specific motion makes her moan louder, arch her back, and/or get even wetter, then do that thing more. 

So, try different things and focus on different areas, but whenever something is particularly arousing for her, double down on that and keep doing it until her arousal seems to hit its peak (this could take as little as 15 seconds or as much as a couple of minutes). 

Make a mental note that she likes that particular type of stimulation (I.E. the area, the movement, the intensity), and make sure to return to it again later.

Once a girl is noticeably wet, you can enter her with your fingers, generally, two fingers are ideal, but you may want to start with one if she’s particularly tight. 

(As for the best technique when you’re a fingering a girl, I can’t accurately explain it without images, so you can check out this page for a detailed guide: https://www.schoolofsquirt.com/how-to-finger-a-girl/﻿17﻿)

As a general guideline, you’d be surprised by how much force you can use while fingering a girl. 

Now, if she’s not completely wet, you want to be tame, but if she is, you can gradually build up to use a lot of strength and pressure, the greater the stimulation, the more aroused the girl will become.

When you’re fingering a girl, you should increase the degree of stimulation over time, but you also include some variety. 

Slow down at some points. Be gentle and intimate for a minute before returning to a more aggressive pace. Predictability can quickly turn into boredom—by repeatedly changing your pace, you can keep the girl excited because she won’t know what to expect.

If you follow the above guidelines, many women will reach the brink of orgasm within minutes. 

There are several signs that a girl is about to cum: she will hold your body very tightly, her muscles will become very tense, her breathing will become heavy and stiff, and you will feel a change inside of her. 

Once you notice this, you should focus on one particular motion and build up the force and pace of that motion until she has an orgasm. 

If she doesn’t finish, that’s okay, just slow down the pace and reintroduce different motions until you think she’s close to finishing again.

With enough practice, you can give most women orgasms simply by fingering them, and in fact, I’ve had girls tell me I gave them the strongest orgasms of their entire lives before we even had sex.

Many people considering fingering something that’s ‘for high schoolers who haven’t had sex yet,’ but it can actually be just as pleasurable as cunnilingus or sex.

&nbsp;

##Cunnilingus

&nbsp;

Don’t worry about the specific techniques you should use with your tongue. Instead, focus on variety. Try different things: use the tip of your tongue for a while, but then try using the top of it. Try an up and down motion, but then try side-to-side. Compare gentle stimulation to more forceful stimulation. Explore different areas.

Notice how she responds to each variation. Again, if she seems to particularly like something (you should be able to tell), do more of that until her excitement starts to wane.

In general, you want to use variety. But once you think she’s close to orgasm, you want to continuously use one type of stimulation to get her over the edge. 

Many women can reach orgasm from oral stimulation alone, but it can help to finger her while you’re going down on her, this will help overwhelm her senses to the point that she loses control.

You can tell close by the fact that she’ll get extremely wet, her muscles will start to stiffen, and her breathing will speed up, and she will enter a somewhat animistic, trance-like state. 

It’s not an exact science (you’ll have to develop your awareness of this through practice) but your intuition will usually be right.

&nbsp;

##Sex

&nbsp;

###Dominance

&nbsp;

When it comes to actually fucking a woman, the principles you learned in the fingering and cunnilingus sections still hold true. Using variety and gradually building the intensity are both effective for making a girl become increasingly aroused.

As important as variety and pacing are, the biggest difference between boring and amazing sex is dominance. 
Dominance and submission are opposites that create a polarity—a powerful magnetic charge.

Now, you don’t necessarily have to be dominant, and the woman doesn’t have to be submissive, but most women won’t play the dominant role in sex (especially during the first encounter), so you’ll be much better off learning how to be dominant in bed rather than submissive.

The more dominant you are, the more a woman will feel like she is able to submit to you, and this will create a powerful sexual charge. 

In his book, Why Women Have Sex, Evolutionary psychologist David Buss writes, “Sexual submission is a popular sexual fantasy among women. A study of 141 married women discovered that the fantasy ‘I imagine that I am being overpowered and forced to surrender’ was the second most common fantasy out of the list of fifteen.”

The more you can make a woman feel that you are overwhelmed with a deep-seated desire to dominate her, the better.

What does this look like?

When making out with a girl, you might want to slam her against the wall (obviously gently enough that it doesn’t actually hurt her).

Or, if you’re on the couch with a girl, and things start to get heated, you can pick her up, carry her to the bed, and throw her on the bed before getting on top of her.

Dominance generally means taking the lead and asserting yourself. You want to take on the spirit of a wild animal who iss completely lost in the act. Essentially, you are possessed by your desire to have this woman.

Instead of changing positions by meekly asking, “Would you like to get on top of me?” move her where you want her. You can also pull a girl’s hair (grab it from near her head, not from the end of her hair or it will be uncomfortable). 

You can even pin a girl’s hands down to her side to show her that you have complete control over her body.
Obviously, if you get any signs of discomfort, stop what you’re doing. Generally, though, you will find that women absolutely love to be dominated in bed.

&nbsp;

### Show Her That You Desire Her

&nbsp;

Women desire to be desired. If a woman doesn’t feel sexy, it’s very easy for her to get into a self-conscious state in which sex is barely enjoyable.

The best time to compliment a girl about her beauty is while she’s in bed with you. You already know she likes you at this point, there’s no need to hold back. 

Furthermore, complimenting a woman can help her let go of any insecure thoughts she may be having about how she looks. As men we don’t remotely understand how much women are pressured to look a certain way. Even the most beautiful women are often very uncomfortable with being naked around someone.

Compliments and expressing your desire will help combat any feelings of discomfort. For example, when you’re in bed with a girl you might say:

- “Your body is amazing.”

- “You look so sexy.”

- “You really turn me on.”

- “I want you so badly right now.”

You can come up with your own lines, what matters is that you let her know how attractive she is and how much you want her.

&nbsp;

##Communicate

&nbsp;

You can use dirty talk during sex if you want. It can be fun, but it’s certainly not necessary for mind-blowing sex.
Talking after sex, though, is essential.

Candidly discussing sex with a girl will help make her more comfortable with her sexuality. Many women have insecurities about sex—having a real conversation about it can help a girl let go of those insecurities when she’s with you.

Furthermore, discussing sex can help you understand what she likes so that you can give her more of it.
When talking about sex, it’s important that you don’t sound insecure. Questions like, “Did you like that?” or, “Was that good for you?” are counterproductive because they make you sound unsure of yourself.

Sounding insecure is in itself a turn-off. Plus, she may not give you honest answers to such questions (because she doesn’t want to hurt your feelings).

Frame questions positively. Instead of asking, “Did you like that?” Ask, “What did you like most about that?” 

Instead of asking, “Did you orgasm?” ask, “What was the strongest orgasm you ever had, and what caused it?”

Ask about what she likes, what she wants more of, and definitely ask her what sexual fantasies she has. You may not be able to help her live out her exact fantasy, but you might be able to do something similar.

For example, if the theme of her fantasy is being dominated, you can use that knowledge as an indication that you should use more dominance. If her fantasy involves being dominant, you could give her an opportunity to live that fantasy out, too.

Get creative with how you discuss sex. The above should give you some starting points, but the conversation should be organic, not completely scripted.

&nbsp;

##Conclusion

&nbsp;

Being good in bed is an integral part of success with women, yet it rarely gets talked about. 

When I first learned how to pick girls up, I didn’t focus any attention on this area and I had some pretty awkward sexual encounters. One time I was so hesitant in bed with a girl that she said, “Is this amateur hour?”

Fortunately, sex is a skill you can master.

Years ago, I decided to read books about how to be good in bed and I experimented with a variety of different strategies. It took a while, but eventually, I was able to give most women multiple orgasms the first time we slept together. 

And this not only made the whole process of game more rewarding, but it also meant that if I wanted to see a particular girl again or I wanted to make her my girlfriend, I could easily make that happen.

Fortunately, the principles of good sex you learned in this article are simple to implement, you don’t need to learn fancy techniques, you simply need to be dominant, escalate gradually, and to pay close attention to what a woman is responding well too (so you can give her more of it).

Learning to be good in bed is actually much easier than learning how to get women into bed with you.

Now, if you’re inexperienced and concerned about not satisfying the women you sleep with, I recommend that you make a point to give more than you take. 

In most cases, bad sex is bad because the man didn’t put in enough time towards pleasuring the woman (or vice versa). To combat this, be particularly generous with foreplay so that even if the actual sex is somewhat lackluster, she will be pleased with the overall encounter.

If you liked this article, you can find more of my content on:

YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4kTcVi-b_9qQnMCRG9WggA
Snapchat: AveryGHaydenWhen you meet someone special, it’s easy to let yourself become overly-infatuated.

The problem is, with over-infatuation comes the risk of self-sabotaging your relationship with her.

If you are at risk of over-infatuation, and you’re doing any of the following: You need to stop.

# 1. Believing she’s perfect

She’s not.

When you’re initially attracted to a woman, your brain releases so much serotonin and dopamine into your body, that you can trick yourself into believing she is without fault.

The more you fall into the trap of believing her to be perfect, the more infatuated you will become, and the more you will feel unworthy of reciprocation of that infatuation.

# 2. Fantasising about your future life together

When you fantasise about your future life together with her, you put too much pressure on yourself internally to ‘make it work’ and can leave yourself devastated if it doesn’t.

# 3. Responding to every text she sends you with the immediacy and enthusiasm of a man who has nothing else going on in his life

Women love a man with independence and self-assuredness, not a man who is making it obvious that she occupies his every thought.

# 4. Ignoring family and friends because ‘no-one compares to her’

Besides the fact you’re alienating important people in your life, you’re also missing out on the opportunity to distract yourself from thoughts of her, with the company of others.

# 5. Using thinly veiled excuses to constantly text her

Every time you text her for no reason, you leave yourself vulnerable to second-guessing your decision to text her and feeling desperate and helpless as you stare at the read-receipt waiting for a response.

# 6. Believing that she’s the only reason you’re truly happy

It's not fair on her or you to believe that any happiness you feel is dependent on her attraction to you.

I know the sparks are flying and she makes you feel great, but don’t forget, you’ve experienced happiness long before she ever existed in your life.

Just as you're capable of experiencing happiness again if she were to ever leave.

# 7. Talking about her to anyone who’ll listen

The more you talk about a woman you like, the more it reinforces your desire for her internally. You start to make yourself emotionally dependent on her.

Plus, talking about the same woman over and over is a great way to annoy your family and friends.

# 8. Wondering ‘how did I possibly manage to attract this person?’

Questioning her attraction to you is unattractive in itself.

You need to remember: you attracted her because you have qualities that she finds attractive.

The more you question these qualities internally, the less they are apparent externally.

# 9. Trying to mould yourself into what you perceive as her ‘perfect man’

Her initial attraction to you is based on the man you already are.

Flaws and all.

Sure, it’s important to self-improve, but the more you try to become ‘perfect’ for her, the further you’ll stray from what initially attracted her to you.

# 10. Over analysing every interaction you have with her

Women sometimes say and do things for no reason in particular (just as men do).

If you believe that every move she makes is a secret message that, once decoded, will reveal her true feelings for you, you’ll send yourself insane.

# 11. Having no next date in the calendar

If you have no firm plans to next see a woman you’re dating, you can start to feel helpless and insecure.

Feelings of ‘will I ever see her again’ begin to occupy your consciousness.

You can alleviate a lot of these feelings by locking in your next meet-up.

# 12. Feeling like you own her

Infatuation often leads to feelings of possessiveness.

Possessiveness makes women uncomfortable and only pushes them further away.

# 13. Wanting to be her saviour

Just as it's easy to start fantasising about your future together, you can also start fantasising about being her white knight and saviour.

In putting these fantasies into action, you're likely coddling her, patronising her and overwhelming her.

# 14. Putting a pause on hobbies or career progression in favour of obsessing over her

Not only are you stagnating in terms of personal progression when you do this, you're also missing the opportunity to distract yourself from thoughts of her with other activities.

# 15. Constantly looking through all of her Facebook / Instagram photos

Besides continuing to build on your obsession with her, it also opens you up to feelings of jealousy over something stupid. Like when she flirtatiously responded to some handsome douche-bags comment on her photo from three years ago.

[Here's a link to the original post.](https://www.menwithmanners.com/dating/stop-being-obsessed-with-her)I saw a pretty girl standing on the street and I told myself I would talk to her. I initially wimped out and walked past her, but then I brought myself around to walk back and actually say hello.

I was really nervous but we talked for about 5 minutes just about what we did for work and what parts of the city we live in. I asked her for her number and she gave it to me! 

I tried texting her but she didn’t respond, but I’m so happy still that I was able to talk to her. Looking forward to meeting more people this wayGot rejected she told me she had a boyfriend. She had a mask on but I could see her jaw kinda drop and she said I am sweet. Doesn't matter I am riding a huge adrenaline high and feel amazing should have done something like that a while ago.

&#x200B;

Holy fuck this blew up, thank you guys all for the support! Literally the best community.

&#x200B;

Seen some people asking for what I said I really just asked her for drinks. She is a nurse at a clinic that I go (went?) to. I'm 24 and she was a bit older in her 20's. Me and her have chatted a few times and idk I went in to get a flu shot and asked her after the visit. Got super nervous when she said she had a BF so I just kinda ran out, wish I stayed a bit more calm. And yea its probably gonna happen a hundred more times but thats alright.Doing this on request from my last post. Some quick facts about me so you understand what kind of girl I am: very bookish/nerdy, activist, business field, dresses well, a bit artsy - I'm hipster lite in an extremely hipster place. The kind of guy I'm into would be very similar to me - well-read, works hard, and is capable of great conversation. Hopefully he also gives off confident 'I fuck really well' vibes. Now, if I'm already really into a guy he doesn't have to do kino/tease me/whatever for me to still be interested, but for guys that I had little contact with through okc/tinder, this is where game comes into play.

THE INITIAL PICKUP

1. Are you picking me up in public? Isolate me, somehow, from my friend(s). If there's just a few of us, chat us all up (social worth), and then find a way to separate me. Better if I'm sitting on a corner that you can sit on (instead of wedged between my friends). Start riffing off of me, then ask if I wanna go to the bar so you can get me a drink. If we're not at a bar, you really want to wait till I'm naturally separated -when we're all paying at the register, if I'm coming out of the bathroom, etc.

2. If you're out with friends, and you've already made some sort of contact with me, seeing you having fun/talking about cool things with YOUR friends is a tremendous source of social proof. Especially if there's a cute girl in the mix. If not, no biggie! That's what you're here for.

3. Are you messaging me online? Go to /r/okcupid for some general tips about pictures, profile, etc. As for first message, the best formula that works for me/on me (and I get around 50 messages per day on average) is ~2 sentences about something I've said on my profile, and then maybe a cheeky joke or tease to challenge or hook me. It really doesn't have to be some long love letter. Don't say I'm cute/hot/whatever in the first sentence (or at all). Don't bring up sex right away, even if her profile name is sluttymcslutterson. You're playing a longer game, here.

4. Texting before meeting - don't go super overboard with texting, but be funny, and jokey, so she'll know she'll have a fun time when she meets up with you. Set up a date as soon as you fucking can, within 7-8 flirty messages, imo.

FIRST DATE
Okay, here's the meat of it all! Some assorted, real things guys and girls have done to totally get into my heart/my mind/my cunt. Most of these are actually stories from one guy, who was the most perfect date I've ever experienced (and we are still casually dating/fucking each other mindless now).

1. Beamed at seeing me and hugged upon first meeting. Mm, you smell great (put on just a bit of nice cologne). Plus it's such a perfectly platonic way to break that kino ice. Do a side hug if you feel weird about it/she seems more introverted.
2. If online - read up on my profile and bothered me about things I said. It's key to recognize the things *she cares about* not just the things that you're familiar with. Tease me! Ask for my opinions. Gently disagree and challenge me about them. This is how a conversation works, so you're not just swapping stories. This is how a girl feels like she's more strongly connected to you. The best conversation I ever had of this nature was about whether or not tinder was destroying the dating scene (my opinion: no). He thought yes, but the good thing about it was that he was able to defend himself while being funny and NOT SOUNDING BITTER about it. Primo. Makes him seem like more of a stud that he doesn't mind that it's more of a woman's game on tinder.
3. Initiate kino FIRST and if she seems into it, then bring up sex as a total philosophical topic of discussion. So, not like "I'm into flogging and watching girls do yardwork in the nude, also I think you're sexy and I have tomatoes that need pruning" More like, "God, people are into some crazy things, aren't they? Like I wonder how that happens to everyone - did they have some weird childhood experience in the bushes and catching some teenagers doing it outdoors?" And if she seems seriously into THAT, then gently bring in personal stuff into the conversation: "I can see you being into some weird shit." But please don't do this unless the rapport has already been strongly built. Source: an actual conversation I had preceding the best, funnest sex I've ever had in my life.
4. Is it a multiple-location date? Small thing, but if we're crossing the street, put a hand on the small of my back. Sweet and protective without being so demanding like a hand-hold.
5. Talk to other girls. What? I mean just randos that happen to pass by. So with the guy I'm currently seeing, on our first date he went to grab his beer and the waitress accidentally sloshed some on him. He laughed and was super gracious, and had a brief fun conversation with her about the music selection (5-6 sentences). I could see that he was comfortable around other women, and the hot waitress seemed to be into it (waitresses are easy for this kind of social proof - they have to be nice to a certain point). Later when we went to a kitschy little museum, he briefly chatted up the front receptionist and made her laugh - which in some girls could incite minor jealousy, but the next thing he did was come over all grinning to me, put a hand on my waist, and said he really wanted to know what I was thinking of the art piece I was currently looking at. Perfect redirect of attention/worth.
6. Don't be bitter. Bitterness is not cute. If there's a topic you're bitter or genuinely embarrassed about, redirect the subject gently, or focus on the future instead of the past.
7. If you're out and walking about, tease her and take the chance to tap the back of your hand against her hip. It's sexual and sexy without being full on ass contact.

TAKING ME BACK TO YOURS
1. Have a clean place. Hang some dumb art on the wall. Also, I am a nerdy girl and will judge the FUCK out of your bookshelf. Every girl does this, I promise.

2. Have wine/beer. Or stop at a place before going back. Don't get a relative stranger blackout drunk, but have a drink or two to get the night flowin'.

3. At some point you're going to end up in bed/on couch to watch netflix and chill. Look, I know. You know. Press your leg against hers. Drop your hand into the crook between your legs. Reach out to hers, squeeze her leg. If she's got any exposed tattoos, trace them with your finger and ask her in a quiet voice what it's about/when/why she got it (be careful, if the tattoo is a date, I wouldn't suggest doing this because it might be a commemoration.). Lean into the crook of her shoulder, briefly. Turn towards her. If she wants to be kissed, she'll turn towards you.

There's more as well, feel free to ask questions. The most vague advice I could give you, which I know is frustrating to hear, is to exude confidence in what you're doing. I want to know that you like yourself and you're proud of who you are - let me get swept up in that feeling! Be cheerful and upbeat, be enthusiastic. All hallmarks of someone that's fun to be with.If you’re out with someone, and she begins becomes less talkative, doesn’t smile as much, gives shorter answers, and doesn’t maintain eye contact, it means her level of attraction in the present moment is low.  

Women don’t play ‘hard to get’— if they are attracted to someone, they will show it in some manner, even if they are more shy or reserved. If they shut down, it is a reliable indicator that they currently aren’t enjoying being around you, whatever the reason may be.

Confused, guys will try to compensate by being more talkative, make more  jokes, attempting to make her laugh and reverse course. While you should always have a lighthearted attitude towards things, getting her to laugh isn’t the best approach.

When you’re trying to put your best foot forward, have fun, carry the conversation, and you’re getting little back, it’s an unpleasant experience. If it becomes a consistent pattern throughout the night, there is no point pretending that you’re having a good time any more.

Mirror her behavior.  Give short answers, use less eye contact and appear disinterested by looking elsewhere, limit your smiling.  You’re not being manipulative in this instance, youre being truthful with how you feel. Trying to interact without someone who is cold and is giving nothing back emotionally is miserable. You don’t need to be rude or complain, just don’t hide the fact you’re really not having fun. No one should be expected to have fun with someone who visibly doesn’t want to be there.

Once this happens, she may adjust her behavior, because she sees you’re not willing to hold up the conversation for the sake of being polite and you have standards of how to be treated.  However if a girl is constantly vacillating between hot and cold, she either has a low level of attraction to you, or she seeks attention. At this point, you want to reassess if you want to have her around.  In most cases, the answer is no.

The same applies to texting. When a woman becomes less responsive, or shorter in her responses, guys will often overcompensate by texting more, spilling their emotions, when they should pull back and mirror the way she is communicating.  She will often come around when she sees that you aren’t as responsive, and that your world doesn’t revolve around her. She may also stop reaching out altogether. This is something you have to accept. There are no texting tricks or anything you can say to force attraction when it isn’t there.

Edit: You should be natural and be yourself, not put on a front, but this post is meant to serve as a warning to guys who feel that they need to go into overdrive when a woman acts cold. Some feel ‘instinctually’ that this is the best way to handle things, when in actuality it backfires and pushes her away further. So even if you feel like you’re acting ‘naturally’ in certain scenarios, it still can lead to more frustration.

Edit 2: This post is meant in the context of a date, not cold approach interactionI believe I have this ability where I can tell exactly how much a girl is interested in me. I think I developed this by growing up as a nice guy because nice guys just like girls are always reading faces trying to figure out if other people approve of what they say and do. 

Last Saturday night I was out with a couple friends and I was dressed really nice * this is important for later *. I start talking with these two girls and I start flirting with them and they flirted back or at least that's what I thought. Even thought it looked like they were flirting with me their eyes were all over the place like no eye contact for more then two seconds I knew there was no tension so I look at the hot girl in an attempt to get something going and I say " hey eyes up here " but then their male friend interrupts the interaction  I greet him and compliment his coat.  Then the next thing I know the girls start asking me to buy them drinks * remember I was very well dressed *. I was like I fucking knew there was nothing going on they were just pretending to flirt with me to get me to buy them drinks. And no I did not buy them shit. 

Morale of the story is eye contact. If it doesn't last for more than 2 seconds the girl is not interested.There are many girls out there. Some find you attractive and some don't, period.

Don't waste your time on those who don't find you attractive, it's nature, we don't attract everyone. Don't blame yourself and don't blame the girls.

Instead, just approach another girl and see if you interest each other.

Your purpose should be to find a **partner that you find interesting** and **who finds you interesting**.Last week I asked all 5 girls I was chatting to if they were up for grabbing a drink.
Not a single one of them even replied to me.

Yesterday I decided to record a voice message and send to each of them (a video which showed part of my face and my apartment). I wrote the message out beforehand and made it pretty humorous and wholesome.

As of 5 minutes ago all of them have replied and apologised for not replying and say they’re excited to hang out. 

I even sent one to a girl I randomly messaged on Instagram and she’s wanting to meet up now. 

My voice is admittedly deep and my apartment is pretty well furnished but I definitely wasn’t expecting this result.

It humanises the messages though so it makes sense why it works.

Maybe not a cheat code and obviously meeting in person is more effective but definitely something I would recommend you guys do if you haven’t had much luck with messagingThere is such a strong emphasis on being the right guy, being attractive, having game and having confidence. I get the sense alot of guys base their whole lives around this. It’s all well and good to land a date, even better if they’re attractive. We then try all we’ve learned to swoon her over, the aim of the game is that we attract them. So much so that it’s often easy to forget that the girl also has to attract you. 
Boys remember that any sort of relationship is a 2 way street, you could bring all the game confidence in the world and just because she agrees to some sort of relationship with you it doesn’t mean it’s a good one. You boys (most) are actually good guys, I see you helping eachother out no one wants to be lonely, you deserve good women who want to be with you. 

You ever spoken to a girl that just swept you off your feet, she was perfect? She takes interest in you, and wants your company, has traits you desire that are maybe rare. Waiting all that time is worth it. There is such a strong emphasis that the guy has to attract the girl maybe even some girls don’t think they need to promote the relationship but they do. If you take any less than that you could risk just settling for low hanging fruit and be blinded to the truth. When you realise you should only settle for someone who wants you and makes you feel truely special and made an effort to attract you and it’s not just lust you’ll be so so happy that all the girls before didn’t work out. We all want to feel special and guys deserve that just as much, so make sure she’s making an effort to attract you too.It’s not about you.  It’s not your looks.  It’s not your game.  Most of the time the outcome is inevitable.  She has a boyfriend.  You look like her abusive ex.  She doesn’t like White/Black/Asian guys.  She’s not dating right now.  She’s busy with work.  She’s moving in a week.  Her mom died yesterday.  She’s depressed.  She doesn’t like talking to strangers. She’s waiting till marriage.  The point is, after you have maxed your looks and game, the outcome is out of your hands.  It’s not that you are ugly - it’s any one of possibly a million different reasons like the ones I just listed.    Don’t let your ego get too invested in the game.  Some girls will use you for attention, some will be flakey, you will get rejected.  If you have done all that you can - it’s not you, it’s them.  Don’t get your ego too invested in the game.  Put your best foot forward and let the chips fall where they may.  Most of the time, it’s out of your control.  Don’t sweat it.# I used to hate them. Now, I love them. You should love them too.

I've learned getting rejected by a woman is actually good for you in a ton of ways.

It's way better than sitting there wondering what would have happened, anyway.

Here are 18 reasons why you should feel **GREAT** about getting rejected.

1. You just proved you're braver than 95% of guys, who would never have the balls to speak to a hottie like her.  
2. Telling someone you like them can be awkward for a few seconds. Not telling them can feel awkward forever. 
3. It's not rejection. It's a lack of chemistry.
4. You're not SUPPOSED to have chemistry with everyone. 
5. You're entitled to your actions, but the fruits are never guaranteed. You can choose to be proud that you took the right action. 
6. It's only uncomfortable if you decide it is. 
7. It's NICE to tell someone you're attracted to them. That's your good deed for the day. 
8. Even the most embarrassing rejections become funny with time. 
9. You took action. Women barely ever make the first move. Without taking action, you'll be single forever. 
10. The more rejections you face, the quicker you learn it's no big deal.
11. Rejection is character-building. You become icy, battle-hardened and generally give less fucks about anything. 
12. If you did something wrong, you can learn from it next time. It's XP in the bank. 
13. Rejection kills your ego. It keeps you humble. Always a good thing. 
14. The more rejections you face, the closer you are to finding your dream woman.
15. You're now free of any anxiety you had about talking to her. It's a weight off the shoulders. 
16. You spared yourself from the anguish of wondering 'what if?'  
17. You now have an opportunity to triumph in adversity by hitting on someone else. 
18. When you find your ideal woman, you'll be glad this not-as-good woman rejected you. 

**If you could use some extra help overcoming approach anxiety, send me a DM and we can talk more about it.**Many people underestimate how powerful daygame can be. If you go out on a regular basis and talk to women on the street or at the mall, park, or beach, you are probably one of few guys who actually do that. Because it's so rare for a guy to actually approach girls during the day, your attractiveness will shoot WAY up in a woman's eyes. 

The most attractive women - those Instagram models you pine after - get tons of attention on social media and tinder. But RARELY - if ever - do they get approached confidently and respectfully during the day. An average looking girl is more likely to get approached by guys because they fear shooting their shot with the really attractive women out of fear, so they'll settle for less attractive girls.

But because the really attractive women aren't getting approached... that is actually an ADVANTAGE. You will probably be the first, if not one of few guys who have ever approached her during the day in her ENTIRE LIFE.

A while ago, I went on a date with a fashion model I met on the street during the day. During our date, we got on the topic of dating and I asked her "How many guys approach you in public"? She answered: "Only once, and he didn't even ask for my number".

ONCE. In her entire lifetime. And she is a young, attractive professional model. 

I've asked other women similar questions, and their response is almost the same. Once, never, maybe a few times at best.

Daygame is literally a man's superpower. Even if your approach isn't that good, as long as you approach, then that is all that matters. Even if she isn't interested, you'll most likely make her day more than anything. That's because it's so rare for guys to approach women during the day in public. Most guys are too scared. The few that aren't afraid of approaching are a breath of fresh air to the women they meet.

So start approaching today. You never know what could happen.▪︎She gives you mixed signals = she is not interested 

▪︎She is cold and distant  = she is not interested 

▪︎She leaves you on seen = she is not interested 

▪︎She takes a long time to respond  = she is not interested 

▪︎She tells you that she's not ready for a relationship = she is not interested 

▪︎She feels confused about you = she is not interested 

▪︎She always find a way to not go out with you= she is not interested 

▪︎She makes difficult to set dates = she is not
 interested 

▪︎She goes out with you but she never let you get              close= she is not interested 

▪︎She responds to messages but never goes out with you= she is not interested 


I know, I know !  what I wrote above is pretty basic stuff but some men are caught in the fantasy of having something with someone and completely overlook how their girl is behaving. Remember  when a woman like you they  make things easy for you, and generally speaking women are not gonna tell you that they are not interested, even if she is your girlfriend or wife, they would just become cold and distant. 


So be aware of the signsYou have to fight against your emotions. I’m not talking about little fights against urges. I’m talking a full on WW3 mixed with Vietnam with a hint of Normandy type of full scale battle against your anxiety. 

When your first starting off and probably beyond, you literally have to tell your brain “fuck you” and take action anyway. Fuck laziness, fuck being tired, fuck not feeling like it, fuck being sad, fuck all of it. Every day I wake up at 6:30 to go to the gym, come home, study, go to school, study, study pick up and go to sleep.  

You think every day I want to do that shit? Hell the fuck no. But in life you have to take action against your emotions to become not who you want to be, but who your fucking meant to be. Figure what you want your life to be, live according to that. Take action to becoming that, regardless of how you feel now. 

Btw I approached a 10/10 girl today and I was nervous af when I came to the close and she could prob feel that. I still closed I got rejected. She said she was seeing someone but really appreciated it. I celebrate that victory and its on to the next. 

Bottom line is, if you let your emotions run your life, your gonna live the same bs life your living now with no changes. Your brain likes the nice little comfy routine your in where your ego is safe. It’ll keep you there forever. Trust me. 

Fight guys. Fight like your fucking life depended on it. Because believe it or not, it does.So I was told the gym is a sacred ground where you don’t approach women. I understood that and maybe out of fear of getting rejected never tried to cold approach a girl working out. But yesterday I broke that rule when this gorgeous stallion kept eyeing me while I was squatting, I have seen her at the gym before but always kept to my self. I didn’t talk to her then because I didn’t have anything to break the ice with. I noticed she was using one of those massage guns and just had a quick thought of asking her if “that thing works ?” I was a little tensed since she was wearing headphones and in between her sets. I waited for her to finish her set and asked her. She responded kind of cold and I went back to working out. But suddenly when I looked up she was standing there and started to talk about the massage gun and we started to chat about other things. Towards the end of the conversation I didn’t bother asking for her social media but instead asked her to put her number in my phone and she did!

I think it was an overall success but it’s too early to assume, will update this post as the story develops.

Update:

Sorry for the late update guys!
First of all I’ll address the “Stallion” comment lol
Some of you realized that yes I was referring to Megan thee stallion meaning a woman that is tall and fine (5'7 and over).

I have a busy schedule at work so and l started to reply to her text late and when we would see each other at the gym I kept to myself because I was focused on getting my sets in and leave. She always approached me and it would be a quick chat. We talked once about going out but I got busy and never followed up. She eventually got frustrated and sent me a long text saying how I am ignoring her and she’s not the type to chase someone who clearly isn’t interested. I told her the truth about being really busy and I said if she doesn’t want to talk anymore I understand that. She told me she’s never been shut out by a guy before and she’d like to go on a date. I eventually made some time in my schedule and we went to watch Space Jam(didn’t enjoy it at all btw) and dinner at this fancy seafood grill. During dinner I got a call from work about an issue in production(I am a developer for an IT company) so I was focused on that and after dinner I walked her to her car and left.

As of today she still sends me texts to check up on me but with the way my life is right now I don’t have time for a relationship. Which I plan on telling her soon. Overall I would say it was a success if the goal was to get into a relationship but that’s not was I going for unfortunately.

Also thanks for all the upvotes and comments!For ages I thought I was “unlovable”. My crippling fears of vulnerability and self-image really derived me from success, but I can definitely attribute my newfound success to a number of factors:

I had this realization that no-one would love me if I didn’t love myself. I picked up skateboarding as I’d always been interested in it, but never committed to it because I didn’t believe in myself and that hard work pays off if you put in the hard work. Sure, you might be terrible at a new hobby, but you need to accept this and allow yourself to progress - as well as not being too hard on yourself. This was my initial interaction with vulnerability. With skateboarding, you literally fall down, hurt yourself, dust yourself off and then go again. I just got immersed in the hobby, and stopped worrying about girls altogether. I also got psychological help. We’re a broken species with everything happening around us, and sometimes it really is OK to put your hand up and ask for help.

So for the juicy bit - I got a date with this girl from tinder. Our first meeting was brief - a beer at a pub and a fairly platonic chat with a bit of flirting. She had her arms crossed the whole time and kept her distance, but I could still tell she was interested. We then met up again about a week later, and I took her to the art gallery and some churros. We were flirting and she was starting to stand closer to me. Nonetheless - still relatively tame. Third date I invited her to my house and asked my parents to go out for a date as I wanted to invite her around. My parents were cool with that, and I cooked dinner. Safe to say, we didn’t eat much food and fooled around - got to third base but no sex. I was pushing for sex, but she said not tonight - I completely respected that but didn’t get salty and we continued making out and a bit of foreplay. 

Fast forward 4-5 days and I asked her to come over on the weekend. For the days building up, she asked about my past sexual experiences. I was completely transparent with my virginity status, and she was super accepting. She told me that she was into rough sex. I was a bit intimidated because she is very sexually experienced, but I also felt safe around her. She came over to play Mario kart, but the controllers weren’t working. We then started making out on my bed and the rest is history. I didn’t expect myself to perform like a pornstar, and either did she. It was quite uncomfortable and even painful because I have phimosis (very tight foreskin) but when I realized that I probably couldn’t make her feel good with my manhood, I decided to go down on her and use my fingers. She probably pretended to be turned on to make me feel better, but I just wanted to make sure she had a good time/felt desired genuinely. She was over the moon after, texting me straight away what a fun time she had. We were super intimate for hours after just lying on my bed in my room completely naked during the afternoon, with my whole family still in the house - I couldn’t give a fuck I was over the moon 😂

Realization - it’s an incredibly beautiful thing to be honest with yourself and your partners. Communication is key.*“Did you die the roots of your hair a darker color intentionally?”*

That was a pick up line I was told to use years ago when I was first figuring out my dating life. It was at a loud house party in high school. I was way too drunk, and she probably was too.

The line was supposed to be funny, but also convey “my higher status”. I wish I could say I felt like a douche saying it. But at the time I had no other alternatives. I do feel like a douche now admitting that I said that line.

No one told me I could just work on becoming a better man and I wouldn’t have to rely on tactics or lines.

**Tactics**

I know a lot of you guys are pretty young here. High school and college age. I’m not too far ahead of you, I’m only 26.

I see a lot of stuff here that is very tactical based. Truth be told, a lot of tactics do work. You can “neg” a girl and she will think your higher status, and maybe you can hook up with her later.

Except intelligent women who value and hold themselves to a higher standard. That’s what you aren’t taught. Sure, you can have sex with as many emotionally empty, approval seeking women as you want. If that’s your goal -- you’re probably on the right track.

I’m not here to say who’s right and wrong. I’ve gone down both roads. PUA routines, and just doing what I felt right. Both will get you results. 

What didn’t work for me with PUA material is that I’m an analytical introvert. Sometimes I get in my head. I don’t feel natural walking up to large groups of people and starting a conversation.

I also felt like a total jackass using other people’s words and routines. 

But you know what? I found a lot of success with not only dating and women, but my social life. 

This post is for the introverts who like connecting with people one on one.

**Not giving a fuck**

“Not giving a fuck” is a popular tactic because when you decide you are “not going to give a fuck” what you are really doing is not internalizing a woman’s lack of interest.

When a girl isn’t into you, it stings. So what does not giving a fuck do? Makes it sting less. 

But, it didn’t work for me.

In fact, I do give a fuck. I certainly give a fuck when a girl wants to go on a date with me. I want her to know I’m happy to share that moment with her. I’m also happy to be brutally honest with her and be clear on what I want in life. If that matches with what she wants, awesome, if not - that’s ok too.

“Not giving a fuck” can have negative effects. If you “never give a fuck” you are lacking the capacity to connect on a deeper human level. Sometimes it’s required to “give a fuck” and put yourself on the line.

ESPECIALLY introverts. Doesn’t it seem silly that we really shine with one on one connection, but we’re also supposed to “not give a fuck” when given the chance?

**Rejection**

The term “rejection” is completely ridiculous when it comes to dating advice. Rejection is a term used in business. Authors trying to get their book published get rejected because it needs improvement. Networks who pitch their reality show idea in LA get rejected because it’s not trashy enough for MTV.

When a girl isn’t into you -- she’s not into you -- no big deal. Rejection is a choice YOU make about the event. If you want to decide that you are ugly, not funny enough, or not confident enough because a girl simply wasn’t interested -- that’s your choice. 

OR… you can wake up and realize the world doesn’t revolve around you and stop taking it personally. 

She’s not into me? Thank you for not letting us waste each other’s time. The LAST thing I want is a date out of pity.

**Desperation**

The interesting thing about desperation is that it creeps into our lives one hit at a time. Just like a crack addict slowly sacrifices who they are just to get one more hit. It’s no different for guys wanting to figure out how to connect with women.

It’s not easy to admit desperation. It feels dirty, and we want to keep up our appearance of being strong and holding it together. After all, that’s being “alpha” isn’t it?
When I was still a virgin and I found out my friend had just gotten laid the I felt incredibly jealous. Of course I cheered him on like any good friend should -- but it ate me alive.

*“Fuck! What am I doing wrong? I HAVE to get laid soon or else I will fall behind.”*

I started drinking MORE at parties and reading more PUA material. I started treating getting laid like it was some kind of numbers game.

*“Tonight it will happen. I just need the perfect line and mix of whiskey and I’ll nail it!”*

I never nailed it.

**It’s a numbers game**

Actually, no it’s fucking not. 

It’s a numbers game if you are desperate, try the same thing every time and spray and pray when you go out to parties. 

* Using the same line and routine every time is a numbers game
* Getting really hammered hoping you say the perfect string of funny lines and witty remarks is a numbers game.
* Logging onto Tinder and following a copy and pasted formula that some other guy used on his vacation in Las Vegas is a numbers game.
* Reading someones “Field Report” on this forum and going out and copying what they do is a numbers game.

It’s NOT a numbers game when you have value to add to the world and to women. It’s NOT a numbers game when you find out what kind of women you’re into, and what kind of women are into you. 

It’s NOT a numbers game when you stop treating social interactions with other people as if it’s a zero sum game. 

If you’re always looking to gain or add another notch to your belt with women, you will never win.


**Create an environment you thrive in**

Get involved with group environments where you have common interests. List all the activities you like to do, then search for groups on meetup.com. 

If you can’t find a group for something you like, then start one. I made a video production group in the past and had 50 people sign up without me doing any promoting. 

If you like going hiking, find a hiking group. If you like playing video games, go to the next ComiCon. Whatever it is, find a group that you can connect with.

**Stop doing things you don’t want to do**

If you hate going to the bars or networking events and go because you feel like you have to meet women there -- stop. Create the life that you want. 

I am still terrible at meeting people in loud environments with excessive alcohol. For a while I tried to improve. Then I realized that I’d rather put my head through a window than try to talk to one more drunk girl about her psychology major.

Now I do activities I like. It’s a lot easier for me to meet people when I know they are there for similar reasons.

**Analytical Introverts**

You know you’re good at one on one connection. You know you aren’t the best at the first wave of conversation. All it takes is for you to get in your zone. The zone where it’s one on one, and you’re sitting with her at the coffee shop, and she realizes that you can listen and connect in such a unique way she hardly ever experiences.

You don’t have to change who you are. You don’t need to become more outgoing or extraverted. You just need to set yourself up for success.

EDIT: Cool to see this is taking off. If you are interested, I write about my dating life and helping out other introverted guys at www.thenewmanwithin.comStop playing the Game and learn some fundamental truth about life. 



A lot of guys learn seduction because



- They crave external validation. 



- They want to attract women to satisfy their ego.



- They want to show other guys "Hey my girlfriend is hotter than yours." 



- They want to attract girls because they want to prove something to someone. 




- They learn seduction because their own lives are boring. They have never worked hard for anything so they crave that sense of accomplishment from female validation. 



These are all the wrong reasons to want to attract women. If you recognize at least 4 of these reasons in your psyche, go to a therapist instead of attending a bootcamp. While a healthy amount of external validation is good, these superficial reasons to attract women often send guys in the bottomless hell of rejection loop. And even if you can attract some girls with that mindset you either attract those girls you don't really like or you quickly loose interest in that girl because you don't like yourself in the first place. 




**What does it really mean to be happy with yourself?**




No, it doesn't mean making crazy amount of money. There are tons of people from all over the world who has lived a comfortable and fulfilling life with a comfortable amount of income. 



To be happy with yourself means:- 



- Getting that Black Belt in BJJ after working for 6 years. 



- or Getting that Greek God physique you desire by pumping iron. 



- or Surviving a Navy SEAL hell week and receiving that glorious trident on your chest. 




- or Completing an Ironman triathlon. 



- or Creating that game you have always wanted to create and publishing it on steam. 



- or Hiking in one of the most magnificent places on earth. 




These are just a few examples of those things that can give you a sense of worth/high self esteem/happiness/feeling of fulfillment and so on. 



The best side of it is that once you have it, you feel so good about yourself that every people you meet can sense it. Your soul becomes purified from all the garbage pick up artist Bullshits that are common in the seduction community. You don't see girls as 10 or 5 or 7 anymore. Everyone you meet seems like an amazing person cuz you're amazing but if you're not good no matter who you meet You'll subconsciously feel unworthy and will never see the nice side of that person. 



If you feel like you need an instruction manual for everything you do in dating, if you can't fully be yourself, there is something seriously wrong and it's your responsibility take care of it. 




Have you ever heard stories like this? 



"The other day I met [.....] I was so nervous at first but man he was the nicest and the most humble person I have ever met." 



I have heard people talking about meeting Arnold & Franko, meeting Tom Cruise, meeting Alex Honnold, meeting Delta Force Operators, meeting the mighty Gurkhas, talking with the Life of Boris YouTuber on email on multiple occasions. 



I once met this pianist during a festival. I was a chess player back then and I said to him, "Do you know Magnus Carlsen and Bobby Fisher?" 



And he said, "No" 


I said, "They are some of the best chess players in history and you look like the combination of both of them." 



And then he went on to talk about the time he played Chess when he was in college. Again I have one thing to say about him - he was one of the nicest and the most humble person I have ever met. 



These people have so much inner fulfillment that they see good in all other people they meet. They have so much self love that they want to spread that love without expecting anything in return. If you meet one of them, you immediately like them cuz they are confident yet down to earth at the same time. So be one of them.What’s up guys,

Last week I wrote [a long rant here](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3bn6q4/looks_women_and_life_lessons_learned_going_from/) on looks and what it felt to go from unattractive to attractive. After posting it, I’ve been getting messages asking for advice how to address one or another appearance related issue, how to improve certain areas of your looks.

I’ve also been seeing a lot of posts that seek help with looks (directly or indirectly) so I figured why not make a single guide to help address most of these questions, so that we can avoid the general “just dress well”, “hit the gym”, “eat healthy”, “improve your body language” and similar answers that are frankly as useful as the ever-popular “be yourself”, “just talk to her”, “be confident!”

Alright,

So what this is (or hopefully will become) is a collection of best FREE guides available on the net that help you handle a particular area of your appearance. This is important – this guide is all about improving looks. **Looking attractive and being attractive are two different things**, they often correlate but not always.

I’ll split this guide into the following categories:

* Physique
* Style
* Grooming
* Body language / Posture

Now, as everyone else, I have my strengths and areas of expertise and there are areas that I’m more or less clueless about, other than I used particular resources to have them handled (physique / posture comes to mind). 

For this reason, I want to make this a crowd-sourced resource which means that your suggestions for articles and guides to include are as good as mine and I’ll edit to include/replace them on the go.

This also means that you should take everything you read with a grain of salt – for the resources I’ll be including, I’ve tested and experimented most of them (not all, some are recommendations from guys, whose opinion on that topic I trust).

Few notes about the recommendations:

* They need to be full, comprehensive “How to” guides on how to tackle a particular area of appearance, so let’s skip the “5 Reasons Why Squatting Is Awesome”, “3 Secret Tricks To Better Posture”, “How changing your sheets will help you clear your skin”, etc.
* They have to be available for FREE (if you need to pay/subscribe to something to read the guide, it doesn't belong here)
* When making a recommendation please link to a particular guide instead of the website/forum itself. Finding specific content on a large site can be overwhelming and time-consuming and that goes against the goal of this post.
* Reddit post recommendations are extremely welcomed and appreciated! I know that there’s a subreddit for pretty much everything these days and some of them have posts/guides that could give best paid content a run for its money, but frankly I don’t really explore other subreddits outside seddit and leagueoflegends (yeah, yeah, I’m a nerd), so I’m simply not aware of them – if you are, don’t be shy and share :)

Lastly, in the spirit that this is a crowd-sourced guide feel free to use/change/adapt/replicate it (I hope reddit doesn’t have any weird copyright rules for posts…)

*(Disclaimer: some of the guides included below are written by yours truly. The thing is I’ve been writing for my own and other sites/forums (mostly seduction) for a while now and I always write “How To” guides with the intention to make them the-only-article-you’ll-ever-need, so at the risk of sounding cocky, if I include a guide written by me I truly think that it’s the best/most comprehensive free guide available on the topic.)*

**How To Use This Collection:**

As you’ll soon see, there’s a ton of epic information here that if taken action on can help improve any area of your appearance. The problem with so much information it’s easy to get overwhelmed and just end up doing nothing.

So few tips to avoid that:

* **Focus on one topic at a time.** Get it handled (for stuff like style/grooming) or set good habits in motion (diet/hitting the gym/skin care/body language) and only then move onto the next.
* **Focus on your most pressing aspect first.** Don’t be the fat chick with pretty hair – it won’t matter how stylish or sexy you dress if you’re obese and, on the other hand, it won’t matter how toned and ripped you are if you’re hiding it under a loose hoodie all the time. You only look as good as your weakest point.

Now that we good this out the way, time for the good stuff.

**Physique**

Quite likely the most effective long-term investment in your appearance is to start working on your physique. It’s like preparing the canvas on which everything else like style, grooming, body language will be built on. The only issue is that it’s a long-term investment, especially if you’re trying to build new muscle or need to lose a lot of weight.

What might come as a surprise to many men is that the physique that is considered the sexiest, most attractive by women is not what you see in body builder magazines, it’s simply lean and muscular (ref: [The Ideal Male Physique — What girls want & what guys want to be](http://foxhoundstudio.com/blog/fitness-lifestyle/the-ideal-male-physique-—-what-girls-want-want-guys-want-to-be/) *note:* the survey and science behind is less than ideal, but from the discussions we’ve had on other sites on the topic and article itself with experienced seducers the results seem to match personal experiences too. Also, if you were to compare male models, who appear in women’s magazines tend to be about 10 pounds lighter than those that appear on men’s magazines)

Alright, the guides:

* [The 9 Categories of Trainee: Their Mistakes, How to Avoid Them, and What You Can Achieve When You Get Things Right](http://rippedbody.jp/physique-goal-setting-part-1/) - probably the best place to start your journey on improving physique, the guide goes through different starting points (fat-muscled/skinny/skinny-fat/etc.) and recommends approaches and goals for each category – great stuff.

* [My Leangains Guide — How I Used Intermittent Fasting To Lose 50 Pounds of Fat and Find My Six Pack](http://www.straightforwardfatloss.com/leangains-guide-fasting-fat-loss/) - the most comprehensive guide I’ve ever found on intermittent fasting and dropping fat. I personally use a program that is based on this concept but by a different author.

* [The Ultimate Weight Training Workout Routine](http://www.aworkoutroutine.com/the-ultimate-weight-training-workout-routine/) - when it comes to guides, this guy gets it! As comprehensive and complete as it gets. It takes you by step-by-step from setting goals to teaching you what to do to even sample workouts.

* [The Beginner Weight Training Workout Routine](http://www.aworkoutroutine.com/the-beginner-weight-training-workout-routine/) - beginner’s edition by the same author.

* [Workoutbox](http://www.workoutbox.com/workouts/) - I’ve been recently contacted by the author of this page and I must admit, I’m very impressed. The sample workout page includes… well… workouts... But part that really impressed me is that each exercise is accompanied by video on how to perform it.

* [The Kinobody Guide to Drinking Alcohol While Burning Fat & Building Muscle](http://kinobody.com/lifestyle/drinking-guide/) - it’s a bit weird to include a guide on alcohol in a section of improving physique, but the reality is that most of us enjoy an occasional (and not so occasional drink) and that doesn’t necessarily mean that we need to develop a beer gut just to accommodate all that liquid. Instead, we can consciously incorporate this social part of our life into developing our physique.

* [Reddit's Guide To Bodyweight Training](https://www.reddit.com/r/bodyweightfitness/wiki/faq) - it takes a form of a FAQ but is still very comprehensive and easy to follow. The recommended routine can be found [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/bodyweightfitness/wiki/kb/recommended_routine)

*[Your recommendations. A full guide on bodyweight training would be great.]*

**Style**

Very few things can transform your image and attractiveness as quickly as the clothes you wear. No, you don’t need to spend thousands on expensive designer brands or know jack-shit about fabrics and stitching to reap the benefits of dressing sexy.

I’ll split this category into two – **fundamentals** and **misc.** The fundamentals, as the name suggests, need to be handled no matter what, otherwise you are shooting yourself in the foot when it comes to looks. Misc. part will help you take your “nice” look and make it “sexy”.

**Fundamentals**

* [How To Identify Your Style And See If It’s The Best Option For You](http://sexystyleforjoe.com/how-to-identify-your-style/) - the article starts off with two tests to help you identify what your current image communicates and then check if its the best option for you based on your personality, goals, where you meet women. Very helpful when you're "well-dressed" but not getting the positive feedback from your type of women.

* [/r/MFA Fit Guide](https://www.reddit.com/r/malefashionadvice/comments/ehrtv/shujins_comprehensive_fit_guide) - basic guide to fit not much more to add. Well, okay, I can say from experience that for seduction tighter cuts will usually outperform more conservative cuts.

* [How To Wear Colors For Men – Become One Of The Few Who Doesn’t Suck At It!](http://sexystyleforjoe.com/how-to-wear-colors/) - one of my own epic guides that goes step-by-step through one of the most overcomplicated topics in men’s style – how to wear colors. The difference between looking bland, boring and “who’s that guy?”

* [How to Layer Clothing With Style](http://www.artofmanliness.com/2013/02/21/how-to-layer-clothing-men/) - layering, the style hack that can make you appear more muscular or hide a beer gut. Use it wisely.

* [The Art of Pattern Mixing](http://www.fashionbeans.com/2012/the-art-of-pattern-mixing/) - how to wear patterns and show that you know what you’re doing.

* [Men’s Accessories 101: Avoid Looking Bland](http://sexystyleforjoe.com/mens-accessories-101-not-look-bland/) - a complete guide on accessorizing. If you ever wondered what’s the easiest way to have a woman approach you in a bar… well… this is it.

**Misc.**

* [Introduction To Dressing For Your Body Shape](http://www.fashionbeans.com/2013/introduction-to-dressing-for-your-body-type/) - a guide on how to dress for your body type to make the most out of the physique you already have.

* [Fashion for Men: The Primer on Looking Amazing](http://www.girlschase.com/content/fashion-men-primer-looking-amazing) - a primer on men’s style specifically for meeting women and dating.

* [Maximizing Your Sex Appeal: How To Pick Clothes To Go With Your Sexy Physique](http://kinobody.com/lifestyle/maximizing-your-sex-appeal-how-to-pick-clothes-for-your-physique/) - a guide for muscular guys on how to make the most out of their epic physique and use clothes to maximize sex appeal.

* [Pinterest](https://www.pinterest.com/sexystyleforjoe/style-inspiration-for-men/) - for those too lazy to learn about men’s style (you still need to have the fundamentals handled) I have a page where I collect seduction-friendly outfits from pinterest. Pick your favorite and copy.

*[Your recommendations]*

**Grooming**

Alright, we’re picking up speed – just two more categories left to cover. When it comes to grooming it really boils down to habits: having a beautiful, vibrating skin, healthy hair, the difference between rocking a monobrow and eyebrows that suit and looking flattering on your face really boils down to those little morning and evening routines we do anyway (the only exception I can think of is getting a haircut).

* [Sexy Man’s Grooming Guide, Part 3: Choosing a Hairstyle](http://www.girlschase.com/content/sexy-man-s-grooming-guide-part-3-choosing-hairstyle) - complete guide on how to choose a haircut (and facial hair) based on your hair, face shape and facial features.

* [Sexy Man’s Grooming Guide, Part 4: Styling Your Hair](http://www.girlschase.com/content/sexy-man-s-grooming-guide-part-4-styling-your-hair) - a follow up to the previous article that focuses on how to style and manage your hair on a daily basis. Make sure to read the comments on this article too, there are some brilliant tips by one of the most prolific seducer that I know off on what he uses and how he rocks his hairstyle.

* [Complete guide to acne](http://www.acne.org/about-acne.html) - not exactly a single guide, but as far as I‘m aware, this is the best collection of resources when it comes to acne (I‘ve used their regiment kit personally too)

* [Sexy Man’s Grooming Guide, Part 1: Skin Care](http://www.girlschase.com/content/sexy-man-s-grooming-guide-part-1-skin-care) - a guide on improving your overall skin condition by creating a skin care routine based on your skin type and developing good habits. Note: I‘ve been now experimenting with diet-based „tanning“ for a few months now (covered in the article) and must say that results are a bit lackluster.

* [Fake Tanning | Tanning Beds, Spray Tan, Sunless Tanning Lotions](http://www.iamalpham.com/index.php/topics/fake-tanning-options-how-to-apply-tanning-lotion/) - a video guide on using tanning products.

* [Simple Guide To Everything Manscaping (Or how to NOT look like a Chewbacca)](http://sexystyleforjoe.com/simple-guide-to-everything-manscaping/) - a guide on dealing with body hair (from eyebrows to crotch and everything in between)

* [How to Be Thorough in Your Oral Hygiene Routine](http://www.wikihow.com/Be-Thorough-in-Your-Oral-Hygiene-Routine) - I hope that most of the stuff in this guide on oral hygiene doesn't need to be said and is common sense, but just to be thorough, I‘m including it.

* [Having a Male Scent That Fills Women with Lust](http://www.girlschase.com/content/having-male-scent-fills-women-lust) - a guide on smell that finally convinced me to stop stressing about cologne (I still use two: one for social situations and one as my signature smell for nights out).

* [Simple, yet practical guide to cologne](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskMen/comments/2iiwxb/what_cologne_should_i_buy/cl2ms6f?context=3) - it's a reddit comment that managed to capture the essence of choosing the right cologne with practical recommendations. 

*[Your recommendations. I‘d especially love to include a guide on colognes simply as an alternative.]*

**Body language**

The way you carry yourself can make a tremendous impact on your attractiveness. Not only that it can and will impact the way you feel and even can help speed your process when it comes to improving physique (as you‘ll learn in the first recommendation).

* [MOBILITY WOD Episodes](http://www.mobilitywod.com/episodes/page/7/) - it might sound strange, but the best resource I found on improving your posture and body language has nothing to do with seduction. Heck, it‘s not even a guide, but instead a collection of video episodes that go step by step and teach you how to correct your movements (when I first started experiment with this it was mind blowing. Heck, using few simple stretches removed my shoulder aches - that alone is worth a place here!). This is originally meant for athletes to help boost their performance, but very applicable for improving your appearance and seduction too.

* [Sexy Body Language for Men (Learned from Hot Girls)](http://www.girlschase.com/content/sexy-body-language-men-learned-hot-girls) - one of the best pieces on attractive body language specifically for pick up and looking sexy.

* [Eliminating Unattractive Body Language](http://www.kinowear.com/eliminating-unattractive-body-language/) - this is a lite, quick guide on attractive body language. It‘s the absolute basics, but it‘s a good idea to remind ourselves about them once in a while. 

* [Develop a Strong He-Man Voice by Using the Voice Nature Gave You](http://www.artofmanliness.com/2011/11/13/masculine-voice/) - a really cool guide that will help develop and improve your own voice.

*[Your recommendations. If anyone knows of full guides on Alexander Technique it would be a great addition to the list. I‘m also currently experimenting with facial exercises, but couldn‘t find a free guide to share.]*

**Honorable mention**: [I Am Alpha M.](https://www.youtube.com/user/AlphaMconsulting/videos) imho it's currently the best site for men who want to improve their appearance (the videos in particular), over the years Aaron created a video for pretty much every appearance related topic and the only reason why I haven't included them in the list (well, only one) is that they usually are "bite size" and don't really suit this "full guide" format.

Aaaannddd I guess that‘s it. Hope you'll find this useful!

Really looking forward to your recommendations (we can add/replace current guides so that we only keep the best).

Cheers
I see a lot of decent advice on here for men who struggle to get women. The one thing Id like to add is; no matter what your approach is, we know you want to copulate with us. Unless you’re really good looking and funny, most women will see your interest as a minor threat. Another guy on our tail, ya know? It’s not always 100% conscious but it’s in the back of our minds. With all that being said, I’d like to outline 2 strategies that I think work well and why they relate to what I’ve said above. 

1) Be really bold and open about how bad you want to have sex with them. - The reason this works is because we think we must be 1 of many women you’re hitting on and trying to sleep with. This reduces the threat because you couldn’t be all that fixated on us if you’re being that bold. Also, we know this strategy works for tons of men. You’ll face a lot of rejection but it does work.

2) Be aloof. This works well in a setting that you’re in close contact with them often(office, school, church, etc). When men are aloof, it allows our guard to drop and gives US the possibility to think of you in a curious and even sometimes sexual way. If we start asking ourselves “wait, is this guy not attracted to me?” It gets in our head and now we actively want you to want us. My fiancé is super quiet and before we actually dated, I really wanted to see his reaction to seeing me naked for this first time. His aloofness created this giant mystery about what he would be like in bed. 

Okay that’s pretty much it. Thanks for listening to my Ted Talk.I don't know about you guys but I have seen way too many posts about 14-15 yo kids asking on how to "get" girls. Like: 
https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3f1xw5/16_year_old_high_schooler_requesting_some_insight/
https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3eyukc/14_yo_first_approach/
https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3f2500/any_help_for_a_15_yo_trying_to_learn_more_about/
If you take a good read at these posts, they are outright ridiculous for these kids.

Assuming that you are still going to school, there are plenty of people to talk to at school. At this point in your life, all you need to worry about is the people around you and the friends that you make in school, and maybe even your education if you want to get ahead in life.


Stop trying to fake alpha and be yourself, learn what makes you you. There's no trick to inner game and outer game and pickup lines and hook up tricks. Find yourself first before you try to change yourself. 

Getting a girlfriend or getting girls to like you, is not about status and power or showing of to your buddies your prize. It's more than that, it's about finding someone in life that you are compatible with, someone who you can truly enjoy being around and share the details of your life. 

And for those of you who try to improve your "inner game" to go after this one girl you feel in love for, I'm willing to bet half of you don't even know what love is and how much you need to care for that one person that you love. 

Tl;dr Stop trying to "pick up" girls, go out, talk to people, have fun, and make friends. You are too young to worry about tips from this sub.
Hello everyone! I am really happy because few days ago I reached a huge milestone for my self-development and my sex-life. So I wanted to share this experience with you guys, and tell all you late bloomers out there that with consistent work, it is possible!

A little bit of background:

* Male, southern European, 33yo. Engineering degree. Good job. Renting my own place. Have a car (Though IMO, none of those really matter anything).

* I consider myself relatively un-attractive. I am short (5'6" on good days) and not a great face either. I keep my wordrobe a bit unconventional/flashy, but everything is good-fitting. I am relatively slim (more like skinny-fat I suppose) and have moderate-severe scoliosis. I am currently doing PT to fix these. I used to lift but stopped because it worsened the scoliosis. IMO, fixing my posture was way more effective at improving my looks that it was building muscle.

* I have been really struggling with girls since teenage years. Had massive school crush for 5 years who never even acknowledged me. Then got unrealistic crushes with various girls, even at late 20's. Through my 20's I did go on several dates which I sucked, or got ghosted. Looks never was my strong point so I sucked on dating apps as well. 

* Like every average frustrated champ not having as much sex as he'd like, I have been hanging around r/seduction quite a lot. TBH, all the seduction and pick-up stuff helped a lot. I feel that techniques, and lines, and date games, and all that are fine, and everyone involved in seduction should know them because they can spice things up and give you a guideline on what to say/do when your mind blacks-out completely, and also give you a pretty straight idea how flirting works and what exactly is the role of the male in the relationship. However, I feel that at the end of the day, what makes a person interesting is his inner self, his values and, most importantly, his intelligence and sense of humor (and nothing of these can be learned from pick-up books). Mark Mason's "Models" and "The subtle art of not giving a fuck", and also "How to win friends and influence people" were really the most impactful and helpful stuff I have read. Of course the change didn't happen overnight

* Over the last few years I picked up some social hobbies (social dancing, language class, group PT), which helped tremendously with becoming more social and self-calibrating all my social interactions by helping me get out of my head and decreasing the feeling of being judged by others. I had to essentially re-learn several social cues and how to behave like a grown up man (you could say I am a very-late-bloomer)

* Never did therapy of any kind, never took any type of drugs, never visited a prostitute. I just constantly pushed myself to get out of my comfort zone

* Last time a girl saw me sexually was like 1 year ago. We dated for a month or so, but I was such a pussy and didn't fuck her, and she had her own set of issues as well. She ended up ghosting me. I did go to a couple of dates since then, but I blew them by being in-decisive and/or awkward.

OK now to the fun stuff:

* Met an OK girl at a party (like 6/10). 23yo. I talked to her (I admit I run a couple of lines with her), teased her, build some comfort and a bit a attraction and eventually took her number. Immediately she was very receptive and investing a lot (texting first several times, wanting to strike up a conversation, etc.) 

* I proposed coffee and she agreed in an instant. We talked for like 2 hours or so. I went for the kiss and she was receptive. She turned out to be an avid hugger/kisser and she got more and more investing. 2 days later we went out once more and after the date she came to my place and we had sex. We met again last Saturday and she slept over as well. So I had sex 2 times already (3 if you take into account the wake-up fuck as well)

* I didn't tell her it was my first time, but I wouldn't mind telling her, had she asked.

* Sex was pretty much what I expected it to be. It was a bit awkward the first time, but overall a great experience! I am not a very experienced in female sexuality, but IMO, she had a great time as well. Well, I consider that soaking up my sheets is a plus, right?

* Now she is super-investing, texting me good-morning and good-night stuff. She really likes me and she is communicating it in every way. I must admit this is a great feeling considering I was alone all my life! I am planning to keep going as long as it feels good, but I do want to keep experiencing around, because I feel like this is the beginning of my sexual life and not the end. I tried to be pretty clear on this part from my side.

* The fact that I am not super attracted to her makes me act so much more relaxed. She even told me herself that the most attractive thing on me was/is my confidence and my chill.Neediness. Thirstiness. Attachment to the outcome. Needing her to like you. Needing the validation.

Time and time again, I see a guy start talking to a girl. She’s into him, things are going great, but then he will do one of two things:

&#x200B;

1. He will try overly hard to make her like him. He will try to make her laugh with silly, clowney jokes. He will try to get physical when it’s obviously not appropriate.
2. He will be too scared to mess it up. In his mind, this is the one girl that likes him, and that paralyzes him. Any move could mess it up. So he stays in his shell, too anxious to make any moves or show any part of his personality.

These two things taint the relaxed vibe.

Overcompensation creates an awkwardness.

Over-shyness fizzles out the interaction.

Your sheer ability to assess the vibe is compromised if you are too thirsty.

You will think that she’s not into when she actually is. You will think you can’t take ballsy action when you actually should.

How do you solve this? Be okay with yourself no matter what happens.

Stop seeking her reactions. Focus on yourself. Be okay whether she likes you or not.

Realize that there’s nothing to win, and nothing to lose.

If you get her, great, you’ll probably be thirsty again in a couple days.

If you don’t, great, you went for it, did your best, and nothing bad actually happened.

Being in limbo is the worst position.

Accept that not every girl will like you, and that you can’t get every girl. If you accept the burden of rejection, you will also be rewarded with the prize of success.

When you notice yourself being overly adoring about any one girl, catch yourself, center yourself, and detach from that mindset.

Be in love with your actions. Be in love with the progress you’re making. Put emphasis on your actions and intentions, not the results or outcomes.

[Best of luck you guys,](https://www.youtube.com/c/SeanSocial?fbclid=IwAR39CXe0n8yhoUutEkcOvWonFLMed0xJ4d3i6L5vVrmfiueT2CpU1sGcyE4)

\-Sean H.  Sometimes it can be tough at the start to have the creativity and speed to flirt and build tension. It can help to have some simple lines that can be used in a variety of situations. Not all of the ones I list are super direct or seductive, but that makes them simple. Plus, they just make situations more fun, which a girl likes. These are my top 10 reliable lines that I'll often use:

&#x200B;

* **"I can definitely beat you in that!"**
   * This could be said when she mentions something like bowling or snowboarding. "O I could totally beat you in bowling" or "I could kick your butt down the mountain if we went."
   * This adds a fun competition and excitement that you can playfully argue about.
   * It is even better if you can actually play the game. Then you could say "Okay, we are going bowling then, and I will bet you a round of drinks I win."
* **"Oucchhhh, I feel like I should be offended."**
   * This can be said when she playfully calls you something or teases you. If she says, "you're kind of a redneck aren't you?", that would be a perfect time to say this. You have to exaggerate the ouch and what you say so she knows you are joking and not insecure, but it is pretty easy to get that across. Just say it with a smile.
   * It shows you can take a joke and have fun with her teasing. 
* **"I think I just fell in love." or "I might fall in love if you say that." or "I may have to marry you      now."**
   * If she says something you strongly agree with like "I love Led Zeppelin!", that would be when to use this. This is another one to say with exaggeration.
   * It shows you are passionate about something and you  like that she is into similar things to you. It is a fun way to show you  are into her.
* **"Welp, I am just going to go and act like we never met." or "I don't even want to talk to you anymore."**
   * Say this when she says something you disagree with, such as "I'm not a huge fan of dogs." This is the reverse pretty much of the one above.
   * It is a good way to tease her and add a little push/pull tension.
* **"Is it weird that that turns me on a little?"**
   * This one is a little more advanced and should be used further on once you can tell you both are already connecting. Say you both are dancing and she puffs on a Juul, you could say it then.
   * This is a good way to introduce sexual tension, but make sure to use this at the right time and with a joking tone.
* **"Ok don't judge me, butttt...."**
   * Use this when you are about to reveal something playfully secretive, such as "Ok don't judge me, butttt I have watched a decent number of rom-coms." Say it jokingly so she knows you aren't actually insecure.
   * It is a good way to open her up to teasing you, which is fun and builds more tension. Getting that back and forth of teasing and flirting is what keeps the conversation from being boring.
* **"You're honestly the worst."**
   * This is good to say if she teases you somehow, such as "You know, I don't think you're very good at golf." 
   * It's another good way to introduce push/pull and teasing.
* **"You seem like that" or "I do get those vibes from you."**
   * I like to say this one if they tell me something like "I'm studying to be a teacher."
   * This tends to pique their curiosity and wonder why you made that judgement about them. People like to know what other's think of them.
* **"I'm really only hanging out with you for \_\_\_\_"**
   * For example, if she has a dog that you like, you can say "I'm really only hanging out with you for your dog."
   * It is a good way to show you are into her, but joke around and tell her you're into something besides her.
* **"Prove it."**
   * This is a good one to say if she says "I am stronger than you." or "I could beat you in a fight." or raises any sort of competition to you.
   * It opens the door for physical competition or fun battles.

&#x200B;

These take practice to perfect how and when to say them, but they're relatively easy lines to keep in your back pocket. Most of them should be said with a smile or joking tone to show your playfulness. Good luck!Quick Preamble: I live in Vegas, home of the world's largest female egos. Everything here is Club/Ultra Lounge Game/Bar Game with 6s who think they're 8s and 8s who think they're 10s, and 9s who think they're God's Gift to humanity.

The most asked question to any man good with women is "So what did you say to her?". Men assume there is some universal line that all women swoon for. I usually tell them "Just be honest, say what's really on your mind, she already knows you're there because you want to sleep with her."

But then I thought, "Why can't there be a universal line? Something simple and charming enough to throw out on any woman?" So what I did was go out and use a variety of canned openers and saw which one got me the best responses. The winner:

"Tell me, are you as interesting as you look?"

We've all used it a dozen times, but what I found is, when I used it exclusively, I never failed. I didn't always get a kiss or a one night stand, but I never bombed. Ever. I used it on women by themselves, small groups, large groups, every race and ethnicity I can think of and I never got blown out of the water. 

It hits everything you want: Confident, Challenging, Honest. Your focus when meeting new women is to find out "What She's Like" and this line gets straight to the point. It also gets her hamster spinning like nothing else: "Is interesting good or bad" "What about me does he find interesting" "Oh god what if i'm not interesting at all and he  leaves". You instantly demonstrate higher value with one simple question because you're challenging her to live up to your expectations. 

In recent weeks I've used this line exclusively and everywhere, from Bars/Grocery Stores to OKCupid and PlentyofFish. I've never had success like this. Ever. 

What I'm looking for is for the men of seddit to play around with this line and let me know how it works for you. I've been sharing it with my approach anxiety friends and it's helped remove a lot of their fear and I'm hoping it works as well for you guys as well!*After lurking on this subreddit forever and learning so much here, I thought I’d finally contribute something. I’ve collected the most helpful Reddit posts that have helped me quickly improve over the past 4 months and this post will be an organized overview of my favorite ones. If anyone has any additions they want me to make or anything I should correct, please let me know. Thanks for reading.*

---

The two posts I will link below have helped me tremendously and I really hope readers here will have a chance to look over these. 

**1: How to Build Self-Esteem**

This is one of the first posts I read from Reddit and I think it’s a VERY important aspect of inner game that should be understood before getting into a lot of the methods here. If you have any time, please read over this guide carefully:

https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/fyv2uo

**2: Guide to Bootcamps (Online)**

I know most people already know about this already but I thought I’d share it again. This is a really helpful post that made it easy to find the cheapest online bootcamps since it was much easier to attend than having to drive far for an expensive bootcamp. Bootcamps are the EASIEST way to improve in my opinion as long as you are prepared to do a little work. The original post is on r/dating but here is a repost:

https://www.reddit.com/r/LearnSeduction/comments/ipgvdk

---

These next two posts were also very important to my improvement but I’d rank them as a little less important than the previous two I read these in my advanced stage of seduction once I was already getting a good amount of dates & experiencing a decent amount of success.

**3: Extending Conversation Forever**

This was a post I read later in my development but I think it’s good for anyone at any stage. It’s actually a sidebar post from this subreddit but I figured a lot of you may still need to be reminded about it. Try to read this post if you can read over it carefully once or twice:

https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/4seyc9

**4: Discipline Subreddit Summaries**

This is a little outside of the seduction category but I still think it’s super important for the majority of members here. This user has summarized  all of the top posts of any subreddit related to discipline and created a handy cheatsheet for anyone to easily look over. If discipline or motivation is a problem you might be having trouble with, check out this post:

https://www.reddit.com/r/getdisciplined/comments/b9w7fx

---

The following list contains links to other articles that I think are crucial to your development in game & social skills. Although the four links above are more important and should be read first, these next ones will also help you a lot if studied and internalized properly. Here are the next 8 reads you should check out:

**5: Guide on How to Ask a Girl Out**

https://www.reddit.com/r/dating/comments/bm84zl

**6: How to be Confident**

https://www.reddit.com/r/confidence/comments/g5pxck

**7: From Friendzoned to Constant Dates**

https://www.reddit.com/r/dating/comments/bgukoq

**8: Men’s Guide to Looking Attractive**

https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3cju8z

**9: An Observation on Modern Dating**

https://old.reddit.com/r/dating/comments/c61hkv

**10: 3 Conversational Tricks to Excite Anyone**

https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/ea2qi9

**11: Guide to Dating Apps**

https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/a01mdj

**12: 40+ Dates in 9 Months**

https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/64ehns

---

So there is the most important links that helped me on my journey to seduction improvement. If you have any links that you think I should add, please let me know in the comments.

As I said earlier, the most important links you should read if you don’t have much time would be the first four articles that I linked in the beginning. These helped me a lot while also significantly cutting down the amount of time I spent working on seduction so that I can work on other passions in my life.

*Thanks again for reading & let me know if this has helped you at all!*As I got older, and looked back at my life, I didn't like how a lot of interactions went due to my horniness.  When you're horny, you do stupid things and you allow stupid shit to happen like a woman making you jump through hoops in hopes of sleeping with her.

In order to successfully escalate sexually, you need to get the girl hornier than you.   When a man begs her to sleep with him, it puts him in a situation where he is at her mercy.  Women don't respect men who they can manipulate with sex.  You have to get into a position of power.  This requires patience and a little restraint.

It could take weeks, months, years... or even hours.

If a woman likes you, she'll like being around you.  The trick is don't spend too much time around her.  Allow her to miss you.  When you talk to her, if you're at this point in your relationship, grab her by her waist or smack her on her butt.  Don't try to get her to sleep with you, just play with her in a sexual way.  If you text her, don't send dick pics.  Instead, flirt with her and give her something to think about in your absence.  She will look forward to seeing you again.  When she sees you, she will get excited.  She may even go out of her way to be available to you.  You want to build this desire in her.  You want her to start suggesting certain things like:

"I got the house to myself.  Wanna come over" if she lives with other people.

"Wanna get out of here?" if you met her at the bar or club.

"I just wanna rip your clothes off" while she's in very close quarters to you.

Be cool.  Move in a control, steady manner.  Don't look like you're about to get lucky.  You want her to feel like she's getting lucky.

This may be a new concept for some of you, but you don't have to get the ass that same night.  This gives you a shot clock timer in your head and it's making you look thirsty.  Instead, know and understand that when you don't beg and plead for her to sleep with you, but build up sexual desires in her, she is at your mercy... and this is how women like it.  This is why a lot of women chase men who treat them like shit.

You don't have to treat her like shit to get the same good results that these men get.  As a matter of fact, most nice guys don't do what I explained.  In their mind, they feel that being nice should be rewarded.  With you, you're building a sexual desire in her.  You're not giving the impression that you should be rewarded, but, instead, you're the bringer of sexual excitement.  Some women are conservative and won't be so aggressive, so you want to isolate these women so they feel like they can let loose.  Make her feel comfortable for letting out her inner slut.  You can tell her something like,

"It's okay to be turned on.  You can touch me.  I don't bite."

When you're able to build a strong sexual desire in women, while staying cool, calm, and collected, this may make her think she has to work harder to please you.  So she may do some freaky shit (shit you like) just to please you.I was at work, she came in and was smiling at me. We talked a little bit and I asked for her number. She said no and that she had a bf and I wasn’t even mad. I fucking did it. That was the first time I have ever done that.

Edit: thank you all so much for the rewards and comments! I am pretty sure this is the most attention I have ever gotten on a Reddit post and most of it was positive. I just want to clear one thing up though, a lot of people seemed upset that I said I wasn’t even mad because I shouldn’t be mad in the first place. I know that, I didn’t mean mad as in literal anger, I just meant I’m not upset that she said no or hurt over it.

That is all, thank you guys for all of the positive comments :)Also wanted to say thank you to everyone who commented and gave advice. I very much appreciate it. But on to the update... 

UPDATE: Well boys. No sex but honestly, not the main goal. And I'd still consider this mission complete.

Was a great night. Walked around, got food, sat in a little park area, talked a lot. Somehow the topic of anxiety popped up and when I mentioned I had some anxiety she really pushed for me to explain more about it. So I let the honesty flow. I didn't mention virginity though, just about general anxiety and intamacy. After that conversation she kissed me. 

I also did not realize that she had work at 4 AM (she works from home) today 🤣 so I drove her back to her house afterwards. But as I was driving away she called because apparently the people she lives with accidentally locked her out and they were all already asleep, phones off, no way to contact them. 

So I picked her back up and brought her back to my apartment where she was able to change her work from 4 AM to 8 AM. We watched a little bit of YouTube in bed and then cuddled and spooned the rest of the night and passed out. Then took her back this morning at 7 AM.

Good times. Gonna hang out again after she gets back from vacation. Hope all goes well and I build up my own confidence.Was at a store and I saw a female nicely dressed walked up to her and said “hey I just wanted to tell you that your outfit is very cute” she blushed and said thank you I said well have a nice day and walked away we bump into each other in the check out line she asks me if I have a SO I said I didn’t so she ask for my phone and type her number I didn’t even register what was going on until I got my phone back. I’m a very quiet person and don’t go up to ppl often.

Edit Update..  wow I didn’t think I would get so many likes and given the cartoon thingys not sure how you call them

I was so busy at work that I didn’t have time to send her  message but at lunch I sent her a message saying it was me the guy from the store. And she responded to me very quickly which I’m shocked since most girls I use to talk to alway texted me an hr later or something like that. She asked me again if I have a relationship with someone but I told her that my answer hasn’t changed and it’s still a no since I been single for almost a year now. So we go back and forth but I can’t really text at work due to regulations and I don’t want to get in trouble. So it was a few hrs before I texted her again but we decided to go to lunch on Thursday! Hopefully it goes okay I’ll update after the lunch on Thursday

New update... lunch 

So just got home from having lunch with her things were good we were there for about 2 hrs I had to leave due to having things to do. But it was good I asked open ended questions and just let her talk she got embarrassed when she realized she was the only one talking but I told her I’m good at listing but not so much for talking so I don’t mind. I asked her why she gave me her number she said that I’m completely different then she’s use to she said she’s use to talking to “pretty boys” which I don’t know what that really is. But she invited me out to a dinner gathering thing but I told her I’ll let her know tomorrow since I’m not sure if ima be busy Saturday not sure if I should continue updating but if you all are still Interested I willI say this as a man who is pushing 40 years old.  I say this as a man who thought to himself at one point in his life, "How do I get a girlfriend?"  Some of you think that talking about self-improvement is common sense, but there are men who are millionaires who don't know shit about women.  There are men who look like African and Greek Gods, but they are beta males.  There are men who get tons of pussy, but they can't rub two nickels together, living off of their women.

I wrote a post called [**A Man’s Looks, Money, And Status Really Don’t Matter… Here’s Why**](http://theconfidenceskyscraper.com/a-mans-looks-money-and-status-really-dont-matter-heres-why/) where I talk about how men can have the looks, the status, and the money, but their women are still not satisfied for some reason.  For the men who send comments saying, "you have to look like a male model in order to be attractive to women" that post will answer your questions (you can also do a little research on the examples given).

There are two sides to self-improvement.  One side is self-acceptance from your achievements and the other side is acceptance and validation from others due to your achievements.  Some of you may want to improve your lives to gain validation from women.

Right now you think you're not good enough to get women unless you look like a male model.  So instead of focusing on mental and emotional strength by learning game, you skip all that and you just focus on your body or get some kind of cosmetic surgery.  You notice more and more attractive women are checking you out.  They are attracted to your body and your face.  When you get into a relationship with these women, you think you hit the jackpot.  You have a hot girlfriend!  Little do you know, you'll just be a good-looking man who is controlled by his woman.  Just because you're good-looking, doesn't mean she won't take you for granted.

"Yeah, but at least I'm getting pussy on the regular"

Is pussy worth more than your self-respect?  Do you like being at a woman's mercy just because she's giving you pussy?  Well, once the novelty of your good-looks wears off, she's gonna find another man who she actually respects (who may not be as good-looking as you by the way), and leave you.

You see, self-improvement/game trumps money, good looks, and status.  You have men who were broke as fuck at one point in their lives, learned the business game, and made a shit ton of money in the billions.  Some of the richest people on this planet were not born into money.  They had to learn some things to build wealth.

When it comes to women, you may not have good looks, money, or status, but you have game.  You learn the nature of women and how they tick, and you're getting more attractive women who love and respect...even though you're average-looking.  You have the mental and emotional strength that you won't hesitate to check disrespect from a Victoria Secret model-looking woman.  It's not a thing for you to reject sexual advances from beautiful women who are not worth dealing with because they're either crazy, needy, clingy, etc.

When you have game, mental and emotional strength, and you're willing to improve other areas of your life outside of women, women will become more attracted to you.  They may not come in droves, but you're gonna realize that you're just living your life and women pop up, wanting to be a part of your life in some way.

Never think that self-improvement is a waste of time.&#x200B;

* Daddy Issues / All Men Are Jerks: A poor role model in a father will lead to a woman not knowing what to look for in a man. She holds resentment towards all men because her initial experience with a man (her father) has tainted her perception. It can be hard for these women to get over past issues as she has been conditioned to think that all men are like the men in her past. It's not your job to be her therapist. She needs to Identify where her destructive behaviour stems from so she can prevent any form of self sabotage and not put another person/man on the receiving end of their own past trauma.

&#x200B;

* Obsessed with Social Media: This is a big one! If she can't stop staring at her phone, she craves attention and validation. She likely has a huge following of losers who will feed her attention when her self-esteem is low. Girls who are addicted to Social media is the male equivalent of a guy being addicted to porn. It simulates the pleasure centres of our brain from a digital device and to rely on such thing's to boost self esteem up is never healthy for one's mental health.

&#x200B;

* Guy Friend's: Girls who have a bunch (not 1 or 2 but a whole bunch) of guy friends are keeping their options open, by queuing up their “backup boyfriends.” These guys are too cowardly to ask a girl out because they don't want to risk getting rejected, so they are content to just be the fake guy buddy. Most women know this, but they love the self-esteem boost from the attention. Also if a women has a fair amount of guy friends. See it as a big indicator that she knows how to string guys along for her own benefit and she may end up doing the same to you.

&#x200B;

* I always end up with bad boys: when you as a guy find yourself in the position of having to listen a women venting about her past love life, such as "I always seem to end up with the wrong guy" view it as her being a bad judge of character and if you still want to end up sleeping with her for whatever reason then view it as her actually describing her personal preference. To many guys end up acting as the reverse person of who she has slept with just because she's moaning about those type of guy's. Do what is counter intuitive and act like that bad boy she has gone for so many times and don't end up acting as a goody two shoes, white knight who is looking to change her perception of who she should be going after. It never works and don't allow yourself to end up being a venting trash can who she only see's as a disposable guy friend. Also don't end up viewing this type of girl as girlfriend material either, there will be a lot of drama involved.

&#x200B;

* "I Don't Like to Talk About My Past": You'd be amazed at what some girls will hide from you and they will see nothing wrong with it. They will rationalize their behaviour with comments like, "I was a different person then." It's very important to look for a partner that is capable of taking accountability and ownership of their past mistakes without making excessive excuses till the point where she always portrays herself as the victim. If she's the victim in all her stories then she is most likely playing the victim to gain sympathy. Don't fall for it.

&#x200B;

* She meets up with you and then reveals she already has a boyfriend: A big one. if she agrees to meet with you and then reveals she already has a boyfriend and that she only met up with you as a friend. Then she is most likely playing the field while in a relationship and even if you manage to form a relationship with her. She will most likely go behind your back and do the same thing she did with her ex.

&#x200B;

* I have friends that are like that but not me: Women do not like to be judged for their actions not saying men do either but I've noticed a pattern of behaviour when ever mentioning bad qualities of a women to a women. If she agrees with you on certain things she will shift the judgement away from her and will put it onto her friends of having those qualities but not her. We as human being's take on the habits of those we hangout with the most so if women has friends that you see as toxic be alert to the fact that her friends have great amount of influence over her actions and same applies to men. ​

&#x200B;

* Lying even when it's save not to lie: People who lie are hiding skeletons in their closet. Don't let curiosity get the best of you. Block and move on with your life. It is also a sign of a psychopath. Spend enough time with a habitual liar and watch how you develop trust issues in the future. lying is also a habit of not wanting to face reality or one's current life circumstances which isn't something that you should be looking within a panther. If you sniff out lies even small one's then it's best to move on to someone else. ​

&#x200B;

* She’s a flake: We all know that trust is an important aspect of a strong, healthy relationship, and it’s hard to trust someone who flakes out on you all the time. Watch to see if your gal follows through on her commitments in all aspects of her life. If she’s a flake with her employer, friends, and family, chances are she’s going to be a flake with you and her life in general. ​

&#x200B;

* Passive aggressive Behaviour and sly/subtle insults: Woman are the masters of showing anger without being direct about it. I remember being on a date with someone once and she revved her car as she dropped me off. I asked her by text if everything was ok. She said she was fine and we never hanged out again. Even if a relationship doesn't work out. It's very important to be in a relationship where you can openly express a problem so it can be resolved instead of being expected to read someone's mind. As for subtle insults. This can be perceived as being playful at first but the more you let go on for the more regular the subtle insult's get. Till she end's up verbally abusing you in public. Stand up for yourself and express disproval and state how you want to be treated. It would be best to move on if this type of behaviour persists. ​

&#x200B;

* She is only focused on you externally: If the woman you are on date with is only focused on talking about your job, clothes and overall wealth. Then she may only be viewing you as an object that she can benefit from without thinking too much about you as a person and this could lead to you being in a relationship with a narcissist. If a woman focuses on you internally she will make comments on your personality such as you being caring, kind, playfully funny and so on. You want your future partner to be someone who values you for how you make them feel rather than how you can make them look and vice versa. ​

&#x200B;

* Self entitlement: usually an attractive women will have have a large sense of entitlement and will over step and push personal boundaries. This is due to the amount of validation they are used to receiving from lower tier desperate men who over inflate a woman’s ego. So if you ever find yourself a position where your being taken granted for and not appreciated, without receiving anything in return and this does not imply anything sexual just anything to know that you are valued in that girls life then move on and make sure your not the one feeding a girls false sense of entitlement.
Hello all. I have contributed here and there on reddit with comments and posts, but I felt a need to collect some of my top relationship advice for anyone interested in the experience of a 30yo virgin who finally got some success with women and finally got into an awesome relationship. Of course, it's clear that I am far from an "expert", however, my seduction journey has been long and I've studied much both in terms of resources as well as observing people around me and trying out stuff myself. Thus, I'd like to share my realizations, observations and advice with anyone who has a hard time in his 20's or thinks that he is "too old" to start dating.

Edit: Part 2: https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/io6ciu/turned_30_as_a_virgin_now_1_year_later_after_a/

Sorry for the long post. Took me a while to write. If you want a tl;dr, just read the **bold** on each bullet to sum-up. I also know that some points are quite controversial and they will just not resonate with everyone. They only reflect my own personal opinions.

* **Everything becomes impossible only when you stop trying. If you want something, keep trying. You 100% fail the moment you stop the effort.** Humans are amazing creatures and are capable of finding the most ingenious ways around obstacles. If you feel that everything is hopeless, then, simply (and brutally) put, you are not trying hard enough. I turned 30 as a kissless virgin. And by 32 I had went out a dozen of dates, made out with 4 girls, fucked 3 of them and finally got into an awesome relationship (still am). I am surely not a PUA, and still below average in terms of experience for my age, but the point is to make it clear that **it IS possible**.
* **Life isn't fair with what it gives us to start with, but it is always fair with the effort we put in.** I see countless people playing the victims and blaming the girls or the system or social apps, or the shallow society, etc. or saying things like "I turn 25 next year and I am a virgin, there is no hope for me". Well, yeah. That's a reality. But what are you gonna do about it? You have only 2 options: either you sit and whine online about it and frustrate other people too, or you go out there and do something about it. There is really NO OTHER OPTION. I can't guarantee the results, but I can say that there are infinite more chances to achieve *something* by trying than choosing the option #1. And, to add to that, the moment you stop trying, you are actually doing everyone else a favor! Simple as that.
* **These are the most important advice regarding meeting girls and sparking attraction and avoid friendzone, etc.** They worked for me and, since then, they worked with every one of my friends:
   * **The ONLY SINGLE thing that matters regarding a girl's attraction is how you make her FEEL. Everything else are just side-dishes.** How well you dress, what car you drive, what hobbies you have, what job you do, how many friends you have, how many abs you have, etc. are of course important, but every single one can be worked around. I've seen men who literally have NOTHING going on with their life, being mediocre in the looks department, but can slay girls left and right. The only important thing is how you make her feel. Of course, every girl is built differently and will respond slightly differently (some girls will get more wet by poetry, others by six-packs, and others by the sight of a Ferrari), but at the end of the day, it only matters how you made her FEEL. No girl will ever debate in her mind that "Max makes good money, but Jack rides a motorcycle". If a girl reaches that point, it's probably game-over for both guys. Which leads us to the next point.
   * **ALWAYS try to connect with a girl at an emotional level rather than a logical one! Meeting a girl is not an interview.** Sure, some information-exchange will occur, but the trick is to make her engaged emotionally. Don't try to find commonalities or "logical" things that connect you. These are bullshit. Instead, make her delve into her mind and bring up emotions and memories. Let all this introspection and emotions merge with your current interaction. This is the best way to make the interaction interesting and memorable AF. Next day you will be a guy who brought up all those tingling feelings in her stomach that she had almost forgot about, and not just another uninteresting guy who made silly pun humor, talked about the weather, or was a self-absorbed Chad.
   * **ALWAYS reveal your feelings AS SOON AS POSSIBLE! You are approaching her because she made your heart pound! Let her know that!** One of the top things almost all girls hate is having to make the first move! Every time one of my friends goes out with a girl for the first time and comes back telling me he got mixed signals I immediately ask him "did you tell her that you like her?". Literally, it is as simple as that and saves a TON of time and effort. Only good things can come out of it. I used to try to "seduce" girls that I met through common friends, and it took months and months of effort to just realize that she was simply not into me. I was like "well, next time we meet, I'll talk to her about X and ask her if she'd like to go to Y", and the next time was 2 weeks later, and when I finally met her again, the interaction didn't go exactly as planned, and the discussion didn't play out as expected to so I hesitated to ask her out, but she was smiling and receptive and she even brushed my knee, so next time, I'll definitely find something to talk to her about, but next time she came over with a her male friend, and he threw off my game completely, so I'll let a week pass and then text her, blah, blah..." Well, if all that sound familiar, then you are probably hesitating too much and, naturally, you are getting mixed signals, or, even worse, getting yourself into the friend-zone. Nowadays, I go for a kiss, or, if the girl is not particularly receptive, I'll just verbally tell her that I like her on the first date. Literally, saves so much time and is so much stress-free. Even if she pulls back, you will still be the confident guy who dared and not the scared pussy. If she does like you, it won't matter, and she will make it SO MUCH EASY for you! You just have to make the move first.
   * **Move on from girls who you like but nothing sexual has happened yet, like NOW!** Consider this your wake up call! Girls who you have been around for more than few months and, while you are attracted sexually to, nothing sexual has happened yet, are most likely staying that way. Don't let them occupy even a minute more of your thoughts. Don't ask for advice about coworkers you've been seen for months, or cute classmates who "tease" you but then hang out with the cool guys, or nice girls who shyly appear in your common group. Just don't. If something sexual was meant to happen, it should have already happened. In almost all cases girls will tend to gravitate towards "non-sexual" view. And if you dwell on it for a long time, coming out to them about your feelings is gonna shock them way more than flatter them. I have heard stories that this worked out in like 1% of cases, but personally in my circle (me included) I have NEVER seen it work out well. The amount of effort required to change her mind (factoring-in the chances happening), is several dozen of times multiple than the effort it is required to make a new girl like-like you. And, moreover, if something does eventually happen, you would have been her second choice, but she would have been your first choice all along, and you must live with that for the rest of the relationship.
* **Many girls have predominantly bad experiences with boys. Use this in your favor. Sometimes, getting pass their emotional walls and proving them that you are not a jerk is all it takes for them to get attracted to you.** Many of them have gotten ghosted, used, manipulated, lied to or abused by guys they've liked. And will make it too much of a drama. Just hang around some girl relationships forum to see what I'm talking about yourselves. Essentially, the very art of seduction is exactly that: to prove her that 1) she can have a good time with you, and 2) that you are a decent guy (not a jerk). That's pretty much ALL you can do about it. The rest is stuff you have absolutely no control over, so there is no reason to dwell on.
* **It is useful to ask for help from more experienced people or from people who were in your shoes (and listen to them!!). If you can afford it, a coach can be a tremendous help and a person to actually hold you accountable.** There are free and non-free stuff out there and you generally get what you pay for. There is a reason so much free stuff out there is free (I guess this post as well, heh). They are no match for tailored counseling/coaching, real-time cold-approach bootcamps, or the non-politically-correct-filtered content. Personally, I've been reading seduction stuff for well over a year and I finally decided to take a coaching/bootcamp course. It didn't really teach me stuff that I didn't know (as knowledge), but it helped me take all the pieces and put them together (and click like a puzzle in my mind, both in terms of knowledge and emotions), and eventually I was able to cold-approach effectively and trigger the correct attraction triggers.
* **There is nothing bad to be gained from knowledge (but sometimes no good either). Always read and expand your knowledge in areas that you want to get better to by people who have been there and have the same goals as you. It is the most basic effort.** e.g. if you want to get better with women, keep studying material on that area. Some stuff will resonate with you, others will just be an interesting read. Take all the bits and pieces that help you figure out how the world ticks, and keep the rest as general knowledge. For example, for me the much recommended book "How to win friends and influence people" was full of interesting advice and anecdotes but it didn't "click" with me as much as "Models" by Mark Mason did. I don't regret having read either though.
* However, one source of knowledge is probably  of zero practical worth. **DO NOT take dating advice from girls!** This includes your dear sister, your super-hot aunt or your happily-married mother, or any female friend whatsoever. First of all, girls may tell you what works specifically for themselves, or if it is something they discussed with their group of friends will maybe apply to 4-5 people. If you are putting yourself out there, you are potentially coming across hundreds if not thousands of girls. So, unless your friends are lesbian or by, it is not a good idea to get statistical advice on how to approach/flirt with girls by someone who has never flirted with a girl in their life. Moreover, keep in mind that almost no girl will tell you what ACTUALLY makes her flip her attraction switches. Girls will gladly tell you all the socially- and politically-correct things about dating, and as a result, they will give you the perfect guide on how to be their FRIEND and NOT their LOVER. I wasted far too many of my earlier years with this bullshit. It's the most counter-effective thing you can do! Instead, **if you absolutely must learn from girls, just WATCH their actions instead of listening to their words**. Watch for which guy they'll rush to answer the phone/texts for, or for which guy will whine all the time but still they'll shower and shave in the middle of the night because he booty-called them, or which guy they'll gladly blow in the club's toilet, or which guy they'll friendzone. Look, I don't want to alienate or offend girls in this community. Some girls may give actually helpful advice, true, (similarly, many guys can give horrible advice too), but, personally, everything I've been advised from girls  didn't practically work for me (at least in my own context). What I mean to say as bottom line is to take advice on an area from someone who is doing good in that area.
* **Extreme views are more destructive than helpful. It is far better and more efficient to assume an open-minded, modest and down-to-earth stance than any unconventional or new-age shit.** I know. Reaching 30 as a virgin, I've passed from the "incls", "RP", "BP", "NFap", and other phases/communities. Now that I look back, all these did more bad than good because they derailed me from my target and that was to get a girl and get laid. Instead, I'd fill my head with whining about how I am the victim of the "bad" women, "bad" feminism, "bad" society, "bad" masturbation, or that in the end, maybe I was wrong about the objective all along (which was even more ineffective because it made me dishonest with myself). Now that I see all these phases, I can say that there is probably some merit in everything, but you must NOT let them govern your thoughts. They are extremist views which stretch reality and make you detached and, thus, they should be treated with much care. It is sort of like self-affirmations: absolutely not a single truly happy person stares at the mirror every morning affirming to himself that "today I'll be happy".

I will post an update as more bullet points come up.Sit down folks and let me tell you a story on how I not only entered the friend-zone but I managed to escape.  Now I wouldn’t say I’m a novice to the seduction methods around here, but I am far from being good at it as you will see.

This story starts off with your typical boy meets girl (whom I will refer to as Kate) story.  I met Kate at a local book store while I was out and about.  I believe I went in to buy the hard back copy of one of my favorite books or a cook book.  That is not important.  What is important is that I spied this beautiful little Asian girl with a copy of John Keats’s complete work tucked under her arm.  I quickly worked my way over to her and opened her with a “Is that for school or are you looking for the right romantic words to say to me?”  She laughed and told me that she liked his works and it had nothing to do with her Masters.  I told her that he was one of my favorite poets and recited one of the verses from a poem he wrote from memory.  The look on her face told me that I had performed the equivalent of bringing her to a raging orgasm while she was tripping on ecstasy.   I quickly made an excuse to leave and handed her my phone while I went to purchase whatever I was buying.  By the time I had finished with my purchase I had her phone number, e-mail , and name already programmed into my phone.  She even dialed her phone to make sure I could return the favor.  

Over the next few weeks we went out a few times, but each date was unique and a bag full of mixed signals.  One date she was buying me drinks and grinding against me while we played pool; the next date she was acting as nervous as if I had told her that Chris Brown was my personal idol.  What had made it worse is that I still could not K-close her.  By the third date I had grown tired of the game and started to shut her out, which normally works on most girls but on this one just made her grow even more distant.  I finally asked her what was wrong and she explained that she was considering taking a job across the country after she finished her courses at the end of the year.  She didn’t want to be in a relationship and wouldn’t do anything intimate (including kiss) if she was going to move.  After a bit of discussion she asked if I would be ok with just being friends.  I stupidly agreed because I had fallen under her spell.

Fast forward a few weeks and we are hanging out regularly.  With the exception of her not introducing me to her friends she has pretty much by all definitions become a regular facet in my life.  Then one of my good friends (and wingmen) called me out on it.  Damnit, I have become her platonic mate.  This would not do.  So over the next few weeks I became unavailable and stopped being the AFC.  Then it happened.  We went out to a local bar after a movie and while she was texting her sister I got up and started talking to another girl.  I came back to this angry eyed, 5’2, ball of seething rage.  How could I disrespect her by hitting on another girl and getting a # close in front of her.  I calmly looked her in the eyes and smiled.   “Kate you know how I like when you put on that angry face, but I need you to stop trying to seduce me.  We are friends remember?”  She glared at me a few moments and told me that it she didn’t think that I would be so callous about it.  I just shrugged and told her next time I would leave her to get the number while she was around.  The next day we hung out I had brought along my friend Rob (the same wingman) out with me to play pool.  During one of the rounds I had struck up a conversation with waitress who was now slipping us free shots.  Kate had now started to find little excuses to talk to me when she came around till I decided the CB needed to stop.  I looked at her and asked her what she thought of the waitress.  She immediately gave me negative ideas and tried to down play the girl’s looks and such.  I asked Rob and he told me that maybe the free shots was to help her chances and not mine.  I decided to play this to my advantage and told Kate she would be my wingman since Rob obviously was going to be too objective tonight.   I then suggested we go approach another table of girls and get them to join our game.  The look in her face told it all.  This girl was good at playing her game, but telling her that I wanted other people to play with her toy was like asking her to put down old yeller.  She begrudgingly went over and helped me successfully open the girls.  Fellas, even at their worst women negate another women’s defenses.  Soon both tables were playing and having fun.  Here was two guys surrounded by a group of HB6s and 7s (Kate still being a 9).  Kate left after two rounds stating she needed to work on a paper for school.

Several days go by and we don’t talk and I go on with my life.  Then the other day she calls me up and asks me what I’m doing.  I told her I am cooking dinner and asks if she wants to join me.  Even though she lives about an hour away via public transportation she got a taxi and was over at my place in 30 minutes.  We sat down and had a nice dinner and decided to watch some TV.  Without asking, she starts to massage my neck and offering to give me a rub down I wouldn’t forget.  I agree and we reposition so that she can straddle me to work on my back.  After about 5 minutes I start feeling her lips on the back of my neck.  I jokingly remind her that this isn’t a massage I normally let my friends give me.  To my surprise she stopped and collapsed on top of me and try to make out with me.  It was the most awkward thing that I have ever seen anyone try to do and I immediately started to laugh at her.  She then told me trying to be my friend was the worst decision she ever made and desperately wanted another chance to be more.  To paraphrase her “Being your friend was the hardest thing I’ve ever had to do.  I was fine with it at first but watching you hit on other girls and have fun with them made me realize what I wanted and couldn’t have”.  Other words were said, but honestly I don’t remember.  We ended up with an Fclose that night with another session scheduled for tomorrow.

So the lesson I have learned is this.  If a woman friend-zones you, turn them into your friend.  Treat them like one of the guys and ask them to wing with you.  The worst thing that can happen is that they turn out to be a bad wingman and you have to spend time training them.  The best that can happen is what happened to me.

TL/DR: Met a girl.  Ended up being Friend-zoned.  Forced girl to experience what it is like to be friend.  She came back begging to be more.

Edit 1: Wall of text broken up and spaced out 

Edit 2: Holy crap, I did not expect to get such a huge response from the community.  Thanks for the supportBefore we get to the meat and potatoes of this guide, I'll tell you a few things that I'm not: A dating coach, a pick-up artist, or trying to sell you anything. This guide hardly a guide, more-so what happened to propel my dating life to a far better place than it was since the day I joined this sub.  


1) The first step is simultaneously your first and last: Leave this sub. Seriously. Leave this sub, any sub that gives dating advice, any website or newsletter that gives dating advice, unsubscribe from any YouTube dating coaches, all of it. From now on, it's all you flying on your own. It's only your last step because you still have to read the rest of this goddamn guide. 

There are a number of reasons to do this, but I'll list the main one: Seduction is dead. Displaying "high-value"? Dead. Anyone trying to tell you to be "high-value" or "alpha" is likely trying to sell you something. Back when I followed these things, despite all of them giving me advice like to get out of my own head and be present, I often found myself thinking of trying to apply what I learned from all of this and then loathing why I'm a person who needs a guide to be dating. I don't. You don't either.

The truth is that even if you did apply these pick-up artist techniques and it work on a woman, odds are you'd be spending the rest of your life using these techniques keeping her. Sure, you could find some other woman this works on but would you really ever be happy? Would you really ever feel like yourself again? The business model for most dating coaches relies on you still missing *something* that isn't grabbing pussy by the fistful, and so you keep coming back. It simultaneously builds you up and crushes your self-esteem when it isn't working.  


**"But wait", you hark at someone who promised a guide, "Where's the goddamn guide?"**

2) From this day forward, you will have (realistic) standards. Back when I browsed and asked around in askseddit, a commonly recurring question from members was "Did I fuck up?" or "How can I save this situation?" Fellas, if you find yourselves with a woman that you have to "save" a situation with, it's not worth your time. As Mark Manson once said, "If it's not a fuck yes, it's a no". You have just as much a right to leave a conversation as a woman does. She doesn't have values you agree with? Next. You're carrying the conversation? Next. It doesn't matter how hot she is, your time is valuable and could be spent with someone who's just as happy to spend theirs on you. That said, you've got to have realistic standards. If you've got a mile-long list of boxes for a woman to check, you'll be single forever. 

3) Be yourself, but the best version of yourself. Women love guys all across the spectrum of personalities. There's a misconception that in order to be successful with a lot of women, you have to be a certain archetype of person, and that couldn't be further from the truth. There are women out there who love guys who love anime, videogames, tv, whatever. That can be a big part of your personality. It just can't be ALL you have going on with your life. Try new things like making music, drawing, whatever. Here's the kicker: I'm not telling you to find a hobby to get women, you're finding a hobby that you really enjoy doing. You won't be doing it for the interest of women, the women for you will be interested in what you're doing.

4) You can be vulnerable and communicate, but stand your ground. If there's two archetypes of person that don't get women, it's the milquetoast Nice Guy, and the guy who's got a lot going on but it's definitely just to get women. Yes, they can tell. If you're trying to be mysterious and aloof, give it up. They know. I flat out use my words and say how I'm feeling with women, and I'm sure about my feelings. I point out when things are awkward, I say when I don't like something. I let a woman know my feelings and I stand by them, take it or leave it. It's not needy or "low-value" to tell a woman how you feel. Paradoxically, it's so not needy that it's more attractive than if you try to pretend you're a mystery so she stays intrigued. On the flip-side, a woman can affect your feelings, but if your feelings depend on a woman? That's when you're being needy.

5) Text "game" will get you ghosted more than having a boring conversation. Especially with the pandemic, yes you can have a full conversation over text. I'm not saying to have boring conversations with your person of interest, I'm saying not to run "game". When I match with a woman, I try to have a conversation deeper than what she does for work, but I don't try to be entertaining. Being entertaining for women is good for getting some replies and then ghosted. Get to know the basics, then ask her what she thinks life means, ask her what she thinks about the afterlife. Something, anything that makes you two get introspective and really talk about yourselves. Then after a good conversation ask her out. When a woman matches you she's seeing if you have a personality that works with hers, and making sure you're not a murderer or rapist. She probably isn't gonna figure that out after 3 messages, and If she requires you to entertain her for a message or doesn't contribute to the conversation, refer to step 2, she isn't the one to be getting your time.

That's it. That's the guide. It's being yourself, enjoying how you spend your time, and being more selective about who earns your time. That's all you need to be successful with the right women. No mind games, no trickery, no performance, and no changing you are. Be a good person, and you'll find a good person.  


Now go on, get the fuck outta here.I'm a recovering nice guy who in the past always avoided risk and just became the woman's friend without ever showing interest. We always talked about safe and boring topics. Basically it was just polite small talk. Even I was bored.

After working a lot on myself, I've started to become a lot more bold and direct, and I've started having some successes with multiple women. This includes a girl who I've been in the friendzone with for about 2 years and with whom I now have an actual date set up. 

It took me a long time to realize this: I was only ever in the friendzone because I failed to take action and make my intent clear. And that goes for all the other times I or anyone else has been friendzoned. Does taking action guarantee succes? Of course not. But if you take action asap, then you'll know where you stand right away and don't end up wasting time in the friendzone. You'll just be clear and masculine and communicate to the woman that you want her. I'm not talking about a soppy declaration of love that nice guys sometimes make when they can't take it any longer. You'll just ask her out in a direct way as soon as you become interested in her.

"But what if she says no? I might lose her!"

Tough shit. You don't have her now either. You have to be willing to risk losing her. No risk means no reward. 

"But I'll be humiliated! People will mock me!"

You won't be humiliated. There's nothing wrong with a guy wanting a girl. If there was, none of us would be alive today. Generally, people don't give a shit about some guy failing to pick up a chick. And even if some people were to briefly mock you, what of it? You were a man and went for what you wanted. They're weak and probably never try to reach their goals in life. You're a man of action, which is why you will achieve greatness!Jesus it is one of the hardest things to do but setting off on the journey of cold approach has changed my life unimaginably. 

I was what I thought an ugly loser, who was a virgin when I started out. I worked an admin position in a university in my home town, a skinny guy, who was seeing this really fat girl, who pretty much eat pizza all day and had a really negative attitude. I thought that was my lot. I thought this was what I deserved and how my life was meant to be.

I was becoming more disillusioned, more depressed. I had no deep connections. Even my friends were all surface level. Ultimately I felt alone. I realised apart from my dad, Mam and siblings no one would give a single fuck if I died. No one would come to my funeral. 

Rock bottom. 

Fast forward 4 years, and I have moved to one of the most expensive cities in the world, and I’m still in the top 5% in terms of salary there. The first month I went out and approached like mad and I now have 4 beautiful girls on the go.  I’ve never been happier with my body (gym for 3 years). My diet is on point and my mindset is rock solid. No guy is better than me out there. 

Yes, there are better looking guys than me, but I know I offer a lot of value, and I know 99% of guys haven’t put in the work I have. 

This isn’t a brag post. This is a post to tell you, yes cold approach does work but in a lot more ways than you can ever imagine. 

Each rejection, each hurdle you overcome massively improves your confidence and self worth. Not just talking with women but guys, bosses, the family. I have never interviewed better. Never had more friends. Even the girls I meet and break up with stay around and are some cool friends. I have learnt a lot from them. It’s a snowball effect. Momentum. 

I never thought this was possible. 

It isn’t easy, it feels like crawling over nails at times. Hell it nearly drove me to suicide, the pain was so much. 10, 20, 30 approaches, a whole day, no numbers. Girls rejecting you left, right and centre. “No.” “No.” “No.” “Maybe...No.” Your ego starts to crack. Cold approach can be pure pain. You question everything. 

But as long as you get back on the horse and go again, each week. You slowly start to get better and better. There’s always another beautiful girl around the corner who will be in to you. The amount of times I thought I’d reached my peak and I’d never meet a better girl (once I’ve lost her). 

I would spend hours looking in the mirror, seeing how my smile looked, and changing it. I would record myself and listen back so I can change my voice tonality deeper. I would go into lifts and have to start up a conversation with whoever was in there. 

I remember I went through a weird spell of seducing my first few 8 and 9’s and when I took them back to mine I was so nervous to disappoint (and ultimately lose them) that I couldn’t get it up. One girl stormed off and called me gay, I seriously thought about killing myself that night. The look she gave me as if I wasn’t a man. Cruel reality. I can now get the girls I dreamed of but I can’t even fuck them. The girls had less respect for me than when I was that admin person in university and respect was all I wanted. 

But did you know what I did. I went out the next morning and approached again. I would bring them back to my flat knowing I may not get hard. That it would be awkward. I purposefully headed towards awkward situations. I fully felt that fear and anxiety within me but went ahead again. I didn’t try to fight it, instead I accepted it. 

Just like a cold approach. 

Each time my dick would get slightly harder. Through persistence and experience, I conditioned my brain that going soft and then kicking this girl out wasn’t an easy escape to avoid the pain. In the end my mind gave in and did what I told it.

I’ve realised recently that this is a metaphor for game, for life. It’s a cliche now but whatever you fear is the exact thing you should run towards. 

If you are scared of losing that girl, lose her. Scared of getting rejected, approach her. Scared of sending that text, then send it. Scared of going for that job, apply for it. Here is the thing even if it doesn’t work you gain experience and become stronger. By taking action. It’s win-win. You either get what you want, or you don’t and become more comfortable in that situation. 

That’s the only way to be free. Your future self will be so thankful you did. 

So I raise a toast to anyone who’s had the balls to do cold approach and work on their life. Here’s to freedom. Here’s to pain. Here’s to our future selves.

TLDR; DO NOT GIVE UP!Most guys who start researching seduction or pickup start because they have a friend who is super successful with women.  They watch this guy always seem to be flush with dates, have lots of girls flirting with him when they go out together, or they know he gets laid more in 6 months than they have in their entire lives.  They open up Google or Reddit and type in something like…

	• How to tell if a girl likes you
	• How to be a player
	• What are girls attracted to
	• How to get a girlfriend

Inevitably they are met with a barrage of pickup-related materials promising techniques, phrases, and the "One Weird Trick" to instantly drench a girl's panties.  They will also be met with diagrams of how a modern man should dress to attract women (coupled with lots of older info about "peacocking"), diet plans and 30 Day Ab Mega Shred programs to give them the best chance to attract a woman physically.  They will see 3000 word landing pages with all kinds of psych-up language, but devoid of any actual information, designed to sell them seminars and private coaching at hundreds of dollars per hour, all with the promise of turning them into seduction superstars with harems of 20 women ready to drop everything and come over and pleasure them at a moment's notice.

What they won't find is anyone telling them the real problem.  **The problem is not that they can't get women to be sexually attracted to them; the problem is usually that they are unaccomplished, insecure, ashamed, and do not have much of a sense of their own masculine identity.**  If you ask one of these men about themselves--who they are, what their hobbies, dreams, goals, aspirations, or accomplishments are--they often will have no answers.  This doesn't mean that they don't enjoy things--just that they don't really have a sense of what their values are, what they are passionate about.  They reply that their hobbies are Netflix, Reddit, or video games--which are not hobbies, they are pacifiers (they can be entertaining, but not much else).  This empty self-identity and life of least resistance is often the result of long-unaddressed issues related to self esteem, childhood bullying, body image issues if they are overweight, or even negative early relationship experiences as young men that left them feeling emasculated and impotent.  **Not being able to attract women is a SYMPTOM, not the problem itself.**

If not being sexually attractive to women is not the problem, this naturally means that becoming sexually attractive to women is not, by itself, the solution.  Instead, solving the problem of a lack of masculine self-identity will in turn make a man naturally more sexually attractive to women.  A man must figure out who he is, what his values are, what his aspirations are, and he must accomplish things that he set out to do with purpose.  **The girl is not the goal.  The goal is to become a happy, driven, successful, self-assured man.**

Before all of the lines, openers, techniques, push-pulling, "negging," DHV's, and other seduction tricks even come into play, you MUST be a complete man who is grounded, self-assured, purposeful, and happy in his own skin.  A confident man who has ambition, hobbies, and his life together to a minimal level is the baseline for attracting women.  **If you do not meet this description, stop reading pickup info, and go get your life together.**  Here are some ways to do this:

1. **If you don't have a job, get one.**  It doesn't even really matter that much what it is, to start with.  Making money, no matter how you do it, opens up literally every other category of opportunities for you.
2. **Get in shape.**  If you are fat, research CICO (Calories In/Calories Out), calculate your TDEE, and eat less than that everyday to lose weight.  If you are tiny and scrawny, do the same, but eat more than that everyday to gain weight.  Join a gym and start a weight lifting program like Starting Strength or Stronglifts, or do bodyweight exercises each day if you can't afford a gym membership.  Get plenty of sleep and eat a relatively clean diet.
3. **If you have a hobby you love, find others who love it and join a club or meetup group.**  This will help you actually force yourself to make progress with your hobby rather than just tinkering around in stagnation.  If you are a musician, find a weekly open mic, go as often as possible, and play every time you go.  This will force you to…
4. **Be as social as possible.**  Go out as often as you have time and can afford to.  Accept EVERY invitation you get from friends: parties, happy hours, Free Comic Book Day, whatever.  If you can afford it and you have the time, go do it.  Putting yourself in as many social situations as possible will get you used to meeting new people, and will give you lots of interesting stories to tell when you do.
5. **Think about the future.**  What is it you want to be doing a year from now?  Five years from now?  Are you building a business?  Do you want a family?  Do you want to run an ultramarathon?  Think about what you want out of life, make a plan for getting there, and execute, execute, execute.  Always be improving.

When you focus on becoming the best version of yourself, women find this naturally attractive.  Yes, you can still benefit from breaking down and analyzing the social dynamics between men and women, and we can still get better results through techniques and theory.  But there is no technique for attraction as powerful as becoming a man who knows what he wants out of life and goes out and gets it.  5 months ago I was a needy loser who thought I would never be able to attract another woman in my life. I was way overweight, didn't talk to anyone, did nothing with my life but work, school, video games, sleep. The girl who I was with for 3 years dumped me for another guy she had just met and told me to my face that I wasn't half the man he was. I hadn't made her happy for the last 2 years that we were together.

It cut deep. I have never felt more ashamed, more hurt, more embarrassed. For a brief moment, I thought there was nothing left. The last 8 years of my life had been filled with heartbreak and hardship on a personal and physical level. I will never forget the day. Something changed in me. But not because of her. That day, I had to look myself in the mirror through tears and ask what did I want to be? Did I want to just say that my failings were because of everyone else for the rest of my life?

5 months later I'm going to the gym 7 days a week (usually picking and choosing between lifting or boxing based on what sounds more fun/what my body feels). I'm saying yes to opportunities to go out more with friends. I'm making conversation with strangers just to see what's up with them. I'm smiling at people, making eye contact when we talk. I have such a busy schedule that I'm struggling to get an hour of video games in (and that is probably for the better). I'm not the same human being I was 5 months ago.

Oh, and the ex? Guy she went with told her she was just a piece of meat after 2 months and now she hits my line every few days to tell me how great I'm looking and that she misses me. She backed the wrong horse and had no belief in me. Even though she had no reason to, which I understand and in hindsight can't blame her for, she doesn't get to partake in my journey any longer. I'm the only one who believed in me.

One of the effects of becoming comfortable in my own skin was that I started to talk to the girls daily in my courses before and after. One of them, cute blonde who I had multiple subjects with but never spoken to in 3 years of being at university together, started really laughing at my remarks. I started chatting her up, and thought "Well, here goes nothing. Lets see if all I have read about game really works."

Mid conversation I said directly "We should go out for a drink sometime" I didn't feel the need to explain why, just threw the idea out there. No hesitation, she said yes. For context, this was Tuesday, we agreed to grab drinks Wednesday.

We had fun, and back at her place I escalated to the point of cuddling when I made a joke about her being able to lift me and said I would easily be able to pick her up and march her around. She said bullshit, so without hesitation I did so. We were having a good time and talking and then in a pause when our eyes locked and there was silence I went for the kiss. She backed away and still smiling and laughing I said "Oh sorry, you had something on your lips, I was just trying to get it off." Really stupid line, but she was red faced and giggling. I wasn't lying about my intent, technically. Went back to talking and I genuinely enjoyed our time. Hugged before I left even though I could see she was thinking I may try kiss attempt #2. I didn't.

In class the next day (Thursday), I talked to her like I normally would. I didn't make things awkward at all or even bring up the night before. After leaving class, went about the next 2 days with my life and didn't text her.

Last night (Saturday) I get a text around midnight "Whatchu doin?"

Brother, a lot more than a kiss went down.

The point is, I thought this was all bullshit. When I lurked here at first, I thought these were tall tales, works of fiction. I want to say after last night, and the last few months of leading a fulfilling life that I want for my current self, I believe in myself more than ever. I see outside of women how much I can accomplish in life if I am persistent with myself to do it. What I want to do is say thank you. The Seduction Reddit can be very grounding, humbling at times. It has helped me to see why things were going so poorly for me, and encouraged me to grow from the past. The positive ideas and suggestions from posts have kept me going in times of self-doubt. I don't think I would have had an amazing experience or the many more to come without this place. I'm so thankful I took the time to come here, learn, and really try to apply all I could. 

To all of you, I'm grateful. I wouldn't have made the leaps in my social/dating life as fast as I did if it weren't for each and every one of you that contribute around here and really try to give guys like myself advice and techniques. 

TLDR; my journey to being in a better place, finally closed and now I believe in game and myself more than everAgain, I find myself reacting to some "how to" advice that appeared on Seddit, giving some people helpful advice about how to pass their days as pleasantly as possible while they're dating a harpy.

My question is, **[why are you dating this kind of woman](http://tabletheory.wordpress.com/2012/05/03/dating-tropes-explained-part-vii-shit-tests-and-crazy-women/)?**

This ultimately goes back to the concept of the **shit test**.

See, there's a lot of advice here about shit tests and how to pass them. The advice, by itself, isn't bad. Most of it is about having a backbone, maintaining frame, not letting another person's actions affect who you are, and **always having the will and wisdom to walk away from a bad deal.**

See, that last part is what everyone forgets, because they get so invested in "winning" the shit test that they don't realize that it's a shitty game, and the prize at the end is that you get to spend even more time with an unbearable succubus.

You get into a relationship with an HB8.5, and suddenly the rules go out the window. Suddenly, you're making excuses for her behavior, because you don't wanna lose her.

We have a word for that. It's called oneitis. And passing shit tests doesn't cure it.

Without the will to walk away from a bad deal, just because she looks pretty or does that thing you like with the bacon grease and the three-pronged dildo, you've lost in LIFE.

And the worst thing about oneitis is that it becomes how you operate in your whole life. You understand that? That it no longer extends to just you and this woman?

That there is something wrong with your LIFE if you let ANYONE mistreat you like this and you just stand there and take it?

If you're the kind of guy who thinks "how do I pass this shit test," you need to ask yourself first "is this woman even worth it?"

Just because you let someone peg you on "your terms" doesn't mean you're not getting fucked in the ass. Don't ever forget that.One of the best things for my confidence, although initially uncomfortable, was taking on certain leadership roles in my job. Now, it doesn’t phase me, but it was initially nerve wracking and very uncomfortable, since I’m not naturally comfortable in front of crowds.

Every month, I have to organize and lead a large scale meeting of subject matter experts from my company across the country. There are usually about 70 attendees. I have to create the agenda, make sure everyone can connect, and be the primary presenter and facilitator of discussions.

It was really uncomfortable at first. I’m sure my first several meetings were not smooth, but over time it improved and now I feel confident every time I lead these type of meetings. I still make minor mistakes from time to time, but I’ve learned to have a sense of humor about it.

This confidence has carried over into my social life as well. No matter how small, find opportunities wherever you can to consistently take on leadership roles and get outside your comfort zone. 

Volunteer, lead your sports team, come up with activities for your social group, request to take on additional leadership assignments at work. Even if these are small, the confidence of stepping outside your comfort zone and leading other people will impact other areas of your life, including your social life.

You will be more assured, a better communicator, and not be as needy and willing to please others. Adopt the same mental approach you take in your leadership role, and the results will carry over into all other areas of your life.I met 3 very attractive girls this past week. I slept with all of them on the same day I met them. And this week has not been unusual. Something just clicked for me these past few months, and I want to share it with you.

Several years ago, when I was in high school, I couldn't even kiss a girl unless the planets were aligned. My sophomore year, I flirted via text with a girl from another school almost daily for months, simply because she was hot and had me put my arm around her once. Months go by with maybe one or two awkward meetings- and then she got a boyfriend! I wasted all of that time chasing a girl that did not respect me, but stayed in contact with me for the validation. I knew things needed to change, so I started reading all sorts of material on pick-up.

It took me a long time to sort through the gimmicks and misinformation, and the transformation has taken me beyond where I thought I could be. My life isn't amazing, but finding girls to sleep with is a non-issue for me, and I couldn't have done it without knowing what I know now. I haven't perfected my game, but I've gotten really damn far.

If I could go back and talk to my high school self, I would have boiled everything down to a 10 steps- and you should already be familiar with the first 2.

1. Be attractive. I'm not saying you have to look like a male model. I'm a few inches below average height, incredibly pale, have mediocre teeth, mild acne scars, and dry skin. If you looked at my photo in early high school, you'd see someone who definitely didn't have a lot going for him. 
So how am I attractive now? I pay great attention to detail when it comes to hygiene, fashion, and physical health. I have hobbies that I am passionate about, and I am a hard worker with a positive outlook. This part is so important, because it is the foundation for all that follows. If you aren't confident in your own body, you can't expect to find a girl that wants to sleep with you.

2. Don't be unattractive. Assume that others know you are attractive. When you take care of your body (both physical health and mental health), and dress as well as I do, you'll know when you're looking your best. You might not be Brad Pitt, but you're as well put together as you reasonably can be- and women WILL notice. If you put a lot of effort into who you are as a person, don't act like anything less. You are an interesting person who has done interesting things, so act like it! Otherwise you are your own worst enemy.

3. Put yourself on the market. Wasting all of my energy on one girl who seemed out of my league did not get me results. I wasn't about to wait for the "right" girl to walk into my life, because it just wasn't happening for me- I was not social enough to get that kind of attention without trying. So in addition to going out as much as I could, I signed up for online dating. Tinder and OkCupid have been my bread and butter. Lots of guys avoid online dating because of this slightly outdated logic: if you were an attractive girl that everyone already wanted to be with, you probably wont use a lot of tinder. But going from not approaching to suddenly hitting on strangers in broad daylight? Lets be honest, that's hard as hell for someone starting out, and it requires a lot of experience that not everyone has. If you learn the system, online dating gives you access to options you didn't know you had, and the rejections are much easier to take.

4. Advertise yourself. This is where you need to build a strategy for yourself to succeed. I built a very flattering profile for myself. It's well written, and I spent a lot of time collecting the very best photos of myself to use on my profile. Because of this, my match percentage is extremely high. Right now I have 1500 matches, about half of which are currently local. Can you imagine what you could do with a pool of 750 potential partners? You can use other forms of dating/social apps, but tinder has worked wonders for me. Let me tell you- I can consistently get 3 dates a week with about an hour total of effort. (If there's enough interest, I can make another post outlining my tinder strategy.)
If you are in class or out at a bar and see a girl you find attractive, say hi! The only way to find potential partners is to reach out and contact them. You can work on your game by reading as much as you want, but experience and exposure is the only way you can really get better.

5. Set the date. Do not waste time texting without reason, and be aware that this situation is time sensitive. So many guys fuck this up, including my high school self. If you met online, ask for the date within 5-10 messages. If you met her at a bar, turn that first meeting into a date. How? See step 7 and try to isolate her from her friends. If you cannot escalate during that first meeting, the chances of having a second one goes down significantly. Do not number close unless you have made plans with her for another meeting. Make sure you make the specifics of the date clear as soon as possible. If you want to go to Starbucks at 9pm for a cup of coffee, then ask for exactly that. You asked for the date, so it's your responsibility to come up with the details unless she suggests an alternative. 

6. Don't sweat it! If you've made it this far, you're on a date. You've done it! At this point, you just need to not mess up. In my part of the sales world, the average conversion per appointment is about 50%. Fifty fucking percent. And these people are spending tens of thousands of dollars after one meeting! If a girl shows up to a date, her guard is way further down than a client's guard is while sitting in front of a salesperson. She actually wants things to go well- just like you do (why else would she show up?). So if you play your cards right, what do you think the odds are? I have gone on *maybe* two dates without at least kiss closing in the past year. And I've been on more dates than I can remember.

7. Get her talking. She should do most of the talking. And how do you keep her talking? Use active listening skills to ask relevant questions about whatever she is already talking about. People LOVE talking about themselves- it's our favorite topic. I used to be think I needed to tell girls cool stories about myself to impress them, but you don't need to do that at all. In fact, unless she asks you, you shouldn't whip out any long story about yourself at all. To lead the conversation, your job is to maintain strong eye contact, use good body language, and ask some fucking questions. The majority of your conversation should be built off of tangents of hers. If you do this right, you can make jokes, observations, tell her about yourself, tease her, and give compliments with ease, because she'll be more invested in what you have to say. Don't use too many fillers. If there is silence (there will be), be comfortable with it and let it sit until you think of something to say; you're in no rush. Eventually, you'll both build a rhythm and feel very comfortable around each other.

8. Do not stay in one place. I learned this from years of reading seduction material, and it has become one of the most important aspects of my game. The idea is that by moving around, you will build a greater connection with the girl because it feels like you have spent more time together. That way, you get to have a series of "mini-dates". Which of these situations sounds like better bonding activities? Sitting in a cafe for two hours and talking; or sitting in a cafe for 30 minutes, going on a walk for 30 minutes, sitting on a park bench for 30 minutes, and then walking back to your place to watch tv.
Yeah. The second one. 
This also works to re-position yourself to your advantage. How are you going to put your arm around her or kiss her if you are sitting across the table from her? Literally just getting up and walking from one end of the bar to the other can dramatically change your situation.

9. Pull the trigger. If you've been doing this effectively, she will be very attracted to you. And if she isn't, then you probably wont be so attracted to her either- if you're doing your job right, the only thing that kills the attraction is a lack of chemistry. The next step is to just go for it. This is my favorite part, and it is also where I feel the most nervous. 
You think things are going well, but you don't know for sure. You could inch closer to her and wait until she looks up at you and lets you know that its time to kiss. It certainly seems like the safest route, until you realize that she's wanted you to kiss her for 20 minutes. 
A better approach would be to escalate it a bit more deliberately. Increase your eye contact by as much as possible without flat out staring, and let the conversation slow until you are both pausing a bit. Move closer to her. Closer than you would stand to one of your friends. Now give it a moment and read how she's dealing with the situation. If she hasn't really noticed, but looks comfortable and isn't pulling away to regain the physical space between you, go in for the kiss. Kiss her like you're both lead characters in a blockbuster hit, and the situation could escalate itself from there.

10. Close. Ask her to netflix and chill at your place. Ask her if she wants to come see that cool piece of artwork you made. Ask her if she wants to come over for coffee. It really doesn't matter what you say, because she knows at this point that she's not going back to your place to just watch netflix.

Let me know your thoughts!

Edit: This post received a lot more attention than I expected. I'll try and follow up with another post on Tinder strategy when I get out of work.


 Wow, I actually implemented strong eye contact into my daily life. Normally, I have a problem holding gazes with women I find attractive. This is mainly due to self-worth issues from my teen years (22 now). But after some digging (finding out women like all different types of men, learning looks alone won’t bed a woman), I thought I have nothing to lose by trying this eye contact thing out.

Went to the grocery store the other day, and it was bizarre. I held my head high, looked confident, and made razor sharp eye contact. I noticed I was getting checked out by a couple of MILFs. So I went up to them and I either said hello or gave a compliment. All seemed very receptive. No long convos or numbers gained, but I believe this is a turning point. At least for my mental game. Going out tomorrow night with this as a boost.

Following your instincts is extremely liberating.

Edit: OMG, can’t believe this blew up. Thank you all for your kind words and the helpful advice :) I’ll be sure to implement those ideas on my next outings! Honestly, if anyone is having trouble with this, just simply say hi! To anyone! I used to think people were against me, but in reality, they’re actually rooting for me. Change your mind, change your world. 😊There are two false idea in society I want to question. The first is the belief that "One person will save you". Some call this the "soul mate". 

But as plenty of people have realized and pointed out, this puts too much pressure and expectation on one person.

Wouldn't a better idea be to have a group of people you can depend on?

If there is just 1 person you depend on for emotional support or help, that person has to listen to all your problems and spend a lot of time helping you.

So it's better to have a group.

The next myth I want to question, is the false idea that if you're a guy, the person who saves you has to be a girl. Why can't it be a guy you're close friends with, or a group of guys you're close friends with.

A better idea is that rather than relying on 1 girl to always be there for you, rely on a group of close guy friends, or soul tribe. They are the people that will be there for you for the rest of your life. (And if one guy does disappear, you can find another guy. But because your emotion dependence is divided among several of them rather than just one, it wont hurt as much when that person disappears).

Accept that your wife can leave at any moment. But you stay with her and don't leave her because it's your duty to stay with her and the children. In some ancient traditions like Hinduism, the man stayed with the family because it was his duty. So the man get more emotionally attached to his male friends, but he doesn't dismiss the wife and children as it's his duty (not unless something really bad happens that causes him to divorce her).

But you can be emotionally closer to your guy friends and plan to be friends with them for the rest of your life as well.

Most girls will support a guy having a group of close guy friends as his priority over her (it's why sometimes when a guy goes to a club by himself, girls will ask him where are his friends). They understand this will help them as a couple survive. A lot of girls whose husband has no male friends will complain that they have to listen to all the husband's problems, and this has been the reason some marriages have ended.

A few girls may get an ego and want to be a priority over the guy's male friends, but this is not healthy, and will be worse in the long-term when the guy becomes too dependant emotionally on the girl, or the couple are in trouble and have nobody to help them.

I think a guy should have his Purpose and guy friends as more important than his wife. It's only when he makes other girls more important than his wife that he is wrong.

I think there are 2 types of girls:

1) Good for marriage girls = Girl who want her husband to have a Purpose and guy friends more important than them. They have less of an ego.

2) Not ideal for marriage girls = Girls who want her husband to make them their number one priority, and the guy has to sacrifice his Purpose and guy friends for her. This will then cause the guy to become needy and emotionally dependent on the girl, which then causes the girl to lose attraction for the guy. It's as if at some unconscious level, girls realize if they are a guy's number one priority, it will be bad for her and her children's survival, which is why girls run away from needy guys. Girls who want to be a guy's number one priority are going against their basic female nature.

Back in the day when we lived in villages, men would depend on other men for emotional support and assistance. In some old cultures, a men's male friends were considered his soul mates. I read a book on tribes that said a lot of problems our modern society faces comes from the fact we as humans need social connectedness, but ever since moving to cities and other modern areas, we live with just our partner. I think maybe one way to remedy that is to build our own tribe.

EDIT: There is an occurrence in relationships called 'emotional gold digging', which is when a man depends too much on a woman for emotional support and to listen to his problems. This is generally caused by a man not having any close guy friends. It unfortunately can damage the relationship with the girl, and some girls have broken up with the guy because of this. Google the words 'emotional gold digging' if you are curious about this.Thats pretty much it. You don't need to do more, just less. Get rid of trauma, you are already enough. Anything telling you otherwise is trauma you need to heal. 

&#x200B;

Thats a whole journey on its own.

&#x200B;

But finding out how to let go will allow girls to come into your life. Whether its allowing you to be genuinely excited to start a conversation, or a girl introducing herself to you while you're being your authentic self.

&#x200B;

In the deep realm of insecurities and pain, this information would probably bounce right off. But just know that you're already enough, and if you fix your image of yourself (through revisiting your past, going for what you want, pushing through your anxiety, talking to yourself nicely, etc. etc.), then you will manifest whatever you want in life.

&#x200B;

Self fulfilling prophecy.

&#x200B;

And I know letting go is easier said than done. But just always keep it in mind. If you are getting harder and harder on yourself, and feeling more desperate and more desperate, seek where that pain comes from, and listen to yourself. And try to heal it. Give yourself the love you need. Give yourself that you're affected by a lot of hardships. Even just mental hardships. Don't bully yourself. That's the path to progress.I wanted to elaborate on this [recent comment I left](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/k6ie6/i_am_a_beta_will_i_ever_be_able_to_build_my/), since a few people asked for a more detailed post. 

**Edit: I was only expecting two people or so to care about this, so WOW!!! I'm speechless reddit! Just hit #1 in /r/seduction, I am honored. I'm still reading every comment.**

Basically, this is how I changed my life, AMA.

Starting Point
---------------
*****
I was 25, only had 1 girlfriend who I lost virginity to. Small kid in highschool, I was the picked on, geeky kid. No real romantic involvement until my first girlfriend at 17(lasted 8 years). Had a crush on my best friend from 14-17, we hung out everyday, never really made a move(fml). I really believed no girl would find me sexy. I had never called a girl, flirted with one, gone on a date, none of that. At 25. This was 2 years ago.

However I had a lot of positives going for me. First, I had insane confidence in my abilities to learn and live life. Even though I didn't think a girl would be sexually attracted, I have a great career, lot of interesting skills and a great life. I believed I had value and I trusted myself to act correctly. Second, I am a performer(actor, magician), since a young age I've loved being the center of attention, even in beta ways. This helped me be comfortable at opening and telling stories, even though stories had a lot of low value qualities in them.

Beliefs
-------
*****


* People self-reinforce roles that have worked for them in the past

From a young age, I realized I could get through school by being a class clown, backing down when bullied. Once that worked, and it was how my social circle saw me, any attempt to act as the alpha or popular was met with resistance. You see this all the time, you can take a popular kid, move them to a new school and next thing you know they are a goth kid getting picked on. The "alphas" are not alpha by special talent or ability, they took the role at a young age by chance, and continually were self-reinforced in that role. This means your "role" is a **choice**, and you can change it anytime you want.

* You are what you think.

It is pretty much proven that if you constantly think negative sad thoughts, you will be sad. If you think positive thoughts, you will be happy. We are what we think, and what we think is a controllable process. If you can't stop thinking "I'm so worthless, I can't attract a woman", then you won't be able to.

* If you expect to find evidence of something, you will.

This is a natural process, and it is a good one. (within reason, when monitored) If you go through life looking for X, then you will find evidence for X where you might not have seen it, and ignore conflicting evidence. If you look for Y, then same thing, meaning you might ignore X. This has a huge impact on your life, and it places extreme importance on what you are looking for and expect to find rather than the data(experience) itself. So if you go out, expect to find women who are attracted to you, rather than looking for reasons they aren't.

* People respond to you how you expect to be treated.

Random high quality people you meet have no idea who you are as a person. No one really does, and we can't take weeks to judge people. So we expect everyone to self-broadcast their social standing, and if unsure we test them, if they respond to the test then we believe them. If you "Hack" the system, there is no way for them to challenge you. How could Brad Pitt prove he is a successful guy and sex symbol if stuck in some bar in the middle of nowhere with people that haven't seen his movies? What would stop you from acting the same and convincing an entire bar you are a movie star?

* Focus on internal change not results.

If your goal is to get 20 #'s or to kiss 2 girls, and then you don't get that due to random chance, then you failed. You feel sad, you wonder what went wrong. Screw that! You should focus on doing your best, having a good time. Don't be outcome dependent! Just do your best, and trust yourself. This avoids collecting evidence against your progress and stops you from giving yourself reasons to fail. Often my goal is just "Make someone smile" when approaching a set. I always win!!!

Tools
------
*****

###Controlling Thought:

####Thinking good things

This is the easy one. Repeat good beliefs, attitudes and expectations in your head. Force yourself to think this over and over.(Even if it isn't true yet or you don't believe it)

My persona is:

* I have a lot of women in my life, and I am used to them chasing me
* I am extremely picky with women as my time is valuable
* I am high value, leader of men, relaxed, and sexual. Alpha mindset
* I often take 10's home for a night of mutual fun with no expectations
* I meet a lot of cool people in my life, this is normal for me

What I expect and look for:

* Every girl here is trying to seduce me and take me back to her place
* Every bump, smile, laugh is a thinly veiled attempt to seduce me
* Guys look to me to lead, seek my approval and give them value

Most of this stuff is easily learnable from standard pickup/seduction sources, but you really need to drill it in your head and respond genuinely as if that is where you are coming from.

**Edit:** I felt like an actor getting into character. I wasn't saying these things as affirmations, but I was figuratively "getting into the head" of someone with abundance in success with women. I forced myself to believe girls flirting with me was normal and expected, even though in the beginning I knew that wasn't the case. Slowly this became more real for me, until I believed it completely. Even now I do this before going out or before a date just to stay sharp and focused, however it is more like remembering things about myself rather than as an actor getting into character.

####Not thinking bad things

This is much more difficult and where everyone has trouble. You need to be able to control your thoughts, and shut off your mind. I am going to use this word, but don't freak out: **Meditation.**

I am not talking about sitting in front of a wall, lighting incense, playing soothing music or any crap. Meditation is about having a tool to shut off your brain's internal chatter. This takes practice, but you can do it at work, in the grocery line, at a bar: anywhere, anytime. Just focus on a spot, on a sound, on your breathing whatever, and let any thoughts briefly pass and move on. Do this until you can consciously avoid the thoughts from forming in the first place, until you can silence the noise. This is a skill you get better at over time, after awhile you'll be amazed how easy this becomes!

Now everytime you find yourself listing reasons to fail, reliving failures or negative stuff, take 5-10 seconds and stop yourself. Take 5 minutes if you need to, but once you silence them, replace them with good thoughts and beliefs.

###Memories:

Make a list of your successes, your good memories. Maybe it was just a girl smiling at you, maybe it was a kiss, maybe it was a wild threesome. Lock those in and force yourself to remember them, let them give you confidence.

####The Persona

Brief explanation of why persona is important over "Tactics". A million things you are not ready for will come up, and you need to respond like someone who often has amazing sexual relationships with women. Beyond all the words you say or kino you do, you need to have this larger "world-view" reality setup where it is a normal thing to meet a girl and take them home. Many PUA guys will entertain, neg, do kino all the right stuff, but don't close because it is not what they expect and not part of their reality that they project.

The Process
--------------
*****

About 30 minutes before going out, get yourself into a good space. Relive your successes, repeat your expectations and positive mindsets. I keep this up until I get to the club, date or daygame spot. This gives you a chance to see if any negative thoughts are coming up, and practice shutting them down.

Once there, I'm monitoring body for tension. If my shoulders are getting tight or whatever, deep breaths focusing on everything to relax. If it is mental, then I stare at my drink or the wall for 30 seconds and meditate, shutting out all thought. Often, I'll get some female eye contact that breaks me out of this(be aware of your surroundings). Be looking for your expectations to be fulfilled, notice the IOIs(smiles, laughs, touches) you get.

Afterwards, remember the night, again focus on your successes. Going through failures is fine, but once you think through them once, tell yourself "I've learned everything I can from that, and thinking about it longer is just harmful" then meditate and shut it out.

Along the way, look for really deep changes. My big sticking point was not thinking I could be sexy or "make a girl horny". It was hard, but slowly I started to believe I could. This was bolstered with evidence from girls telling me how sexy I am, getting makeouts, threesomes, etc. It took awhile and was a leap of faith to just let myself believe it. I haven't looked back.

Closing
--------
*****
I'm not trying to preach the truth or give an absolute plan, just relate my personal story and what worked for me. Take from it what you will, thank you for reading. My investments hit an all-time-high ($200k) at the age of 28 while earning $30,000 or less per year.

However, I regret my entire life. Why? Because of my unhealthy fixation with saving money. I would simply never spend it. I always like seeing the numbers increase from the age of 8 years old (allowance money, selling candy, bank account matching by my parents to encourage saving).

I did not take any risks in life. I did not look for a high paying job. I did not experiment socially with dating, networking, or travel. I have no hobbies. I waste too much time sleeping.

Saving was easy because I didn't do anything. I spend most of my time thinking about my savings, trying to reduce expenses, bored, or working. I don't think of greater opportunities for self-improvement. No social growth. No friends. Never kissed a girl, etc.

When I got my first job, I felt so aimless after hitting a certain saving metric (maxing my IRA). What now? What's the point of working? I was clueless and native but still, the issue was a lack of deep fundamental purpose in life. When I was younger, I had women ask me out. I turned them down (terrified) and kept sticking to saving money. 

So now I have this somewhat big amount of savings, but with no goals. And my biggest desire was to have a health social life and romantic experiences. I failed. 

What would you recommend?Gimmicks, jokes, and techniques, learning female psychology, even being confident or un-reactive is not necessary to create a connection and get intimate with a girl.

The only thing you actually need to do is not act weird. Act normal. Be socially calibrated.

Girls are automatically attracted to guys, just as we are to them. This understanding will help you immensely.

When you feel like you have low self worth, aren’t enough, or have to do something in order to earn her affection and attraction, that is when the overcompensation, neediness, and weirdness come out.

These are the things that DISENGAGE from attraction. You are DISENGAGING from understanding her sexuality.

It’s like making a dad joke when you’re passionately making out.

It’s like being overly goofy when you’re romantic.

It kills the vibe. It also sparks red flags. You are not okay with just being yourself. You have to overcompensate.

This sets off an intuitive alarm in people. Why are they acting like this? Something is off.

Tons of guys come up with theory’s on how to attract women. It all comes from a place of low self worth. If you would ask a guy that is naturally good with chicks, he would say ‘just be yourself’.

The origin of having to do a ton in order to win over a girl is that you are not enough as you are.

As Nirvana says, “come as you are”. Let go of the outcome. Stop caring if she likes you or not. Just assume she does.

If you can truly let go of your negative self image, and just have a normal conversation with girls, and then go for the moves when you want to, you’ll realize you’re putting all this pressure on yourself for no reason.

Girls don’t need to be constantly laughing, giggling, giving you super intense eye contact in order to be attracted to you. Many girls are too shy to even show their admiration.

Take the pressure off of yourself, assume she already likes you, and just build comfort and rapport with her. Get to know her. Converse. Be light hearted a little bit. That’s all you need.

All the extra bells and whistles, all the crazy actions you can do, all the push-pull, excessive physicality, pushing her buttons, dissing her, overly disagreeing with her, etc. are all extra, and in fact, many times they alienate her (even if they make her giggle on the spot).  


[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=appgiikxhC8&t=215s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=appgiikxhC8&t=215s)Hey everyone, I made a post like this around 3 months ago and this sub seemed to like it so I thought I’d try it again. Once again, I’ve collected the most helpful Reddit posts that helped me really improve pretty fast over the second half of this year & this post will be an organized overview of my favorite ones. If any of you have any additions you want me to put onto this post or have any corrections, just let me know below. Thanks for reading.

---

###These 2 are the most important in this thread. I’m re-listing them to make sure you read them:

####1: How to be Confident

I found this post the last time I made this but I still think it’s incredibly important, especially for some of you newer users. It’s a somewhat long but very detailed thread, so I’d really recommend that you read the entire thing when you have time:

https://www.reddit.com/r/confidence/comments/g5pxck

####2: Guide to Bootcamps (Online)

Like last time, I know most of you have already heard about this by now but I thought I’d still share it. This is a really helpful post that that provides a super helpful chart to find the cheapest online bootcamps. Bootcamps are the EASIEST way to improve as long as you are prepared to do a little work & they are easier to attend than having to drive far for an expensive bootcamp. The original post is on the dating subreddit but here is a repost:

https://www.reddit.com/r/LearnSeduction/comments/ipgvdk 

---

These next 2 posts were also very important to my improvement althogh I’d rank them a little lower than the previous two:

####3: 9 Habits of Socially Anxious People

This is a great post that outlines a lot of traits that people can identify with but also gives instructions and clear advice on how to change them. I know a lot of people just think they’re never going to change these aspects of themselves, but posts like these give practical information that anyone can apply to their lives.

https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/jllnas

####4: Discipline Isn’t the Answer For Procrastination

I know this may seem a little off topic, but I think procrastination is a HUGE barrier to self-improvement and should be dealt with immediately. Althought other discipline-based threads have made similar advice, I’d really recommend reading this post if discipline or procrastination are areas where you have difficulty with.

https://www.reddit.com/r/getdisciplined/comments/jjexwr

---

####The following list contains links to other articles that I think are crucial to your development in game & social skills. Although the four links above are more important and should be read first, these next ones will also help you a lot if studied and internalized properly. Here are the next 8 reads you should check out:

5: From Isolation to Self-Confidence – 10 Lessons

https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/jl2dno



6: Overstimulation is the Cause of No Discipline

https://www.reddit.com/r/getdisciplined/comments/ic70lc



7: Improve Confidence & Reduce Anxiety

https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/wiki/index#wiki_i_want_to_feel_happier.2C_more_confident.2C_and_less_anxious



8: The 1 Method That Always Works

https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/jmbner



9: Guide to Tinder Profiles

https://www.reddit.com/r/Tinder/comments/cnwwxb



10: Guide to Looking More Attractive (Men)

https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3cju8z



11: How to be Attractive

https://old.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/i7p1vq



12: Comprehensive Clothing Fit Guide

https://www.reddit.com/r/malefashionadvice/comments/ehrtv/shujins_comprehensive_fit_guide/

---

*So that’s the second list of the most important links that helped me on my journey to seduction improvement. If you have any links that you think I should add, please let me know in the comments.*

*As I said earlier, the most important links you should read if you don’t have much time would be the first four articles that I linked in the beginning. These helped me a lot while also significantly cutting down the amount of time I spent working on seduction so that I can work on other passions in my life.*

**Thanks again for reading & let me know if this has helped you at all!**Just about every week on r/askreddit someone posts the question, “what non-sexual act turns you on?” One of the top-rated comments from women was watching a guy back in the car while having his hand on the passenger seat headrest.

Now, I have no need to use my arm like that; I can back-in perfectly fine with the mirrors and a slight shift. After driving to the place, having some casual conversation, a little banter, a couple of jokes which she laughed at, we get to the parking garage. 

The guy gives me the return ticket, and as I’m about to back in, I put it in my mouth like a cigarette, put my arm on the headrest, and back my car into a tight space. I did it subconsciously, more than as a way to show off or look cool, and joked about it afterwards. I’d known this girl a total of 10 texts (met on bumble), and a 15-minute drive, yet I could see her watching me intensely as I went through the motions, to the point where I almost felt self-conscious.

I teased her, lead, made her laugh on the date (all of these are important of course), and even though I wasn’t that interested in her, we hookup and decide to head back to the car. Once we’re in the garage, she said, “I knew this was going to happen after watching your little  back in maneuver with the car.” I almost started cracking up, because I took that advice from women on a reddit post, and the rest was history.

Edit: we made out at the venue then went back to her house. She was talking about sexual things on the walk back to the car, so we both knew it was happening, and she confirmed it with the car line mentioned in the story above. 

If you go to r/askreddit or r/askwomen and search the word “sexual” or “non-sexual” you should be able to find multiple threads to browse for yourself.This may seem like a small or inconsequential behavior, but the ability to receive a compliment graciously is extremely important in social interactions.

Even if you are attempting to be humble, downplaying a compliment will backfire. When someone gives a compliment, they are putting themselves out there. Downplaying a compliment is in essence a form of rejection; if their compliment is sincere, you are negating a feeling they had about you and were willing to express. They will be less likely to open themselves up to you in that manner in the future. Additionally, downplaying a compliment will make you seem insecure and unsure of yourself, not humble.

The same holds true for returning compliments. On the surface, it seems like a friendly and polite thing to do. However, it comes of as being insincere. You are not giving someone a compliment based on something they did themselves, but rather as a favor for saying something nice about you. This will likely make them feel the opposite of how you intended when you returned the compliment.

If you receive a compliment, embrace it. If someone says something to you that is impactful, try to stay present in the moment and remember it for when you need it in the future. There is nothing egotistical about this. Tell them how it makes you feel. Simply saying “Thank you, that means a lot to me” is all you need if you mean it.Pick up is about YOU.  Not her.

Everyday the same questions appear on this sub over and over.  “What do I say to HER?”  “What do I text HER?”  “How do I approach HER?”  “What if SHE responds this way or that way?”

If you’re asking these questions then *you’re missing the point completely*.

The questions you should be asking are about YOU.  What needs to be done about you?

\-Don’t like the way you look?  Fix it.

\-Too scrawny?  Buy some dumbbells.

\-Too fat?  Haul your ass down to the gym.

\-Too ugly?  Learn to shave your facial hair in a way that elongates your jaw structure.

\-Still too ugly?  Get a better hair cut.  Buy color contacts. Get some acne cream.  Get a tan.

\-Bald?  Who gives a shit.  Bald guys get laid all the time.

\-No social skills?  Find a dude you like and trust.  Tell him: “bro, I don’t have any fucking social skills.  Help me.  Teach me how to talk to people.”  Be straight up.

\-Don’t know hot to talk to girls?  Learn about free association.  Learn not to give a fuck and just say whatever.  Pick a guru you like on this sub and listen to him.  (Here’s the secret -- they’re all right and they’re all wrong.  Why?  Because everything works sometimes.  And nothing works all the time).

\-No hobbies?  Get off your ass and find some.

\-Bad clothes?  Really that’s your fucking excuse?  Dressing well doesn’t have to be expensive.  You don’t have to shop at Nordstrom to get laid.

\-No wings?  Find some.

\-Tinder girl not answering?  Forget her.

\-Girl you met in person not answering?  Next.

\-Approach anxiety?  How about dying a virgin?  Which is more scary?

\-Nervous about rejection?  Make it a point tomorrow to go get rejected 20 times. ON PURPOSE.  At the end you’ll realize it makes no fucking difference.  And you’ll never have felt so confident in your life. (Plus you'll probably get some numbers along the way).

When you’re done with all that, realize that everything on this list is within your control.  And it’s time to fix it.

Even more important:  Fixing it.  Taking pride in yourself.  Being a man who gets his shit together.  That’s what girls really want anyway.

They don’t want dudes on the fuck-up list above who memorized some pick up lines.

So stop asking about HER.  Start asking about YOU.  Once you do that, you’ll discover that girls are really easy to find.

Actually, they’ll start finding you.

\---

Update: My best selling book 'Make Women Chase You' is now available to read **FREE** on Kindle Unlimited.

[amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193056&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.co.uk](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193197&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.com.au](https://www.amazon.com.au/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193254&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.ca](https://www.amazon.ca/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193354&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.in](https://www.amazon.in/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193319&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language)

\---

Also check out my free guide on 5 Steps To A Masculine Sexual Frame That Women Find Irresistible [here](http://dailymanup.com/attract-women-girls-masculine-alpha-sexual-frame-presence).

\---TL;DR: Something changed in my dating life. Here are the things that I worked on (they're not particularly new or ground-breaking):  

* Experimented with a new hairstyle and got better fitting clothes  
* Asked a friend to take better dating app photos. I got them to take photos of me doing the things I would want to do on the first date.  
* Started swiping selectively, declined to use the kind of "funny" opening-lines seen on r/tinder; started the conversation as I would in real life; bailed politely if I wasn't getting a response; moved to IRL date asap; accepted this part was going to be a numbers game  
* Outcome independence / Inner Game: Dissociated dating outcomes with your self-esteem and stop taking it so seriously  
* Worked on kino: hug at start of date, hold for longer and compliment on hugging technique; learnt to flirt, escalate to holding hands, recognizing the moment to go in for the kiss and eliminating the hesitance/shame of asking them over to my place 

---


I'm not an especially good-looking, slightly pudgy, 5'10'', 28yo, brown Indian guy living in a European capital for the past two years. I don't have a super strong accent, but I did grow up and study entirely in India, mostly outside of the big cities with limited exposure to dating culture. So, when I moved, I basically had to learn how to date from scratch - what to say, how to escalate, how not to be shy, etc. It went horribly as you can imagine, in that it didn't go anywhere. I barely matched with anyone, I didn't know how to approach people in real life (I still don't really, but at least I have more confidence in initiating conversations), and a few colleague-friends I asked out thought we were hanging out as colleague-friends. 

However, in the last 10 months or so, something changed and these have roughly been my stats (primarily on Hinge):  

* 100 matches  
* 20 first dates  
* 5 lays  
*  2 people I would have liked to be in relationships with  
* 0 relationships  

These might not be amazing numbers to some, but for me they are infinitely more than what I expected out of life. So keep that in mind for the rest of this "advice". This community has been a source of support in those times, and I wanted to give back by describing what I think accounts for that "success". 

Obviously, a big chunk of this "success" comes from the lockdown as it probably got more women onto the apps and taking it slightly more seriously. That might have played a huge part but not something I really controlled. 

But here's the things I did control:

**I grew a beard and let my hair grow long**  

* Growing up a goody two-shoes in India, having been warned away from caring too much about how I look lest I become a lafanga (good for nothing, unemployed guy), I always had a clean-shaven and no-frills, no maintainence, short hair. Through lockdown, I figured why not take a chance. I grew out my hair and beard and when things opened up again, I started getting a lot of compliments. Maybe it was just some, but if it goes up from zero, everything feels like a lot.  
* I lurked on /r/malefashionadvice and got myself more European, better fitting clothes. I got a few compliments on my clothes.  
* Lesson: If you're in a rut, experiment with a new hairstyle and get better clothes. I had to overcome some cultural conditioning.  



**I finally updated my dating app photos to be explicitly for dating apps**  

* I finally asked a female friend to help me take some photos. Apparently, this was super normal request, and not at all the big, judgy thing I was expecting it to be. With my new found confidence from the compliments I was getting, we headed out to the park with some costume changes (jackets, glasses, etc.) and got a couple of good photos.  
* I asked her along to a bunch of activities that I do, or would want to do on a date (like bouldering, kayaking, cooking, etc.) and took more photos there, so that my dating profile would show some personality and also show the kind of things I'd imagine us doing together on a date. My match rate "skyrocketed" (again compared to before, which was basically zero)  
* Lesson: Ask that friend (guy or girl) to help you take good dating photos.


**I did a mushroom trip and read a therapy book (Feeling Good by David Burns)**  

* And something changed inside my head. I wasn't as concerned or worried about dating. If it happened, it was good. If it didn't, it wasn't that big a thing. And it definitely didn't have anything to do with my worth as a human or potential partner. I worked on my self-esteem and negative self-talk. And my depression became less severe. I became less anal about following an algorithm and became more comfortable with just being me and being in the moment.  
* Lesson: I can't say go do shrooms, so let me just say work on your inner game
  


**I started to only swipe on people I actually thought were interesting**  

* I used to swipe on anyone I found pretty. Unfortunately, because of my cultural conditioning, I found most of the people on the apps 'pretty'. So I changed my approach to swiping only on people I found interesting. Lowered my standards a little bit for outer beauty and increased my standards for what side of their personality was the person highlighting and if I thought we'd actually have anything in common, other than being on the app. So instead of running out of likes and having wasted them on people I had nothing in common with, I ran out of likes while only swiping on people I actually would have liked to talk to.  
* Once I matched, I'd start the conversation normally, like I would in a real life. Reveal a something about myself (interest, activity I'm doing, what I recently read) and ask a question. I decided to refuse to play the opening-line game and just behave 'normally' like I would in real life. Might not be the most successful strategy but it is definitely a less stressful strategy.  
* There was one moment when I was speaking to 6 women at the same time. It was overwhelming. I didn't know who was who anymore. I empathized more with why women ghost and I accepted ghosting as part of the process. I don't ghost. Even if the women isn't putting in the effort. I will end the chat with a simple, "Hey, I don't think we're really connecting. So, Im going to unmatch but I hope you find what you're looking for." No blame. Just facts. And move on.  
* After a couple of back and forths, when they ask me the next question, I respond with "How about I tell you when we meet at XX on XX?" If they're not asking you questions, time to bail.  
* Lesson: Conversations on an app are a numbers game. Be kind. Move to an IRL date asap.


**I learnt how to flirt and escalate through practice and missteps.** 

* My first couple of dates, now that I had started getting dates, fizzed out and didn't go anywhere. I spoke too much about myself, didn't really flirt and had no idea how to go for the kiss. I decided to treat the dates as practice sessions, now that I was slightly more confident in getting more dates, not every date was a do-or-die situation. I decided to just tell them, "I'm going to kiss you now," when I felt like kissing. It helped that we were post-lockdown but still Covid, so there was an excuse to "seek permission". But phrasing it like an intent would make it work even otherwise, I guess.   
* Most women would just smile and nod and I would kiss them. Some would say no, and it would be awkward for a few moments. In that case I powered through the conversation to other subjects and we usually ended the date 15m later or so. I got better at calibrating what I felt inside and how things were going outside and when I should make the move.  
* At the end of one of these earlier dates (my flirting technique still in a fledgling state), the girl just straight up asked me if I wanted to go back to her place. I couldn't believe it. And also how easy and straightforward her approach had been. So, after we're making out, I also just started asking to go back to my place in an easy and straightforward manner.  
* At the same time that I was calibrating my kissing-moment-radar, I also experimented with simple kino escalation. I was extremely shy about hugging. Didn't even know how to go for one. Learnt that if I just smiled and held out my arms, most women would just hug. I experimented with how long to hold the hug and rubbing their back towards the end of it (some of this might sound aspie, but I had to work through it). As with the kissing, I just decided to go for hand-holding, when I felt like it. I figured, I feel like holding hands, and I like holding hands. If I don't make that be known, how is it ever going to happen. You know what? Not that big a deal, as it was in my head.  
* Finally on flirting. The book that helped me the most (and yes I've read a lot) was "Double Your Dating: Cocky Comedy". I dislike the PUA scene, but this book really did help me by offering simple advice like "intentionally misunderstand sexually", etc. I stole jokes from my favourite comedians, accepted and then leaned into my own sense of humour (silly, punny and sometimes dark); and just had fun with it. Sometimes, I even pretended in my head to be a stand-up testing out his material. As I gained confidence in myself, I was able to become even more sexual in my flirting.  
* Lesson: Hug at start of dates, hold for longer, compliment. Eye contact. Flirt. Hold hands. Make out (just saying "stop" works to give you the 'moment'). Ask to go back to my place.

So, yeah, that about covers it, I think. Hopefully, this helps someone. I've tried to write in a way that would have been useful / inspiring to someone in my position a year ago. 

My next goal is, as bars open up and things start going back to normal, to be able to translate these skills and learning to "real life" meet-ups. And as I push myself to do that, try not to lose sight of that fact that having fun is the point.- It's not your lack of money she finds unappealing.  It's your lack of ambition.

- It's not your looks she finds unappealing.  It's your indifference to how you look.

- Whatever excuse you have about women being uninterested is just an excuse.  Countless men with your "handicap" (and worse) enjoy satisfying love lives.

- Everybody has insecurities.  In fact, she probably has more than you. 

- 90% of game is self-esteem, getting out of the house and having a fun laid-back personality, not on being "alpha".  

- Do not rely on seduction "rules" (never buy her a drink, remember to neg, be cocky/funny, etc).  Putting on an act = shittier self-esteem = shittier game.  

- Woman do like nice guys, just not weak needy ones.

- Your value to a women is directly proportional to your unwillingness to take her shit.

- Women and feminism aren't the problem.  You're the problem.

- If you expect or want women to make the first move, you have the wrong mindset.Hi everyone, it's been about a week since my last post. I appreciate the support and I'm glad my first post got the interest that it did. Alot of you asked for an update so here it is.

So she ended up messaging me about a day and a half after I gave her my number. We chatted for a bit. I asked her what her favorite wine was and tried to soft close her on a date. She kept changing the subject and it seemed at first like maybe she wasn't super interested. I realized I was pushing for the date prematurely so I pulled back a bit. A couple days later she messaged me again and I again tried to set up a date. Still no luck. Finally she told me it was because she didn't know what I really looked like since I always wore a mask in the store. I think she was afraid I'd be ugly lol. So I visited her on her lunch break that night. I waited in my car for her and she got in the passenger side for a chat. I guess I put her fears to rest, because she almost immediately went for the kiss, which of course I reciprocated. We made out for a bit and she began to tell me how I was the topic of the stores gossip. That her coworkers were always asking her about me and when we were gonna go out. She tried to shit test me a few times. Saying she wasn't gonna date me since I had forgotten her name earlier on. Which I did, but after that kiss I knew she couldn't resist me and just wanted to see how I'd react. We kissed again and she said, " I'm definitely going out with you." We joked around and flirted for a bit before she went back to work. It's been a few days since then and she is the one fully chasing me now. She texts me all the time, asks me lots of questions. And Even bought me a candle from her work. I'm going to see her this weekend and I plan to fuck her brains out. So be ready for another update.

TLDR: Milfy employee from the pharmacy messaged me but wouldn't agree to a date, turns out it was because she wanted to see my face with no mask first. I visited her at her work, and she was all over me. Now we're planning a date this weekend.Last week I asked a girl out, if she’s not busy Monday and she said she would get back to me. That Sunday night, still nothing about our plans. Per someone’s advice, I did not ask anything about the Monday plans and in my head decided to ask her later in the week for future plans. We’ve been on two dates btw. 

Come Tuesday, we’ve been texting but she seems less engaged in our texts and overall showing less interest than usual. Now Wednesday (yesterday) she knows that I had spent the day with my female friend (who is taken but she doesn’t know that). So she doesn’t text me at all that day until 9pm when she asks me to play a video game with her. She also immediately asks how my day was, specifically how’d it go hanging out with my friend Renee and asked whether she lives nearby. 

Here’s the point. We’re on call playing the game, and she just cannot shut up about how much she misses me lmao. Like it was every few minutes, talking about me kissing and cuddling her. And making jokes about how we are a married couple and share a bed. Lol don’t worry they are all jokes. I guess she expected me to take this and make plans with her. I didn’t though, I was tired from being out all day and wasn’t thinking very much. 

So guess what? She does it herself. She practically starts begging me to see her on Saturday. And I’m like “don’t you have Sabbath on Saturday?” and she goes “yes but you can still come!!” so she ends up asking me to come over to her house on Sunday, and it really seemed like she was trying to convince me because she was talking somewhat frantically about plans like how we could also go to x beach and do y thing. I’ve never literally been begged to go over to someone’s house so this was honestly amusing. I’m guessing it was a combination of not asking her about our failed Monday plans, hanging out with my female friend, and just removing myself a little bit. But man was the change in her attitude towards me sharp and sudden.I hope you'll be able to watch these and get a clearer idea or which ones you would be interested in reading fully.

**I'm releasing a new video or two each week or so if you're interested in that consider subscribing :)**

Thanks, have a great day

**I've made over 50 summaries of the best self improvement books, the links are below.**

**Full playlist of them all here:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&list=PLaNTB6oQAa0AYuul0tqUscg1ZLj\_arZga](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&list=PLaNTB6oQAa0AYuul0tqUscg1ZLj_arZga)

**Here are the links:**

Make Your Bed:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c)

The power of the subconscious mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw)

Getting things done:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc&t=1s)

The power of intention:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY&t=1s)

Deep work:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA&t=8s)

The magic of thinking big:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8&t=3s)

The alchemist:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU&t=36s)

Blink:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk&t=246s)

Atomic Habits:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU)

The E-Myth Revisited:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g)

Mindset:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo)

The art of war:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8\_5qhA2y-E4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_5qhA2y-E4&t=32s)

Rework:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k)

The lean startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE&t=67s)

The hard thing about hard things:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl\_Q3E5d33U](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl_Q3E5d33U&t=2s)

Crush it!:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI&t=6s)

Delivering Happiness:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8&t=4s)

The personal MBA:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU&t=2s)

The $100 startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE&t=1s)

Zero to One:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc&t=1s)

Grit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s)

Start with why:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY)

The compound:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0&t=218s)

The Prince:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ&t=78s)

The willpower instinct:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ&t=103s)

The slight edge:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS\_ZU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS_ZU)

Meditations:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI&t=30s)

Who moved my cheese?:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw)

The One Thing:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM&t=16s)

The richest man in babylon:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs&t=20s)

The power of habit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA&t=24s)

Secrets of the millionaire mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g&t=1s)

The 6 pillars of self esteem:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB\_-w10](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB_-w10&t=8s)

The 7 Habits of Highly Effective people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_nGzZ9m\_Xsg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nGzZ9m_Xsg&t=3s)

Thinking Fast and Slow:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw&t=224s)

The 4 hour work week:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g&t=1s)

The power of positive thinking:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM\_19KBc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM_19KBc&t=1s)

The power of now:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w&t=35s)

Think and grow rich:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww&t=1s)

12 rules of life:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU&t=26s)

The 5 love languages:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY)

Rich Dad Poor Dad:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8&t=28s)

How to win friends and influence people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM&t=137s)

The inside out revolution:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo&t=31s)

Models:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo&t=5s)

Man’s search front:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk&t=18s)

The subtle art of not giving a fuck:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&t=253s)

How to stop worrying and start living:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug)

The millionaire fastlane:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA)

5 extremely powerful techniques to master motivation:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM&t=37s)

Quiet by Susan Cain:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzRcYLq63dU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzRcYLq63dU)

Extreme Ownership:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMWeEyqWHe0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMWeEyqWHe0&t=56s)TIP ONE. Have something more important than girls. Have goals and hobbies that give you self-esteem and happiness so you don’t need girls.

TIP TWO. Don’t make being good with girls your identity. If you do, you will put more pressure on yourself to do well with girls and will struggle more in conversations. You will also need girls more for your self-esteem, and this neediness will cause girls to lose interest in you. The guys who get the best results with girls often deny being good with girls. This takes away the pressure on them to do well with girls.

TIP THREE. Have a few supportive guy friends. Some men have no male friends for emotional support, so they depend too much on the girl and will do things like call her all the time because they have nobody else to talk to. This is too much work for the girl, and can damage the relationship with her.

TIP FOUR. Don’t aim to get every girl to like you. You want to polarize, as Mark Manson and The Natural Lifestyles teach. If you show the real you, 9 out of every 10 girls you talk to might not be interested, but 1 out of 10 will really like you, and that is Deep Attraction. She  will stay in your life for longer. If you pretend to be something you’re not and try to get everyone to like you, there will be Shallow Attraction. They will like you a little, but eventually they will forget you when they meet someone they have Deep Attraction for. Deep Attraction beats Shallow Attraction. 1 out of 10 girls having Deep Attraction for you is better than 5 out of 10 girls having Shallow Attraction for you, but they leave you when they meet a guy who polarizes them and they have Deep Attraction for.

TIP FIVE. Have a social hobby where you can meet girls. Your main priority here is the hobby, meeting girls is a bonus. If you go there just to meet girls, you will give off a desperate vibe and girls will avoid you. If you focus on the hobby and become good at it, girls will introduce themselves to you. For those of you obsessed with cold approaching, I still suggest doing this as it will make you better at cold approaching. You spend time with girls here which makes you less intimidated by girls. You also get to practice your conversation skills in a safer environment than out on the streets. And because you have another way to meet girls, you put less pressure on yourself when you cold approach, and will do better.

TIP SIX. Write down everything you know about social skills. This was a game changer for me. When my friends asked me for advice, I sat down and wrote everything I knew so I could teach them. I then realized I actually knew very little, even though in my head I felt I knew a lot. The problem is we spend hours watching videos and reading books or websites, so feel we must know a lot, and this is really complicated. But more than 90% of the information in seduction is bad information, or stuff that doesn’t work for us, or stuff we already know. When you write down what works, you notice how little is actually useful, and this then changes your perception of the game. The game becomes a lot easier after you do this exercise. Plus you can revise everything you know to understand it better. But as long as you carry it around in your head, you mistakenly believe you know more than you do, and seduction is harder than it really is.https://youtu.be/C1kX52dAeBE

Here is the video i watched for you all that dont know about him. Quote is from some other video, had it writen down in my notes.She is only a supplement to AN ALREADY GOOD LIFE.

If you have nothing going for you and your life revolves around getting girls and nothing else then you’re just gonna end up a loser.

If you’re a loser and you get a girlfriend, then you’re still just a loser with a girlfriend.

Build up a good, positive life first, and then SUPPLEMENT it with a cool girl... or 2, or 3.1. *Find your purpose and spend as much time and effort on it as you can.* Women need relationships in their life to feel sane. Not just a man, but friends and family too. Similarly, men need a mission, a purpose. Something outside of themselves, their wants and their ego to dedicate themselves to. For some men it's a creative endeavor like art or a business. For others it's a family, or an institution like the military. Or the quest for knowledge, the truth, some kind of meaning. As Ayn Rand said, the most depraved man is a man without a purpose. Choose your own adventure.

2. *Exercise.* Why give yourself a handicap like a beer gut when you don't have to? Exercise not only improves your physical appearance but also your mental health. In fact, if I was to name the physical trait that women universally find attractive, it would be a low bodyfat percentage. You look your best, and your fitness level signals good things like self-discipline and commitment. 

3. *Keep building a lifestyle that makes you happy.* It's not about reaching milestones like a net worth or home ownership. It's not about money or flashy toys or a huge social circle. It's about being happy in your own life before you invite others into it. People who aren't happy in their own life are needy by default because consciously or not, they're looking to other people to make them happy. If your happiness is dependent upon other people, you're in for a bad time.

4. *Develop self-discipline.* Not only is it a crucial life skill, it's something that a woman will test you on, sooner or later. If for no other reason than her wanting to know she can't manipulate you. A man who isn't in control of himself will sooner or later be controlled by others. Women want a man who is the master of his own destiny, and there is no way to get there without self-discipline.

5. *Own and accept your thirst.* Men want to get laid. We're biologically wired to chase sex because if we didn't, the human race would die out. The desire isn't the problem, in fact it drives a woman nuts and not in a good way if your desire is out of reach (the same way men find the friend zone excruciating). What is a problem is when we let our thirst hijack us or we repress it and act inauthentic. The secret is to not be ashamed of your sexuality, but to have standards so that a woman has to do more than just show up for you to be attracted to her.

6. *Assume attraction.* This is one of the most misunderstood teachings of the seduction community. The secret is to understand this: loads of women could be attracted to you, and you have no way of knowing how much. Many women will deliberately act like they're not, because they are. The best stance to take is to quietly, in your own head, assume she's into you on some level until there's a clear pattern of rejection/disinterest. When you do this right, women call it confidence. And if you screw it up, you'll do it by trying too hard or overcompensating. The secret is remembering that if she is in fact attracted to you, you don't need to make an impression, you already have. This is how confidence becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. 

7. *Polarize to attract.* One of the big differences between men and women when it comes to attraction is that when a woman is into you, she'll pay more attention to you. When a man is into a woman, it will give him the urge to act. So if you don't act, even if she's warm for your form, it will never go anywhere. Remember that even a bad or an awkward move is better than no move at all. And sooner rather than later. The slower you are to make a move, the more leverage you give up and the quicker she figures you out and categorizes you. That's how guys wind up in the friend zone. 

8. *Touch her and touch her often.* One of the big riddles of sexual tension is the first person to discuss it directly loses. This is why love-bombing a girl or asking permission to for instance, kiss her, especially before you've been intimate with her is almost always a fatal error. So how you do communicate sexually without words? With touch. The trick is that lots of light touch is better than big bold moves because it creates that unspoken rapport and physical chemistry. Save copping a feel for when you guys are already intimate, and just touch her on the arm. It's also a good way to polarize because if she freaks out or responds badly to friendly non-sexual touch, she's either got issues or she's simply and clearly not into you. So get comfortable breaking the touch barrier and communicating with action, rather than words. 

8. *Treat rejection as the blessing in disguise that it is.* The simple and unavoidable fact is not every girl will be into you. This is life. Often the reason is something that has nothing to do with you. But rejection is infinitely better than some girl breadcrumbing you just because she can. When a girl rejects me, what I hear is "Your gift is wasted on me." And I'll take and appreciate that kind of honesty every time over the alternative. Furthermore, nothing shows how weak a man is, than when he takes rejection badly. You're far more likely to get her to change her mind by taking it on the chin and not caring, than by trying to argue or reason with her. Also remember to distinguish between "not yet" and "no", and if you keep getting "not yet"s, it might as well be a "no". 

9. *Learn to get comfortable in sexual settings with women and don't sabotage yourself with bad experiences.* Most men find their way to the seduction community because they're either alienated from women or had bad experiences. This is something you will have to overcome. Some women will do everything in their power to make your life miserable because they're miserable themselves. Don't chase girls who you know are bad investments. Don't try to fix broken situations - they're always broken for a reason, even if you only figure it out years after the fact. Women judge how successful a man is with women based on a man's expectations. If you're believing and expecting the worst and lamest in women, she'll read that as you being bitter and lonely. If you expect better, she'll see you as a man who's expectations are worth meeting.

10. *Cultivate options.* This is just a tool for survival in the modern dating world. Most women these days if they're least bit attractive will have options, even if they're not single. The men they're using to dealing with have options too. This unfortunately leads to many people getting narcissistic, treating their romantic prospects as disposable, and "burning" people. It may be shitty and stupid, but it's something you need to be prepared for. It's a lot easier to say to yourself "I don't need this shit and I'm gonna go spend my time with someone who values me", when you have options.

11. *Practice Stoicism.* Overreacting to things looks weak because it is weak. It demonstrates an external locus of control and a lack of self-discipline. Far better in fact to under-react and undersell. What women look for in men is their reaction to things, especially herself. If you don't have control over your reactions, you're an open book. There is a certainly a time and place for passion, vulnerability, and being an open book, but it's like sex - if you spent all your time in the bedroom, your relationship would be a diet of pure sugar. Think of it this way - many famous kings of history made it a personal rule to say as little as possible, react as little as possible, and avoid committing themselves verbally to a position or course of action. And then act swiftly and decisively, so that their actions and decisions sent the message, both in rewards and punishments.

12. *Get comfortable enforcing boundaries.* Boundaries can be a tricky thing because too much makes a relationship all about control and that never ends well, while no boundaries  also never ends well. The secret is knowing what you do value in the opposite sex and knowing what you can't tolerate. Thus oriented, you have some idea when and where to take a stand. Another secret is to give warning shots. Make it clear something bothers you, but in a friendly not-accusatory way so the other person can save face. This way, if the behavior continues, you know it's either deliberate or a symptom of some kind of character flaw. Resist the temptation to let something slide or undersell a reaction. If something demands a reaction then react. And finally, when you do make a decision that someone has crossed a line, act decisively, unapologetically, and do not back down until there's at least been a serious correction and some accountability. Women do not like it when men are pushovers, because if you can't stand up to her, you won't stand up for her either.- Wake up at roughly the same time each day regardless of how much sleep you had  (ideally earlier than 7) 

- Make sure the FIRST thing you think of is a positive thought or affirmation. If your first thought is that of dread or perturbation you’re predooming yourself from the get go

- Don’t lie in bed on your phone - jump the fuck up 

- Drink a glass of cold water to rehydrate and kickstart your digestive system 

- 3 rounds of wim hof breath retention work (gets you used to staying calm mentally whilst your body is releasing adrenaline - also works as a mindfulness meditation exercise) 

- A cold shower for at least 2 minutes (stimulates testosterone production, improves thermoregulation, self discipline)

- Head outside and view sunlight if possible (causes cortisol to peak early in the day, calibrates your circadian cycle) — delineate a few goals for the day, ideally in a journal, to be used as reference for reflection later in the evening. 

- have a balanced breakfast e.g complex carbohydrate in cereal, fruit and vegetable smoothie, yoghurt.  Avoid caffeine if possible - it can heighten physical anxiety symptoms if used regularly also this routine will energise you when done consistently. Use half the regular amount of caffeine if you need to. 

- play some music that helps cultivate an empowered mindset e.g some Nordic folk music https://youtu.be/l199zOeT4ns 

- Spritz some great cologne and use mouthwash so you’re smelling fresh 

- avoid mindlessly scrolling social media or dating apps 

- Head out into the world feeling like a fucking king 



Bonus 

- Force yourself to interact with a few people as early as possible to snap you into a social mood 

- Try to jack off less in general (test peaks after one week without ejaculation)

- Workout in the morning of that fits your schedule but dont stress about it 

- Look people in the eye, walk tall with your chin up 

- Remember your worth, even if nobody else does 



Anyway, my anxiety and fear have diminished almost entirely since doing this - but thats not the goal here. 

The real goal is to learn to act in the face of fear. That is true bravery


——————————————————-


Edit:

This isn’t just some generic alpha male bullshit (I don’t even believe in that dynamic amongst human beings). 
It’s based on information I derived from several podcasts by Stanford neuroscientist and ophthalmologist Dr Andrew Huberman.

You don’t have to follow every step (I laid in bed for 10 minutes this morning) but you should try to, and it should give you the healthiest start to the day.I was sitting outside my psych appointment (has a very small waiting area with only 2 chairs). This really cute brunette walks in and I’m a bit flustered but she sat right next to me and I figured it would be weird to say nothing.

So I said “hey, I know this is probably the worst place to do this, but I thought you were really cute and I wanted to see if I could get your number.” As expected she was taken aback, and seemed very caught off guard. And her response was “uhhhhhhmmmm” (and not in the good way). 

So my smart ass trying to save face says, “you know what, it’s ok, at least I know what to talk about in therapy now.” She starts cracking up and agrees to give me her number. 

Sarcasm - 1 
Normal pickup lines - 0I want to start by saying if you want to get better at texting girls (or get better at almost anything) you have put in the reps (practice). If you aren't willing to fail, task risks and put in the time to try new things then this isn't the guide for you.

Disclaimer: This guide is not a quick fix that will make every girl fall in love with you through text guide, it's a this is how I think it should be done and how I get success with texting girls guide.

&#x200B;

*Why do we text?*

Texting is a form of communication to stay in contact with someone. Texting isn't meant for "getting to know people" that's what dates are for. Face to Face interactions will always be better than texting. You should be texting to set up dates, build interest between you and a girl. You shouldn't be having a full conversation through text, you should be saving that for when you're in person.

&#x200B;

*When do I text a girl after getting her number?*

I highly recommend not waiting longer than a day or two. If you wait too long (3+ days) she may think you're not interested or even worst forget about you. If you text her the same day you may come off as desperate or needy. During the evening time is usually best to text someone.

&#x200B;

*What should my first text be?*

"Hey, what's up" or "hey how are you" are some of the worst first texts that you can send. They are basic and overused. If she replies that text then it will lower the initial interest level she had and it will leave more work for you to do later. You want to reference something she bought up when you first met her. If she talked about how she thrifted her outfit and she enjoys going to the thrift store. Your first text could be something like "where was the thrift store you mentioned earlier? I want to check it out"

Jokes, memes are anything clever things you can think of is also good. Don't overthink it. With the first text, you just want to give her something to reply to. Don't text her anything like "hey do you remember me from blah blah blah?" when you first met her you should have also given her your number to avoid the awkward "hey, who's this." If still get a who's this after you told her to save your number. I wouldn't even text back because she's not interested enough or doesn't care.

&#x200B;

*What should I do after the first text?*

If she replies I would assume her interest level is about 40% to 90%. If she's already at 90% then just don't have to tell her dumb things like you're not over your ex, you're a bum and you're an emotional wreck. If she's already at 90% this part is about laying a strong foundation. If she's less than 60% you have some work to do. You need to get her to at least 70% to reduce flaking. HoW Do i KNoW WhAt % iS ShE At? we'll get to that. If she's doesn't text back after the first text deletes the number and move on. Work on your approach and focus on building a better connection next time.

At this part, you want to ask questions during the "warming up" phrase. These are essential to building enough trust and comfort, so she'll be more than willing to go on date with you. You want her excited to get it to know you and see you face to face.  These questions are where you start screening her and seeing if you're even interested in her. Remember you are the prize and she should also be trying to earn this date with you. Don't try to take her on a date just to take a girl out on a date. You don't need to take girls on dates to get laid. Dates with no excitement or spark end in the friend zone or your texts will get ignored after the date.

&#x200B;

*What do I do during the "warming up" phase?*

You need to ask her that ask where is she from, Where does she do for a living, if she goes to school ask what's her major. Ask where has she traveled. If she doesn't travel ask where she wants to go. Everyone has a story and everyone wants to travel. She should be excited to tell you these things if she's interested in you. There must some type of back and forth. If she's not asking questions back her interest level is too low. During this process, you need to make mental notes and notice what she is receptive too. Do you best to make sure they are open-ended questions. There's a difference between "what's it like growing up in California?" and "Where did you grow up?"

(if you already asked these questions before you got her number, good conversation starters can be about things you remember her mentioning. You can skip a lot of the warming phase if your approach was good, but you still want to screen her, before asking for a date)

The part when you're asking her questions is to make conversations out the questions. Again there should be a good back and forth. You should be making jokes and asking questions about things that genuinely interest you about her. Most importantly you should be flirting and finding out what you have in common. When you find out things you share in common make that a topic. If you both like books. See if you like the same books and authors. Ask her to recommend a book. Find out what her favorite books are etc. etc. Don't agree with everything she says or try to say you like all of the same things. Be genuine and don't be scared to disagree.

&#x200B;

*How do I flirt over text?*

Use emojis. I'm serious. Texting is disingenuous and emotionless. 🥰😍😘😏😉❤️🔥🍆 you know what these mean and she knows what they mean. These make it obvious that you're flirting with her and that you're interested in her. Emojis convey emotions (in a way) you want her to feel a certain way about you and this one way to do it.

Use words like "us" "we" and "together"  if you use these world you let her you want to be with her. If she doesn't like it when you use these words her interest level is too low drop her and move on. If she says that she's hungry you should joke that she could come over to eat because you cook a good microwave dinner. Allude that you want to meet up and hang out together.

Tease her. You don't want to be like every other guy texting how beautiful and sexy she is. Make fun of something and do in a nonhurtful way using emoji can help show that you're only joking. Don't say mean things or talk about things she's insecure about just make a light joke.

If she's flirting back and doing the same things like teasing and using emojis back her interest level could be anywhere from 70% to 90%. When you feel like her interest level is at least 70% then you should be asking her out on a date. Can you ask a girl out on a date if she's at 40% or 60% yes, but the chances of her flaking will be very high.

&#x200B;

*How do I ask her out on a date?*

First, you need a plan for the date. If you've been asking her questions and learning things about her you should know what would interest you both. Day one of texting you should already be thinking of a date plan. My go-to dates: if she's competitive I'll choose the arcade, mini-golf, or dave & busters. If she's into music/artisy I'll choose a piano bar, the museum or people-watching at the karaoke bar. you want to have a few options on where you want to take her out to.You want to ask when you feel like her interest level is peaked.

You also want to have an idea of when, and where. If your texting has been solid you should know what her schedule is like. If she likes you she will have no problem telling you what her schedule is like. When you ask it should be something like "I know you said you've always wanted to try Chinese food, how about WE (keyword) go this restaurant I know across town on Tuesday?" You want to go to multiple places on the first date. Give her a fun experience. Keep the first dates cheap and do your research on free activities in your area.

You want her to reply with "Yes! I would love to meet up with you at blah blah blah on Thursday." Some bad replies: "I'm too busy" or "I'll let you know" or "ill think about it." If you get any of these you probably asked too late or too early and I recommended just not texting her again unless she texts first. I want to add there's a difference between "I'll let you know when I'm free" and "I get my work schedule on Wednesday, so I'll know then" girls that are eager for the date or happy you ask usually have very high interest.

After asking her on the date you will need to remember to send a confirmation text. "We still down for bowling at 7?" and if she says yes then get prepared for your date. If you get a "ummmm I don't know now" then you're getting a little last-minute resistance. Tell her that's she'll have fun and there's no pressure. "we are just gonna grab a drink and chat" claim her down and don't allow her to overthink. Don't allow yourself to come off as angry or flustered.

&#x200B;

*what do I text after the date?*

Don't text her immediately text after the date. It will come off as needy and desperate. Wait until she texts after the first date. if she doesn't text in 3 days prepare to get friend-zoned. if you text her first and she doesn't reply prepared to get friend-zoned. On day 3 after the date, you should text her and make a joke something you talked about on the date or start a new conversation. If she had fun on the date she'll let you know and you should start planning the next one.

Don't ask if she had a good time on the date.If she says she had a good time that means she'll want to see you again and from now on you must stay consistent with your texting. if you text her 10 to 20 times every couple days keep it at that rate. You don't want to start texting her less and making her overthink or think that you're boring. Again don't an open book and share everything about you. Have some mystery to yourself to keep her interest high.

&#x200B;

*What do I do if she flakes on the date?*

Context matters in this situation. If she goes radio silent for days, then don't reply if she texts you again. She has no respect for you. If she says "I have an exam or group project" or anything dealing with work/school then try to reschedule. Don't immediately assume she's lying or get mad. Some girls just get nervous and need a few more days to mentally prepare. Emergencies do happen, and shit does happen. it's no big deal. If you have to reschedule don't slip up by making yourself seem too available and trying to plan another then and there, give it a day or two.

&#x200B;

*How do I know her interest %?*

if she replies quickly, asks you questions and make conversations flow well/makes them fun - 70% to 90%

short text and long periods between - 40% - for these situations try to text her again in a couple of days. If she still takes forever to reply drop her

Leaves you on read - 0% - move on and drop her - if she leaves you on read more then once she doesn't respect you. move on

Texts you first - 90% - you should be closing or asking her on a date the same day

Doesn't text first and barely replies when you do text - 40% to 0% - drop her and move on

Doesn't text first, but has great conversations when you do text - 60% - don't ask her on a date until you feel like her interest is around 70% to 80%

one word replies - 0% - stop texting her and move on

she randomly sends pictures of herself - 90% - you should be asking her on a date quickly

if she replies to with exclamation marks and emojis. - 80% - she excited or happy that you texted her. You should be asking her out on a date.

&#x200B;

***TEXTING DON'TS:***

***Do not text her all day.*** You don't want to think of you as one of her girlfriends or texting buddies. The goal of texting is to keep her interested and meet up with her. Leave some mystery to yourself make her have to see you if she wants to get to know the good stuff about you.

Don't text her "hey, what's up?" if you've done it once don't do it again. When you text her have a plan and topics. "Hey, how are you" and "what are you doing" can hard to form conversations out of it. If you make a habit out of it when will she stop replying to you.

***reply with a one-word text***. If you're ending a conversation that's okay but you don't want to make it hard for her to reply.

***Don't go overboard with the emojis*** one or two is all you need.

***Don't go into interview mode***. When you're asking questions don't ask a lot of them back to back. Ask questions that lead to conversations.stay away from questions like "tell me about yourself" or "what do you like to do for fun?" ask about things that interest you. Ask about things that matter to you. Make assumptions to create conversations.

***"Whenever you're free"*** don't EVER EVER EVER leave it up to her to the set the plans. You will come off as too available. Girls want you to have a plan. If she's not free the day you have planned then try to reschedule a day you're both free. Again if she likes you she'll let know when she's free.

Don't text girls for longer than a week and a half without a date planned. Don't let her "I'll let you know" or "we'll see" you forever. Look at a girl's actions. If she flakes more than once or doesn't reply to the question when you ask her out on a date then stop texting her. If she's interested she'll want to go on a date.

***Long text***. If it's a long paragraph reply leave it for when you're on the date or just call her. (Yes, girls still like it when you call them.) 3 to 5 sentences max. You don't want to give her too many questions to answer at once and you don't want her not to be able to interpret all you're saying. Keep it short, sweet and to the point.

***Double texting***. have no shame in double texting if it's during a conversation. If you text her, hey and she's doesn't reply don't text her hey again. it's over. move on.

***Don't ask deep questions***. Leave that for in person. Don't ask about her opinion of the current state of the world. Don't ask her to explain if she thinks there are flaws in Einstein's theory of relativity.  This can creep her out or just lead to long messages that can get misinterpreted.

***Don't text girls that frustrate you.*** if she's making you mad through text it's your fault for not deleting her number yet. Stop acting entitled. she doesn't have to text you back. Move on and work on yourself. Don't sit around waiting for a reply and stay busy by doing other things.

***Don't text her basic stuff like:*** good morning, hey beautiful, you there?, ???, don't send dick pick, etc.

&#x200B;

**PERSONAL TIPS**

I highly recommend texting more than one girl. I'm not saying text more than one at a time. I'm saying have multiple girls to text. A minimum of 3. Let's say you want a girl you want to invite a girl to come over to watch a movie. You text girl #1 and she doesn't reply. instead of getting angry and having an emotional response you text girl #2. Girl number #2 says sorry I'm busy, but let's go to the movies on Tuesday at 8. Then let's say you text girl #3 and she says I would love to come over and watch a movie. Instead of getting annoyed/feeling frustrated, you got a date and a girl to come over to watch a movie.

When you have more than one girl to text you instantly get more relaxed. you're able to take more risks because you have more girls in your life. Clinginess and neediness are some most unattractive qualities you can have to a girl. You should be doing anything that makes you less needy.

Since I mentioned taking a risk you should have any shame in turning conversations sexual. You must take risks with girls. If you're not trying to flirt or ask her on a date you will get friend zoned. When you're on the date you should be trying to hold hands and kiss. The risks create sexual tension and the spark that girls are looking for.

You should be working towards being able to FaceTime with her (if you have an iPhone of course) it’s a great way to connect. If she gets the point to where she wants to sit on FaceTime with you and just looks at you all day, then you’re in a very good position. Facetiming can be a good replacement for texting. I recommend facetiming once she feeling comfortable with you after met up with her a couple of times.

**Send Memes.** Memes can be funny and every better they can be relatable. The more things you find that that you both have in common the better. Having a similar sense of humor is a good thing to find out. Sending memes can also be a way to turn conversations sexual.

**Don't waste your time.** If she takes forever to reply or rarely does at all delete her number. If she leaves you on read multiple times delete her number. Stop wasting your time on girls that aren't interested. Go out and find girls that are interested. Most of you guys don't have bad "text game" you're texting girls **THAT AREN'T INTERESTED**. **When a girl is interested in you she will make things easy.**

**Don't be overly persistent with girls.** Take it from a guy that used to pride himself on "not giving up on girls" you don't want to force the attraction. You give up too much power and you only get desperate girls. You attract what you are. Have self-respect and don't blow up her phone trying to get her to like you. Even if you get her out on a date it will be out of pity or boredom.

**Make texting fun!** Too many guys try to hard to entertain girls through text. Let things flow and don't overthink your texts. Say what comes to your mind. Talk about things you want to talk about. If she wants to talk about things then she'll bring up new topics. Make yourself laugh. entrain yourself. Too many guys put to much pressure on themselves to always have the perfect text. Just text her.

&#x200B;

**Getting reps:** in the beginning, I mentioned getting reps and practicing. I got the majority of my texting skills sending 1000s texts a month in middle school/high school. I also got my practice in other ways.

imvu - this "game" is full of chat rooms and you get a 3D avatar that you can customize. I learned how to flirt and roast here. I spent a couple of years here making online friends and getting "girlfriends"

Skout, pof - these are dating sites that I recommend because you don't have to get matched with a girl to message her.

chatroulette, omegle - both link you up with random strangers to video chat with or message with.

I want you to use these sites and get practice. Don't just talk to girls talk to everyone. When you talk to a girl learn how to start a conversation and see how receptive she is when you flirt. if you say something creepy or weird trust me she'll stop replying, but they are low-pressure situations to experiment. on the dating sites don't message local girls if you're not ready. Message girls 100s of miles away. Trust me a lot of girls on there will like the attention you give them. The best way to learn is by failing. It's much easier to figure out what doesn't work than what does work.

As you're messaging girls I want you to focus on developing to-go topics. Learn what you like to talk about and what girls like to talk about. Maybe after experimenting, you'll find out plenty of girls like talking about video games and sports. You might find out girls don't like talking about dinosaurs or evolutionary psychology.

&#x200B;

*Conclusion*

**Don't ever send emotionally charged messages to girls.** Women can be too nice and do a lot to protect the fragile male ego. Some girls are bad at texting and there are girls that are simply not interested, but they like attention. Being able to tell this difference comes with experience.

This guide should help you waste less time texting girls and understand what you need to know. Texting girls should be fun. You should be only texting girls that make it fun and reply. I've wasted so much time texting girls that only wanted attention. I wasted so much time texting girls that I was trying to force interest with. I wasted months texting girls, calling each other baby, just to get friend-zoned after we finally went on a date. No one is "too busy" replying to a text takes 1 minute tops. Don't waste a second thought on someone who won't give you a minute of their time.

&#x200B;

EDIT: formatting.Right now there are some men who think that they can't get women because of their looks.

What actually happens when you do this is your body language changes.  You may avoid eye contact, you may have your head down, you may look down at the floor when you talk to her.  Your poor attitude and sense of self-uncertainty will make you look unattractive to women... even if you have male-model looks.

Let's say you think you're an ugly man, but you still look women in the eye.  You speak to them with certainty.  You show interest without being cringey.  What do you think is gonna happen?  You will look more attractive.  There will be "something about you".

Don't think of yourself as an ugly man.  Think of yourself as an average-looking man.  Your attitude will sway what end of the spectrum you'll fall on.  If you're cringey and creepy, you'll be "ugly" to women.  If you're cool and confident, you'll fall on the attractive, "there's just something about him" end of the spectrum.

The more you normalize women, the more confident you'll become.  Have you noticed that unattractive women are usually attracted to you?  That's because you don't put them on a pedestal.  You may even seem smooth and confident around unattractive women.  The moment you like a woman, you act needy, you put her on a pedestal, you are at her mercy.  You fall right into the category of men she finds unattractive.

Try this.  The hotter a woman is, the less you care about getting her. Not in a "she's out of my league so I won't try" kinda way.  More like, "she's hot, let's see if she's worth my time.  If not, I'm not afraid to walk away from her".  The moment you start thinking on these lines, your attitude will change.  You'll feel like you have power in the interaction.  You may notice that she will try to be on her best behavior or start showing signs that she's interested in you.

This new mindset will take conditioning, but once it's a part of your personality, you'll see how much success you'll have with hotter women.  The more you value yourself, the more she will value you.  If she does not value you, don't get involved with her.I put “incel” in quotes because it’s not technically accurate.  I lost my virginity early, had sex here & there over the years, but was just uninspired about meeting women, rarely got women I truly desired, and had just a general mopey & “victim playing” attitude.  Gross.  Unattractive. 
  
I had a rough stretch late 20s/early 30s (major health problems, job problems) which was not conducive to excelling in the dating world, but it was still pretty pathetic and way, way below my potential.  By mid 30s, I said “enough” and transformed myself: both [physically](https://i.imgur.com/0R8h5HL.jpg) and my attitude.  And the results have been highly beneficial.

Here’s a small snapshot, all from 2019 and early 2020 before Covid hit.  

- Wedding: heavy makeout/petting session behind a curtain with a woman I just started randomly dancing with.  Got her number and she sent me flirty messages and said she’d hit me up if she was ever in my city.  

- Regular at bar I frequent: Sex on 2nd date with gorgeous woman 10 years my junior.  She kinda looked like Kelly Kapowski.  When we got back to my apartment, she straight up jumped on me once we sat on my couch.  
 
- Bar (bachelor party): makeout session with a woman 13 years my junior followed by some flirty texts later that night.  Knew this one wasn’t going anywhere but it was fun.  
 
- Hinge date: she turned out to be pretty boring, but makeout session an hour into first date on (empty) back patio of bar.  

- Bar: cute girl I’d just met 8-10 years my junior (friend of my brother).  After chatting we dance a bit and she just closes her eyes and arches up her neck to be kissed.

- Friend of friend: Kiss on first date. Amazing sex at her place on 2nd.  Afterwards she wrapped herself around me and fell asleep on me like I just rocked her world.  This one turned into a little something and we dated for like 6 weeks.

- Bumble date: Drinks then I took her on a walk down to a sick view of our city’s skyline (pre-planned spot by me) where we made out on a bench.  She was nice/cute but not my type so I politely texted her that there wasn’t a spark. 
 
Quarantine, took a break until things started opening in my area.  Chatted casually with a few women on dating apps, but nothing serious.  

- Hinge date: Makeout session on 2nd date which led into her dry riding me on the couch.  Enormous, perfect  boobs on this woman bouncing in my face.  At that moment I’m thinking how worth it all my efforts have been.  If only the lumpy, mopey version of me from 4 years ago could see this.  Sex on 3rd date.  3 times at night, again the next morning.  She texts me the next night saying she loves sleeping next to me.  I actually quite like her so will continue pursuing.    

--------------

Here are my suggestions based on what worked for me (some of this obviously applies to a pre-Covid 19 world, but at some point we’ll be back to normal):


**1)** Get in shape.  You don’t control your facial bone structure or your height but you do control your physique, so work to maximize its appeal.  You don’t necessarily have to get shredded, but just put some effort in. Showing you care about being healthy & strong is itself an attractive trait.  And it WILL raise your confidence level.  I’ve had women I barely know literally stroke my forearms while remarking how veiny they are.  

How’d I do it?  I went to the gym 4 days a week where, frankly, I didn’t even kill myself or lift crazy amounts of weight (peaked 220 bench).  I’m the farthest thing from a “gym guru”.  I don’t even do squats cause they bother my hips.  But I was consistent.  Then I counted calories (cheat days here & there) and protein intake and I achieved a nice physique.  Nothing complicated.  Just took dedication which all of us is capable of.  Too poor, busy to go to the gym?  Not an excuse.  Find the money, get up at 5am.   If you’re *really* too poor, get a pull up bar and do a home workout (this is what I’ve been doing while my gym is closed for C-19).  Then get a better job, too.  
  
**2)** Put some effort into dressing well.  You don’t have to go nuts.  If you suck at fashion, learn a little and ask a female friend and/or gay guy friend.  Nice pair of jeans (I like Joe’s), black tshirt, cool shoes, a watch but subtle, not blingy ([Hamiltons](https://www.macys.com/shop/jewelry-watches/mens-watches/Brand,Sortby/Hamilton,PRICE_LOW_TO_HIGH?id=57386) are classy mid-range ones, Apple watch is fine too).  Buy some nice sunglasses.  Maui Jims if you have some $$ to spend.  $60 pair at Costco (they have some older model designer brands) if not.  Try to look “sexy”.  This is subjective and varies based on the guy, but play around (stubble?) and ask female friends for advice.  

**3)** If you online date…NAIL your photos.  I cannot stress this enough.  Really put some thought into them so that they say “this is a nice, interesting/cool guy”.  If you have more than 1 selfie, your profile sucks. 

**4)** Be busy.   You have lots of constructive stuff you need to attend to in your life: work (and this could be its own long post about having stability), hobbies, volunteering at animal shelter, projects, family time, etc etc.  That means that time you dedicate to her is valuable which reinforces your self-worth *and* makes her feel special.  And when you’re with her, by the way, you’re 100% focused on her.  
 
**5)** On dates: YOU plan them (at least in the beginning).  Don’t tell her everything you’re doing.  Keep some mystery.  Add some fun!   You’re taking her on a hike?   Good choice.  Bring a dog (yours or your wingman’s),  bring a Frisbee, bring binoculars cause you know about some cool bird species that you can show her, you grabbed some red velvet cupcakes from this killer bakery you’re going to tell her about.  

I’m not going to tell you specifically how to act because I don’t know you or what works for you, but as a general guideline watch the movie “Crazy, Stupid, Love” and pay attention to [Steve Carell’s character](https://streamable.com/a7knj3) post-transformation.  (Gosling’s character is hilarious & pimp, but Carell’s is much more real world realistic/genuine).  Great moment in that clip at 0:10 when the old version of him is gazing with jealousy at the new, improved version.

You’re engaged in her (eye contact!), you’re curious about her, quick interesting anecdote about yourself relating to what she’s saying (“Vietnam, really?  My friend & I got lost in Saigon and a street vendor fed us the best Banh Mi I’ve ever had, told us his life story, then got us to our hotel.”), then back to her.  

Personally I don’t do arrogant.  At all.  I throw in a little cocky funny but only when it’s completely natural and fitting for the moment.   Humor is absolutely heart-meltingly lethal if you’re funny, but if you’re not funny, that’s okay!  Don’t force it, just smile and laugh at things around you (“haha look at that little dog chasing those ducks”).  Being playful and laughing is attractive.  

Always what I call “back-pocket” things she says.  So if she’s telling you about her family and she quickly mentions her sister lives in Montana, don’t necessarily remark on it right away.  “Back pocket” it and bring it up later.  “So hey, you said your sister lives in Montana.  That’s so cool!  I’ve always wanted to see Glacier.  Have you visited her out there?”  You listened to what she said, remembered it, and now care enough to show curiosity.  One woman told me her pets’ names when we were chatting over text.  When we met up for our 1st date, I asked “so how are Ratso & Quinn?”  She melted.  We were making out not 20 minutes later.  Another woman on a 1st date said she loves Mojitos.  I didn’t acknowledge in the moment, but guess what I made for us on our next date…

My absolute favorite point in Manson’s “Models” is his spot-on accurate observation that “she’s rooting for you.”  She WANTS you to be a great guy that she’s helplessly attracted to.  All you have to do is fulfill that fundamental desire.  This is highly motivating.  

There is no paint-by-numbers ideal approach and all the same stuff that worked for me won’t work for everyone.  And I’m not even saying much original stuff here (“Get in shape, huh?  What a *brilliant* observation, Watermelon_BBQ…”).  But the point is that the big things are not complicated.  You just have to put the work in.  High quality women want high quality men.  I was not a high quality man for a long time…physically or my mopey attitude.  I worked to become one and it has significantly improved my degree of success with the fairer sex.
  
There are a ton more little things I could enumerate like “get more female friends” or “have a super comfortable, cozy bed” (I’ve had women text me the words: “I miss your bed”.  My response: “I miss having you in it”) but that’s not what this post is about.  It’s about the big controllable things that any of us are capable of and which make a huge, noticeable difference.  I’m living proof.

**EDIT**: I removed (an irrelevant) reference to a woman's nationality.  Aiming for positive & constructive with this post, not a ticking boxes tone.The vast majority of hot girls that put their sc and ig in their bio are looking for fans and validation. These girls will swipe right on every guy to simply match and then never respond to their message or eventually unmatch. They're just matching so that you think you have a chance and go follow them or add them, to increase their fan base.

Essentially every guy swipes right on these girls because of their pictures/looks. What i'm suggesting is that we take back some power and swipe LEFT on these girls. Think about it: these girls swipe right 100 times and EVERY time it says "It's a match!". Don't feed into their egos. Swipe left and make them feel the absence of the validation they're seeking.

The other reason i'm suggesting this is because this behavior trickles from the virtual world into the real world. If you get used to rejecting girls who seem vein and validation-seeking on Tinder, then it'll open your eyes to it in real life when the hot girl at the party is basking in the attention of the circle of guys around her and you refuse to participate in that competition to feed her ego (which will coincidentally make her notice/attracted to you). And when you cold approach, you'll keep in mind that she could easily be one of these types of girls who has become a validation-seeking machine and needs A LOT of personal work to actually be an interesting person, and you'll be able to just walk away uninterested if she gives off that "I'm too hot to have to do anything at all" vibe.

Disclaimer: I'm not saying all girls who put ig and sc on their bio are like/do this, or that you should never swipe right on a girl who has ig and sc there if she seems like she has a great personality and actually filled out her bio well. I'm saying the vast majority of hot girls with ig and sc in their bios are using tinder in this way and it's creating an environment where they feel like they're on a pedestal because we put them on one.Me and my peers play a game when we go out where we try to get rejected as much as possible. We don’t do anything out of the ordinary but we count rejections as success and actually getting the number or contact information as “ehhh whatever”. Seems silly but it’s actually and easy and efficient way to get started on interacting with women especially in a bar or club type of setting. Try to get more rejections than your mates! Fun game and really relieves the stress because you’re actually hoping to not get the number even though you’ll ask for it. I like to get a rejection as soon as I enter the scene just to get my feet wet.. after you get rejected go for your next one! 

You’re playing a numbers game but at the same time it’s psychological and after you’re in a groove you’ll notice you’ll start flowing pretty smoothly. Also don’t just go for the elite women with this game, have fun and try to get rejected by women you consider below you’re level or standard. Remember approach regularly and don’t try to purposely get rejected but if it happens that’s a point for you. 1-0. You don’t have to actually count but the more the better.. you’ll get women’s numbers of course but we don’t care much for those because that’s obvious.M28- 
My last date was a month ago with a gorgeous blonde who I was too much of a pussy to kiss. That put me in a depression for a week. I wasn't going to go through that again. Before that I hadn't been on a date in nearly 7 years. I've been working out this past year and gained some needed confidence. 


Got another match with another gorgeous girl. We met up to walk dogs 2 days later. She's new to my state and also fresh out of a long relationship. Conversation was flowing pretty good though I always run into silences, which had always been my biggest problem. Luckily she likes to talk. I never found an opportunity to kiss her on the trail, and before I knew it we were back at the parking lot. I mentioned I brought a couple hard ciders and suggested we go drink them somewhere. She lives alone and said we can go there.

I thought for sure this was it. I'm driving behind her to her place to have an amazing night. Though when I got there she suggested we sit outside. 

So we talked for another hour or so until it was late. When she suggested she was getting tired and ending the date I just said it. "Do you think we should kiss?" She was a little flustered and said she wasnt sure cause of covid and asked me if I want to. I said I want to. She scooted closer and we made out for maybe 10 seconds. I wanted more so we did that again. And then one last time. It was all pretty short, I could have kissed her for hours. I suggested we keep it going but she wants to take things slow. I went home very happy! Though now I just want more.Tits and ass seem to be bouncing around everywhere in this world.

Actually, not seem to be, ***are***.

And what used to piss me off about that?

*Most of the time, I wasn’t doing anything about it.*

\---> Cleavage bulging out in isle 6.  A hottie in the first row rockin’ shorty shorts -- you know, the kind where the pockets stick out below the hem line.  A jogging MILF sporting the thigh gap -- yeah, the kind where you look below the honeypot and see the light behind her.

***It’s fucking everywhere.***

*So why was I doing nothing?*

The same reason we all do nothing.  **The pain of rejection.**

She might be rude. She might laugh at us.  God forbid her friends (or some random person standing nearby, who sees the rejection) might laugh at us.

*That fear can be paralyzing.*

*Then I got a little older and I realized there’s a pain worse than rejection.*

***Not knowing.***

Always wondering.  What might have happened?  Could I have gotten that one?   Could I have that one bent over the fucking kitchen table right now, driving home my manhood while watching the salt-n-pepper shakers go crashing to the floor?

***That pain is worse than rejection.***

And when that opportunity goes bouncing by, you almost never get a second chance.  If you’re over 25, you’ve probably started to experience this.

**Sometimes I can still see their faces.  Their bodies:**

*-- 115 lbs of glistening muscle in a skirt that’s too short and heels that are too high.*

*-- An ass teaching a pair of lululemon yoga pants what’s up.  Man...I fucking love lululemon.*

**Some of them even smiled at me?**

And what did I do?

**Nothing.**  Fucking nothing.  I broke eye contact.  Looked at the ground like a loser.  Or I just stood there frozen.  Hesitating until, well, nothing happened.

**But I’ve also had the opposite experience.**  Sometimes, for whatever reason, I did have the courage.  I did take the chance.  And I have personally experienced this enough times to know it’s true: *A girl often doesn’t seem to even notice you. Then you approach her, and her face lights up.  A week later her headboard is chipping paint off the bedroom wall, while her o-face confirms this reality:* **you manned the fuck up and made the approach.** Props.

So how do you change from having the courage sometimes, to having it on command?  That’s what I asked myself, and this is what I learned:

**You can condition yourself to not care about rejection.**  Not just saying you don’t care, but actually not caring.

**How?  You use the simplest psychology trick in the book.  Pavlov's dog.**

You create a trigger.  In this case a “trigger phrase.”  And then you condition yourself to respond to it.

The response is that your demeanor and thought process changes, instantly, through conditioning.  *Call it demeanor, inner game, mindset, whatever you want.  At the end of the day, it’s all the same thing.*

**I use “Fuck It.”**

That’s my trigger phrase.  If you don’t like “fuck it,” pick something else.  That actual phrase don’t matter.  What matters is the association you condition yourself to have with the phrase.

Here’s the steps I took to condition myself.  **Test it out for yourself.**

1. Pick your phrase.  For this example, I will use “fuck it.”
2. Stand in front of your bathroom mirror.  You going to condition yourself to unconsciously accept 2 things: *(a) that there is more pain associated with not knowing, than with being rejected, and (b) that what people think about you doesn’t matter.*
3. Close your eyes and picture a recent failure to approach.  We all have them.  I’m sure you can think of one from the past few days.  Take a few moments.  **Really try to picture it as vividly as possible.  Put yourself in that moment.**

What did her perky little tits look like pressing through that blouse.  Were the nips pointing at you?  Did she have the gap between her legs?  Was that booty bouncing so much it should be illegal?  **Did you do the fucking stare-n-pass?**  You know what I’m talking about: you spot her, you nonchalantly turn your head and stare at a case full of orange juice, and wait until she walks past it.

Whatever it was, try to vividly recreate the moment.  Then feel the emotion of not doing anything?  **How does that feel?**  How does it feel right now as you’re reading this?  **It fucking sucks.  Because you’ll never know.**  That opportunity came and went, and has left an unknown in your past which can never be fixed.

Then open your eyes, look at yourself in the mirror and genuinely say, “fuck it.”  ***Say it a few times.  Say it boldly and loudly and with sincerity.  Say it like you fucking mean it.***  Then close your eyes again.  This time, instead of staring at the OJ, picture yourself walking up to her, introducing yourself, holding out your hand, her taking it, her smiling, and then you handing her your phone, and ***her putting her number in it.***

*Everything that happens in the middle (between her smiling and her putting the number in your phone) doesn’t matter for this conditioning.*  **So don’t worry about it.**  The middle part will be different every time. **And a successful first approach is 90% confidence, attitude, body language and tone.  The remaining 10% is what you actually say** (thank God).  *Get your mind right, get in from behind right.*

**Vividly feel the success.**  The feeling of her smiling at you.  Of her being interested in you.  Of getting the number.  Then open your eyes and say “fuck it” a few more times, really feeling and associating those positive emotions as you say the trigger phrase.

4. Now close your eyes and picture the exact same scenario.  Except this time, the hottie rejects you.  And she does it rudely.  She doesn’t smile.  She’s cold shouldered.  She’s like “excuse me, but you need to go away,” and then she walks away.  She gives you the fucking stop-sign-hand. ***Whatever.  Make it hurt.  Make it uncomfortable.***

Now here’s the important part.  After she walks away, picture a middle aged soccer mom standing nearby.  **She’s looking at you.  She’s smirking.  She knows you just got rejected.**  She just witnessed it.  She thinks its funny.  She thinks you’re pathetic.  Now picture exactly this:

***You smile right back at her.  You’re smile is even bigger than hers.  You wink at her.  You blow her a kiss.  And then you walk away, shoulders back, head held high.***

As soon as she’s out of sight, open your eyes and say “fuck it,” five times.  Really feel the emotion of not giving a shit what the old bag thinks.

5. Practice the above (a) once in the morning, and (b) once at night, for 5 days in a row.  **Don’t miss any practice.**

6. On day 6, practice the above steps in the morning.  Then go somewhere public.  As soon as you get there, pick out any attractive girl, the first one you see.  Look at her.  Say “fuck it” to yourself and walk right up to her. **VERY IMPORTANT: Don’t hesitate, don’t think, don’t hem and haw.  Just do it.  Whatever happens doesn’t matter.**

When the interaction is over, close your eyes, and reinforce the trigger phrase by **saying it a few times with a huge smile on your face.**  You will feel amazing after the interaction just for doing it so boldly and with no hesitation.

7. Repeat the last step once a day until it becomes second nature.  Do it no matter where you are (school, mall, grocery store, anywhere).  If fact, just do it indefinitely and ***before you know it, you’ll be hitting on chicks all the time without even realizing you’re doing it.***

So what do you do now?  You can leave this article and say it was great, but do nothing.  You can say it sucks.  You can continue to hem and haw and complain about not getting the things you want in life.  Or you can just fucking try it.  It costs nothing to try.  ***And who knows, you might just get laid.***

\---

Update: My best selling book 'Make Women Chase You' is now available to read **FREE** on Kindle Unlimited.

[amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193056&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.co.uk](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193197&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.com.au](https://www.amazon.com.au/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193254&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.ca](https://www.amazon.ca/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193354&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.in](https://www.amazon.in/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193319&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language)

\---

Also check out my free guide on 5 Steps To A Masculine Sexual Frame That Women Find Irresistible [here](http://dailymanup.com/attract-women-girls-masculine-alpha-sexual-frame-presence).

\---# FYI: I recently started a blog that talks more about this kind of stuff: [Socialite Magazine](https://socialite.substack.com/).

In this post, I'll identify the personality traits that are most important for success in the social and dating world.

Wanna be considered "cool" or "attractive" by those around you? Continue reading.

*(Note: contrary to most pickup advice out there, I don't care about being an "alpha male." To be frank, I don't think that matters at all.)*

**About me:** I've been studying pickup for 8+ years. I've been a people-watcher since I was four-years-old *(a weird habit that has stuck with me since I was a kid, but now I consider it a gift)*. I started studying pickup at the ripe age of 17-years-old, of course, as a horny high-school student. Today, I work in Silicon Valley doing business development. It's my job to make cold-calls *(6,000+ cold calls made at this point)* and spark conversations with important people to generate revenue. Getting laid is awesome *(and no doubt, every human being would agree with this)* but now that I'm 25, I'm more interested in my career, wealth, and future.

In other words, I'm less interested in how to get laid and more interested in the attractive qualities that are going to make me successful in every aspect of life.

**Pickup skills are great, but people skills are better.** And it's true! Pickup skills are great. They teach you how to manage your dating life *(which is a very important aspect of any person's life)*. But people skills are better because they transfer to all other aspects of life including your career and wealth.

**Want to get laid?** These traits will help.

**Want to get promoted?** These traits will help.

**Want to negotiate a raise?** These traits will help.

**Want to be admired and respected by everyone around you?** These traits will help.

In the pickup community, there are a few character traits that are heavily emphasized. Those traits are typically something along the lines of, *"Be alpha, be dominant, show intent, and everything will be fine."*

However, I disagree with that. In the social and dating scene, people just want to be around a guy who's fun to be around. **I've found that people just want to be around someone who's got good vibes. Not someone who is overly aggressive and trying to prove they're an "alpha male."** And if you're someone who's pleasant to be around, then you've got a good grip on things.

**I don't believe in being "alpha." I believe in being someone who others want to be around.**

And if you're in the same shoes as I am, then I encourage you to continue reading on. Because that's what this post is about.

Based on my observations from 8+ years of game, these are the six traits any guy must have to be considered "cool" or "attractive." These traits extend far beyond the pickup and dating community. These traits will serve you in any part of life. Whether it's about your career, relationships, new friendships, building a social circle... you name it. If you have these traits, you win. That simple. Let's dive in.

## The top six traits any guy must have to be considered "cool" or "attractive":

## 1) You gotta be "likable."

If you've got this trait down to perfection, nothing else matters. You can get away with a lot of things. You can have shitty fashion style. You can have crappy body language. You can be a shy, introverted guy. But if you're someone who's likable, you're in the clear.

There have been times in my life where I didn't say the right line to a girl. Or I fucked something up somehow. But I was always forgiven or given a pass.

People are willing to let a lot of things go if you're someone who's nice to be around.

This is why I tell guys who are new to pickup to not sweat the small things *(body language, kino, eye-contact, etc)*. It's because if you handle the BIG things, such as being a likable dude, then you're in the clear anyway.

No girl is going to say, *"Um, yeah, he was cool, but his kino was lame. NEXT!"*

NO! That's *NEVER* going to happen! Instead, she will just oversee all of those small quirks of yours because overall you're a cool, likable guy to be around.

If people like you, you can be more than "inadequate" and still come out on top.

Here's my boy, /u/IllimitableMan, explaining [how to be a likable person](https://imgur.com/QhQ4RRb).

Be someone pleasant to be around, and you're in the green. I feel like I shouldn't even have to post this tip, but too many guys are walking around trying to be "alphas," not realizing that's probably harming their social and dating life more than helping.

## 2) Self-expression monitor must be low.

Something I see a lot of guys struggling with is being funny, witty, or interesting. They've got zero clue of how to be funny, humorous, light-hearted, etc.

If you want to be someone who's pleasant to be around and liked by everyone, you've got to know how to make people laugh.

I wouldn't put this one on the list of necessary traits if I didn't struggle with it for many years myself.  I used to be considered the "serious" guy. People would always ask me, *"Why are you so serious, man?"*

And I didn't recognize that what they were really saying was, *"Yo! You never laugh, man. You never smile. You never crack jokes. Do you dislike us or something?"*

I was a depressing person to be around!

My advice to you is to take an improv class *(if you can, because you'll learn how to let go and be funny. Google improv classes in your area)*. My second piece of advice to you is to say whatever is on your mind. That's how to become funny, interesting, and witty.

Seriously. Don't put a filter on anything that comes out of your mouth. Don't try to monitor your self-expression. Whatever you want to say, say it.

*(A good resource on this subject is Patrick King's book,* [*Improve Your Conversations*](http://a.co/8jUaPfy)*. Homeboy should also answer my emails.)*

Too many guys are stuck in their head worried about saying something weird or silly. And it's true. When you quit monitoring or judging what comes out of your mouth, you might actually say something weird, silly, creepy, or awkward. Own it.

Over time, through trial and error, that will fix itself. You'll become funnier. You'll become wittier. You'll learn how to think on your feet. Nothing will catch you off-guard.

If you want to become someone who's funny, interesting, or witty, you've got to quit trying to monitor your self-expression. You've got to quit thinking to yourself, *"But wait, if I say XYZ, won't that come off weird!?"*

**When you heavily try to monitor yourself, you only end up restricting your true self. And that's a shame.**

Don't self-monitor your self-expression too much anymore. As long as you don't say anything blatantly offensive or racist, you'll be fine.

## 3) Looks matter. They aren't everything, but they matter.

First, let me say this. I *rarely* see guys who are truly so fucking ugly and disgusting that they'll never get laid. So if you're reading this and thinking, *"Yeah, this all works, but only if you're good-looking"*... Shut up.

Most guys I see are good enough. I *rarely* see truly ugly dudes who are astronomically unappealing. I very, very, very rarely see a guy and think to myself, *"Goddamn! Now THAT'S one ugly motherfucker with a 0% chance of ever getting laid."*

No. That's rarely ever happened.

*(Although, if send your selfies to me on Snapchat, I'm happy to judge your uglyass.)*

Chances are you're overly hard on yourself and your looks.

**Here's the good news: you can fix ugly.**

Got bad teeth? Find a dentist + [whitening strips](http://a.co/j1mILDm) \+ [this thing](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0045IZ9Z4/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_RD7wAbQ3ZMRMM).

Got acne? Find an acne treatment. I use [this](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01MV2C5KQ/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_0J7wAb1X32GZV) and then [this](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B0166NTN2U/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_NK7wAb8E2RH8M). Every morning.

Got no muscle or too much fat? Find a gym + an online training program. (As a naturally skinny dude, I invested in the program, [Bony to Beastly](https://bonytobeastly.com/), and gained 12 pounds of muscle. /u/williamshane, got anything to add to this?). When I was a broke college student, I did [this program](https://www.bodybuilding.com/fun/jim-stoppani-six-week-shortcut-to-shred.html) and [this program](https://www.bodybuilding.com/fun/shortcut-to-size.html).

Got bad style and shitty wardrobe? Find an Instagram profile or blog focused on fashion. (I follow [this blog](http://theessentialman.com/) to keep up with fashion advice for men. He's got really simple advice to follow that's game-changing. The author is /u/peter_n. Peter, got anything to add to this post on looks and fashion for men, brotha?).

I'd say I'm a decent looking dude. But if I quit hitting the gym, taking care of my skin, or don't brush my teeth... I'm fucked. I'd just be a 5'7 scrawny dude with pimples and bad breath.

One more thing. As a decent looking dude, I'd also say that looks aren't everything. They matter. Yes. But they aren't everything. Even with good looks, if I don't have a good sense of humor, bravery, likability, or pickup skills... I don't get anything. Believe it or not, I have to put in just as much work as anyone else.

*"GASP! But, you're only saying this because you're GOOD LOOKING! And that's insensitive to ugly people like ME!"*

And you're only saying that because you've never put any significant effort into looking better.

Looks take as much work as anything else. Invest time and effort into your looks. Don't be a lazy fuck.

[Read this post if you want to get offended about your bad style. Notice how all the guys in the comment section are offended by actually good fashion advice. Don't be like those guys.](https://www.reddit.com/r/malefashionadvice/comments/5krwax/things_you_probably_shouldnt_wear/)

As homework, do this: next time you're out in the streets, notice the type of guys girls are dating. Notice how *none* of those guys would ever be on the cover of GQ Magazine. Lesson in there.

One last note I want to leave you with on looks. The way you look shows a lot about the level of self-respect you have. If you look important, it helps you think important. Your appearance talks to you. So make sure you look a way that lifts your spirits and builds your confidence. You're not just doing this whole "looks" thing for others. You're also doing it for yourself.

## 4) 80% Confidence

Contrary to most pickup advice out there, I don't believe you need "core confidence" to succeed in the social and dating world.

**Nobody is 100% confident. Show me someone who is, and I'll show you a phony.**

The reality is that we have all have insecurities. The best guys just accept those insecurities. That's all confidence is. It's self-acceptance of yourself.

I say 80% confidence because we all come with our own set of flaws and baggage. Sometimes, these negative aspects of us are incredibly difficult to fix or get rid of. At that point, it's best to accept them as part of who you are. For example, I grew up shy and introverted. I've accepted that no matter how much I work on myself, there will always be a part of me that's timid when it comes to meeting new people. However, I don't let that flaw hold me back. I don't beat myself up for it. I just roll with it. You should do the same with any flaws you have.

[Here is a good post on how to develop solid confidence in one week.](https://thatregulardude.com/confidence10x/)

Confidence is also about how you treat yourself. The way you treat yourself will be evident to everyone around you. Are you shy and timid? Or are you ecstatic and fun? This is a reflection of your confidence. And people will notice it. And they'll choose to either be around it or be away from it.  When it comes to the social and dating world, nobody wants to be around a petty, insecure guy. Why? Because it sucks the energy out of people.

**You are what you think you are. So you better start thinking highly of yourself.** This begins by fully accepting who you are (instead of beating yourself up for it).

## 5) Positive Psychology (mentally healthy)

Beyond confidence in one’s self and actions, I think another must have is positive psychology. **Confidence is how you perceive and accept yourself. Positive psychology all about how you perceive the world and everything going on around you.**

I like to call it being "sharp." Others call it having strong "inner game." You've got to be mentally vivid and not focused on the fog surrounding us *(negativity, victimization, offensiveness).*

Be someone that brings positive energy rather than toxicity. Be ambitious. Have goals, dreams, ambitions, ideas. Be excited about them. Be enthusiastic. Have a positive outlook on life. Reframe negative situations into positive ones. See the kindness in people. Never take the victim mentality.

In today’s world, it’s easy to be discouraged by the negative news and media going on around us. Everyone is always offended or taking offense to something. Millennial of all people seem to have it worse than everyone (regarding wealth and opportunity). Learn to mute all that noise.

I’m not saying you’ve got to be a peace & love hippy-like character from the 70s. But man, it’s tough to come across anyone who’s truly positive these days. Everyone’s a victim. Everyone loves to complain. Everyone is filled with envy.

[For example, a post like this one claiming America is a “plastic” society blah blah blah. Dude. Get that negativity out of here. Toxic outlooks such as that one benefit nobody.](https://imgur.com/sNhFNpp)

Mute the noise. Stay positive. See the opportunity in everything.

Whereas being likable is about how you treat others, positive psychology has to do with how you treat yourself. More specifically, it’s how you choose to nurture and develop your inner mindset and beliefs.

**Monitoring and improving your internal thoughts is a constant work of art. This is hands down the most difficult thing to maintain out of everything on this list.**

If you don’t keep your mind sharp, or if you get in the habit of being negative, you can easily lose control and turn into a negative, victimized person who can’t handle Life. This in turns makes you a shitty, toxic person to both yourself and those around you.

Here are some things you can do to have a positive psychology and be mentality fit:

* Reframes (turning negatives into positives).
* Resilience (keeping your chin up through thick and thin).
* Optimism.
* Thoughtfulness and strategy (know how to plan ahead and learn from mistakes).
* Ambitious, determined, and driven.
* Opportunistic (turns everything into an opportunity of some sort, even if small).
* Non-victim.
* Lack of long-term negative thinking, resentment, bitterness, and jealousy.

Although being mentally sharp is one of the hardest things to do, I've got a few resources that'll give you a good start:

* Watch RSD Tyler's Secrets to Success [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JGjPLeMEZLE).
* Read Mike Tyson's book, [Undisputed](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00BC254I8/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_xOnzAb0R26CJK). (This dude was the most vicious and most ruthless fighter ever. In the book, notice how indestructible his mindset was on the way to the top. That's the power of a positive psychology or "inner game".)
* Read [Relentless](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B008O58LL8/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_jPnzAb0QCB4S7). The author coached some of the greatest NBA players.
* Read [Think and Grow Rich](https://www.amazon.com/dp/193787950X/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_zQnzAb42TF1AN). It'll give you the mindsets needed for wealth and success.
* Read [The Magic of Thinking Big](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NGZIR92/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_ep_dp_0UnzAbCXDA7EF). **(If you pick any of these books, pick this one. Best book I've read in YEARS!)**
* Read [this post on psychological mindsets](https://thatregulardude.com/40dates/) to adapt.

One last note I want to leave you with (and this is something I learned from Stephen Covey's book, The 7 Habits). Humans are not animals.What distinguishes us from animals is the fact that animals are reactive to their environment. Animals are already programmed. They've got no control over how they react to the external environment around them. They just act.

On the flip side, humans can "program" themselves and their minds. This is done through reflection, observation, trial, and error. We consciously decide how we will react to the environments around us. Will we choose to be negative? Or will you choose to be opportunistic?

If you've read [Victor Frankl's book](http://a.co/6XRSC5W), you know this dude went through some serious shit in Auschwitz. You also know he chose to have a strong inner game. His mindset was powerful. He stayed fairly optimistic. He made the most out of the situation at hand, despite how disgustingly tragic it was.

Determine your own weather. Don't let the world and other external stimuli get to you.

## 6) Relationships

Show me a guy who has good relations with others, and I'll show you a guy who knows likable, easy going, and fun to be around.

Show me a guy who has trouble establishing good relationships and a solid inner-circle of his own, and I'll be worried.

When you've got your likability, inner game, looks, and confidence down... all that's left to do is putting yourself out there. And when you do, you'll win. Indubitably.

Relationships are the outcome of all the other traits combined. Furthermore, it's the measurement stick people will use to judge you.

Are you a guy with plenty of other friends and healthy relationships? Great, you're a safe bet.

Are you a guy who never has anything to do and stays inside his apartment every weekend? Questionable. It's going to raise some eyebrows.

**This is why I am firmly opposed against guys who go out alone to clubs, bars, etc.**

**It's not the act of going out alone that's a problem. It's about the message being sent. If a guy has to resort to going out alone, there's a bigger issue at hand.**

The relationships you have (or the lack of them) will speak volumes about you.

I've seen people who are tremendous cold-approachers. They're brave. They can open anyone.

But when it comes to holding down friendships or relationships, they suck. They've fallen off the deep end. They thought "cold approach" was a cure-all. I've attended dozens of pickup seminars and events in the last few years. It's always the guys who've done nothing but hundreds of cold-approaches that are the least relatable. They've taken no interest in building other aspects of their personality or skills. That's a problem. **Just because you can do the bravest thing in the book doesn't mean you're the best around.**

**Bravery /= greatness.**

We have this same problem in business development and sales. The old school guys glorify the ability to pick up the phone and cold call anyone. *"Oh, just pick up the phone and keep dialing. That'll fix everything and get you more meetings."*

They equate bravery with effectiveness. But that's such a narrow-minded way of thinking.

To be successful, you must be more than just brave. You've got to be well-rounded. You've got to have interpersonal skills. You've got to know how to establish and build relationships.

Cold approach is effective. Cold calling is effective. But not when it's the only card up yourself sleeve. You've got to be more well-rounded than that.

**The hardest thing to do isn't always the most effective thing to do. Hard work doesn't always mean good work.**

Master all the traits above and you'll have stellar, generous relationships with everyone around you.

## Fin.

When I first began studying pickup at the young age of 17, I was only interested in getting girls. I was interested in closing. Kino. Push-pull. Games. The more results I got, the more pumped I became. My ego and confidence blasted. After 16 years of introversion and being timid, that's good. I congratulate anyone going through that stage right now.

**But I also encourage you to recognize that pickup is just the first stage of many great results to come.** Eventually, you're going to graduate college and move into the real world. Maybe you'll join a large corporation. Perhaps you'll start your own business. **Regardless, you're going to need to develop exceptional character traits no matter the path you choose.** At least, if you want to be successful, you'll need to. And learning pickup and people skills will give you an exceptional competitive advantage over other people.

Currently, the pickup and dating space is roughly worth $2B. There's a huge need and demand to learn these skills I just showed you today.

In the corporate world, soft skills and people skills is an industry worth $50B. Again, the need and demand to be someone with exceptional people skills are ever-present. Companies want to hire people who've got the shit we're talking about in this post on lock.

And you, as someone studying pickup theory and social skills, have a head start. And potentially a competitive advantage if you keep at it.

This is why I cannot stand blogs and coaches who are solely focused on how to get laid. Those blogs undermine and narrow the importance of pickup and people skills. Getting results with women and dating is just the tip of the iceberg.

If you can master the six traits above, you're off to the races. Not just with dating, but with life.

**TLDR: I'd encourage you to pick one the above to master. #1 is the most important. #2 and #6 are the most offensive (and will piss a lot of guys off). #5 is the hardest to master. #3 is kinda easy - just accept yourself.**

**FYI: I recently started a blog that talks more about this kind of stuff:** [**Socialite Magazine.**](https://socialite.substack.com/)Women don't approach men directly the way men approach women.  What women will do is make themselves available for the men they're trying to attract.  You may be at work and a woman may be in your general direction for no reason at all.  If you're more aware, you may notice that she's done this on numerous occasions for no reason at all.  She may talk loud and try  to get your attention.  She may giggle or laugh for something that is not funny at all because women know that men like when women giggle and act girly.

I'm not saying that you're gonna get every girl, but you increase your success rate with women when you open up your awareness.  Women use their eyes when they try to attract men.  A man who can hold good eye contact with a woman puts himself ahead and above the rest of the male population who are focusing on being good-looking to get women.  While he's trying to avoid eye contact because he doesn't want to come off as a stalker creep, she could be attracted to him, but he's not allowing her to give him the sign by giving her eye contact.

Keep in mind that you don't know what an individual woman's type is.  You use the general population's opinion of what good-looking is.  So men who have male model features may be confused how an overweight man got a hot woman and didn't choose them.  She may like men with the dad bod.  She may not be attracted to pretty boys but the fat dude looked more rugged.  This is why you shouldn't rely solely on general opinion.

Men think they have to be good-looking in order to get women.  How do you know that your look is not a specific woman's type.  If there aren't a lot of men that look like you, her interest is gonna really spike because you're unique.  I'm not saying that to make you feel good, I say that because it could be true.  Let's say you date women who look like lingerie models, but you're also attracted to thick women.  Should a woman who does not have the body of a lingerie model disqualify herself because she only sees you dating lingerie models?  So, just because a large population of hot women could date men with chiseled features doesn't mean they won't date a man who has a dad bod.  I'm not saying you shouldn't work on improving yourself, but you don't have to disqualify yourself either.  While you're working off your dad bod, a hot 20-something year old woman may be giving you choosing signals even though you are no where near your physique goal.

Open up your awareness because women may be hitting on you everyday and you don't even know it.Unless you're super hot but for the regular guy no. A lot of guys come off the bat showing how much sexual interest they have. You gotta have more than that: hobbies, goals, a personality, and a life of your own. No girl wants a guy that just wants to get in her pants and has nothing else to offer. 

You're just like every other dude in her eyes and she can get sex whenever she wants. Comes off as needy and desperate to.Just thought this would help because I don't think a lot of guys realize this. They think they're  doing the right thing by showing interest but get frustrated and wonder why the girl isn't reciprocating.For the past week, I've been going to Whole Foods right before work to buy a snack beforehand. For a few days in a row, I've gotten rung up by a very attractive girl; petite, short, pale skin, black bangs, and dark eyeliner, which checks off pretty much all of my boxes for what I consider to be extremely attractive in a girl. Even though I've only ever seen her wearing a mask, I can tell that she's my type as far as looks go. We chat briefly each time I get rung up, and I decided that today, I was going to go for it and give her my number at checkout. When I went to sign my receipt, I turned it over, wrote my number on the back, and said to her "if you're interested" and pointed to my number before walking away.

I prefer to temper my expectations and wasn't expecting a text soon, if it all, but my phone buzzed about an hour ago with a number I didn't recognize, saying the following:

"Hey it's Eva from Whole Foods :) not sure if you're still at work but how is your day?"

I texted her back, "Hey Eva! Good to hear from you. I am actually still at work but I'll call you afterwards, how does that sound?"

She replied: "Perfect! I'd like to chat more once I get off work as well, I'm on my lunch break."

My last reply was, "Have a good day at work! Talk soon" and she replied with a smiley face emoji.

So far, so good. I'll try to set up an IRL date with her during the call. For my first "cold approach" of a retail worker in a long time, I would say that this went very well. I think that losing a lot of weight (almost 15lbs) over the past couple months has helped my confidence a lot. Even if things don't end up working out in the end, I'm happy to be "back in the game" as far as approaches go. Online dating has been messing with me for the past few months of COVID madness, so I'm putting all my attention into IRL conversations and gaming (not video gaming).

UPDATE: I called her and had an interesting conversation with her. She has a boyfriend but still wants to meet me for brunch on Saturday... my plan is to proceed as if she doesn't have a boyfriend, but I'll be vigilant for vibes that she's only using me for attention.

UPDATE 2: This blew up unexpectedly. She texted me again this morning and still seems very eager to meet. Like I said, I'll let this situation play out. If she wants to cheat on her man, that's her own choice. I've slept with girls back in college who had boyfriends back home, we had our fun together and then moved on. I caught feelings for one girl and it got a little complicated, but like I said, that's just how life goes. If she was married it would be different, but out of all the fucked up things going on the world, shooting my shot with a girl who has a boyfriend is a drop in the bucket.I have tons of matches on tinder but I still have to initiate and get ghosted all the time. The girls I do manage to set up dates with are girls I wouldn't even notice outside of Tinder. The really hot ones either never respond or they look nothing like their pictures in real life. I did get laid a few times but it is nothing to write home about and it is extremely time consuming and can also make you feel like shit. 

Meanwhile when I go to the club on saturday night I have girls grinding against me that are so hot I wouldn't even see or match with on tinder and it takes a fraction of the time to get their number than it does on tinder**This is a blog article I wrote years ago, I figured it might help some of you out.**

Overthinking is one of the most draining mental ruts that one can find themselves in. It is draining because it feels as if you have lost control of your mind. Your mind will run rampant entertaining the same tired thoughts that you wish to extinguish. If left unchecked, overthinking can lead to unnecessary stress and can ultimately diminish the quality of your life in a major way. 

I have come up with 6 effective strategies that you can start implementing as soon as you sense that you are overthinking. 

##**6. Focus on what’s in your power and disregard what is not**##


 

What often stresses us out the most are things that are not within our power. If you want peace of mind, you must always wage war against the present. Always look for things that you can influence that are within your locus of control. 

 

Instead of stressing out the day before an exam and overthinking about various outcomes, focus on what you can do in the moment. A more fruitful exercise will be to study to the best of your ability, playing the cards that you are dealt as well as you can.

 

You have a job interview tomorrow and you keep overthinking about the outcome – a waste of time. Spend your time instead on practising common interview questions, perfecting your elevator pitch, and getting your confidence and charisma on point. These are the things that you do have control over, these are the things that are within your domain. 

 

A wedding is coming up in two weeks and you ordered some shoes on Amazon, but you’re afraid that they won’t come in time. Instead of worrying about things outside of your control, start planning for the contingency. Arrange for a plan B – the second pair of shoes – just in case. Always look for things that you can attack in the present moment!

 

##**5. Put things into perspective**##


 

It’s not the end of the world, and you are still alive, so what are you worrying about? There have been countless situations in the past that had you hamstrung, but you overcame them, didn’t you? You have faced adversity before, and you are still here!

 

The stoic philosopher Seneca once said,

 

*“We are more often frightened than hurt; and we suffer more from imagination than from reality.”*

 

Our minds have a tendency of creating worst-case scenarios. The mind, when left unchecked, will entertain many Armageddons that almost never flourish. 

 

When you notice yourself overthinking, just remember all the other times in your life when you:

 

​Went for your first job interview. 
 

​Asked your crush out on a date.
 

​Moved cities.
 

Look into your memory bank for countless examples of triumph. 

 

##**4. Be willing to forgive yourself if shit hits the fan**##


 

It is the tendency of man to tie his sense of self to his accomplishments. That is to say, a man who has not accomplished much sees himself as being fundamentally flawed. Let’s break away from this mode of thinking. Dissociate your sense of ego from your external worldly results. A failure in the world is not a failure of self, yet a failure of strategy. This insight is liberating. 

 

Allow yourself to fail, because in life shit will hit the fan. We overthink because we want so desperately to succeed. We desperately seek validation to reinforce our sense of worth. Fuck that! Always try to win while simultaneously being perfectly fine with failure. 

When you have forgiven yourself prior to any failure happening, you no longer fear anything; once you stop fearing failure, you can stop overthinking.

 

##**3.Go into your body and become more mindful**##


Energy cannot be created nor destroyed. It can only be exchanged or transformed. When we overthink, there is a dense energy stuck in our mind as our brain fires up like a nuclear reactor. Disperse this energy by going into your body. You can’t focus on two things at once, so this is an effective way to get out of your head.

 

Some things you can do:

 

Feel your feet and the surface below them, feelingthe rocks and every crevice in the ground.
 

Feel your hands, bringingattention to every single finger one at a time.
 

Feel your calf muscles as you work, noticinghow they contract with each step.
 

Enjoy the breeze on your back.
 

Embrace the air as it enters your lungs and followits passage.
 

This is called being mindful, and it is amazing for stress relief and tackling overthinking. 

 

##**2.Change your environment to prime different emotions**##


 

In the field of influential psychology, there is a term called ‘priming’. It is defined as,

“The implicit memory effect in which exposure to a stimulus influences response to a later stimulus”. Lots of interesting research has gone into priming; for instance, if I were to flash the colour yellow and then later ask you to give me the name of a fruit, you would be more likely to suggest a banana. 

 

If you have recently seen or heard the word ‘eat’, you are more likely to fill in so_p as ‘soup’ rather than ‘soap’ within a few minutes’ time.

 

Priming has been used by marketers for years to influence us into buying because it’s incredibly powerful. 

We can prime ourselves through changing the stimulus that we are exposed to. Sometimes our environment – through its arrangement of objects – can evoke implicit meaning, and in turn, prime us into mental states. A messy room can make us feel lazy, while a clean and orderly room can inspire confidence and productivity. 

 

Perhaps the environment in which you find yourself is leading to your overthinking…Try a change of scenery! If you work in an office, go to the beach! Mix it up to give your brain some fresh stimulus. 

 

##**1.Get Active**##


One of the best ways to get rid of stress and overthinking is through exercise. Pick your poison: running, weight training, yoga, swimming; as long as you are getting active, you are doing well. 

Exercising can provide a natural high through the rush of endorphins (feel-good chemicals) that your body releases upon completion. 

 

Let’s not even get into the health benefits or we will be here all day. Sometimes when you are overthinking, the best thing that you can do is get your ass to the gym!And I didn't give a fuck. I saw her, walked up to her, and greeted myself. I could instantly tell she noticed my height (5ft 8). I made a joke about how I should be the one in heels, she laughed, we continued talking. She threw a bunch of shit tests my way, judging what I study, and of course making a remark about how she thought I'd be around 6ft. I passed her shit tests, went to 3 other bars, and without going into too much detail, had quite some 'fun' before parting ways.

(I feel it's relevant to add, she was just as good, if not better looking than myself)

My guys, you may already know it, but confidence is one of the most important traits a man can have. No matter how attractive or how tall you are, if you don't seem confident, you don't have a chance. Had I said "ahah yeah sorry I'm quite short" it would've been over. Had I said "oh you don't like maths? yeah, I guess it's a bit nerdy" Instead of laughing and saying "so you're shit at maths I take it?" with a smile, again, it could very well have been over.

And no, I haven't always been confident. Two years ago I was a literal 3/10 incel, barely able to talk to girls, yet now, after 2 years of self-work, I feel comfortable talking to attractive girls. No, I can't walk up to a 10/10 expecting to get her number, but if you can work your way into the top 20% of guys actually getting laid (without dipping below your standards), I'd say you're winning.

Remember, confidence is the key to success. Why do women spend so much time and effort on their appearance? Why do they go to singles’ bars and join dating sites and give blind dates a try? They don’t do it so that they can revel in rejecting a bunch of guys. They’re just as lonely and frustrated as we are. They want to meet a man. But not just any man, a great man — a man who is confident, charming, fun, and interesting. A man who is non-needy, who is vulnerable, and who will honestly express himself to her.
She wants you to be that man. She’s secretly rooting for you. She doesn’t want to reject you. Every time a new man walks up to her, she’s secretly saying to herself, “Please, please, please be the man. Be the attractive man that I can’t say no to.” And then he nervously stutters around buying her a drink and makes uncomfortable jokes about the weather and she’s back to that horribly uncomfortable position of having to reject him again.
Other times it doesn’t even get that far. It’s obvious before he even opens his mouth that it’s game over. He’s dressed like a clown or hasn’t combed his hair in three months, or he’s too drunk to even look at her directly.
This is also why women are willing to overlook a lot of bonehead moves and mistakes we make if they like us. It’s amazing how many second and third chances a woman will give you if she likes you. She’s rooting for you. She’s your biggest fan.This is easier said than done sometimes, but neediness stems from one of the following:

- Fear of being alone
- Fear of being rejected 
- Fear of losing something special that you will never find again

If you work to adopt mindsets that neutralize these natural, yet counterproductive human emotions, you will rarely finding yourself seeking approval from another person.

Rather:

-Embrace and seek out time to be alone. Look at being alone as time to pursue your interests, develop yourself, be in control of your own time. Personal freedom is often times more valuable than companionship.

-Get comfortable with rejection. Recognize that rejection is something everyone experiences frequently, in some shape or form. Rejection does not exist solely in your personal existence. Anyone who implies that they rarely encounter rejection is delusional or a liar.

-Have an abundance mindset when it comes to relationships. Having a connection with someone isn’t something that happens every day, but it’s not a once in a lifetime occurrence. If you are a well rounded person, there are hundreds, if not thousands of amazing people that you could connect with. Purely from a logistical perspective, you don’t have enough time or resources to date all the available people who you would find appealing.I’ve been a lurker for a bit but I finally did it. After like a year and a half of eyeing this girl at the gym I asked for a coffee and she said yes. Felt great. Although I would be a fool not to since she matched with me on bumble like 2 days ago but she didn’t say anything. I just took that as a sign and went for it.I’m 57. I slept with exactly 7 women over a lifetime. I am happy and well and have been with the same woman for ten years. A friend of mine who is 20 laughed at me and said he’s been going strong since he was 16 and hooking up has always been easy. Including sex in the restroom of public parks. He now has genital warts and genital herpes.  All before his 21st birthday. Serial monogamy is what I do. Sticking with one, and seducing them for years. Fear not, brothers. It all works out.Go workout.

No you don't have to look like Mr. Universe; you don't have to look like Hugh Jackman in The Wolverine; just enough that you go down a few shirt sizes and your clothes actually fit you. You'd be surprise what working out 3-4 times a week can do for your confidence.

That is all, have a good day!This is all you need to know.

Build a life that you are enjoying and witch keeps you busy 90% of the time. 

Develop a great mindset about who you are, learn to love yourself and be unattached to things and situations. You can have sex once a year and be happyer than a guy who does it 200 times. 

Learn from where is your subconcious mind getting the validation, what things make you feel valuable and change the clasic narative. You re not the number of women you sleep with.

When you ll meet a woman you ll have a great character. She will be attracted. When you re not with her, you re busy, not overanalizing things , forget about her. That time in witch you ll "forget" about her, will drive her wild . Because you re a rare man. You do not need her to make you life special.

If you look at every grate movie, most of the time, the man has SOMETHING to DO. The woman comes along. The man must transcend himself. The woman it s a bonus. 

Be a PORSCHE along common men.

Good luckI didn't know how easy this shit really is. I'd been having so much anxiety about my first time but once I just focused on her and how she felt, and just having fun it felt natural and less awkward. It started out after taking her on a date, we were in her driveway, and I told her that "I really want to kiss you", and then she told me how nervous she was and that this was her first kiss as well. I felt embarrassed to tell her this was my first so I just laughed and said "Really?" and then went in for it.  I was pretty insecure about not having experience before, so I just played the rest of the night like I did, and it worked because she thought I did. So win-win. Also, it's a lot lower than I thought.

&#x200B;Every single sentence in this book hurts like a cold dagger filleting through my chest. All the examples of Mr. Nice yet needy Guy are completely in sync with my current self. Every theory he wrote reflects my exact personality. The reason he provides are so fucking point on.

I read Models and thought that's all I have to read to know the game. I started approaching but I just couldn't bring myself to put words in my mouths. I'd be sitting beside a lovely lady and I just couldn't even ask for time (I'd be screaming in my head: SPEAKUP ASSHOLE!), I just couldn't. The only lady I talked to was the cashier and when I asked her about her day she gave me a 2 sec stare and looked away. I told myself I may have creep'ed her out (notice this is me self talking, she didn't actually say it.)

I'm at 70th page of this book and it makes all the sense in the world. All of this boils down to the way I brought up. The things I keep telling myself. And these things can't be just changed in a flick of a button. It will take time, and it is painful.

**Everyone knows how to raise a kid, people should also know how NOT to raise a kid.**

I can talk to random people relatively easily but the woman are a different story, may be coz I am idolizing them, putting them on a pedestal. My brains knows this, but unconsciously I am shit scared of them. I think if I were to go talk to a lady she would slap me and people will come around and beat the shit out of me for bothering a lady. Fucked UP thinking, yes it is. Damage had been done and it's very hard to undo.

edit: thanks for taking the time to read my story and providing thoughtful insights. It's really heart-warming to see the support you guys can extend in true [reddit fashion.](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/iwu0ry/this_sub_is_simply_just_gals_and_bros_trying/) It's encouraging to know that many of you were as I am now and were able to develop and improve yourselves. The response I am getting is very humbling. can't thank you guys enoughHi guys,

Long time lurker but I have been hearing the advice of "not being friends with girls", "dont be in any friend zone" and "only have sexual energy relationships with women" etc and I honestly think that is terrible advice.

People see things far too black and white the truth in almost all cases lies in the middle with underlying degrees.

Being friends with women can be super beneficial in helping guys get girls and get laid as long as you are forming the right relationship with the right girl.

The benefits include:

1) Access to other girls: The first benefit is that being friends with girls will ultimately introduce you to other girls through parties/events/etc. I cant count the number of times me or my friends gotten laid through a mutual friend of a girl.

2) Social proof: When girls see you with other girls it signals that this guy is 'safe' and 'proven' thus lowering their guard when you approach. 

3) Observations: Being around girls allows you to essentially see how they are, behavior etc. first hand. It also allows you to try things and see how they first before you try then on someone you want to get laid with. Its like when some two tribes are at war and you have access to enter their camp and see how things are (bad analogy but you get the idea).

Don't think that just because you are "in the friend zone" its the end because it could be a sea of opportunity. Anyway that's all thanks for coming to my ted talk.This is gonna be a semi field report and semi advice post from an interesting experience I had at the club last night.

So I was on the dance floor having a good time, I catch the eye of this one girl, she was pretty attractive so I extended my hand to her and invited her to dance, I spin her around and bring her in close, we grinded for a few minutes and it was getting hot and heavy, all the sudden this dude comes in, pulls the girl away and gives me a shove. Now I had always noticed this dude dancing around this girl in my peripheral, but I just assumed he was some random dude creeping around like the rest of the chumps. So the dude gives me a stern warning and pulls the girl aside and starts arguing with her, I thought that was hysterical and I just walked away and kept dancing. The guy ends up just dancing with the girl awkwardly after I left, but whenever I look over there I see the girl giving me all kinds of looks.

At some point of the night I ended up bumping into her again on the dance floor, I look around and the dude is nowhere to be found so I ask her "hey where's your boyfriend at?" In which she says "he's just my friend, he's very protective, I'm so sorry about that" so we picked up where we left off, made out a little bit, started to get to know each other physically and conversationally, we were having a good time and what do you know, the dude comes back from wherever he was and goes "hey fuck off she's my girlfriend"

Now I could have said a lot of things to this guy, like "well that's weird cause she's been sticking her tongue down my throat for the past 5 minutes" but I decided to be the bigger man and not say anything smug, instead the girl was the one being all pissed that the guy kept cockblocking us. She argued with him while still having her arms around me (which I found to be pretty funny lol) but the guy was super persistent. Eventually she just got mad and stormed off the club and the guy followed her out.

Now I never got her number, or even her name, and will probably never see her again, the whole time they were arguing I could've probably intervened and changed that fact, but the whole thing was just too amusing for my drunk self and I just wanted to watch the show, and to be honest the girl wasn't worth me getting invested into that argument for. In the end what I took out from that night was a pretty interesting story, and a lesson to be learnt for guys like this: if the girl you like is dancing and sticking her tongue down someone else's throat in front of you, you're probably better off moving on. Don't be needy and kill the fun not just for yourself, but also for the girl who you claim to be friends with.

I personally have been in the receiving end of this situation where I brought girls I was interested in to bars and clubs and they end up flirting and even making out with someone else, what did I do? I moved on. Girls like that aren't worth your time or emotional investment. And there are plenty girls out there to go around so relax, focus on yourself, the girls that are worth your time will eventually come.Do not spam approach randoms.

You cold approach with your eyes.

1. Make sure a woman catches you looking at her.
2. When she catches you DO NOT LOOK AWAY YOU PUSSY and smile and nod
3. If she smiles back or looks DOWN go talk to her. If she doesn't smile back or quickly looks away or whatever don't bother.

^ this is how you set up a dope opener.

Where it seems like you just walked in and said some cool shit and she smiles and blah blah.I recently saw a post where a guy said random women were making rude, judgmental comments about him as he was minding his own business in public. They said things like ‘ew’ and ‘no thank you’, even when he wasn’t trying to talk to them.  He said a few key things, some common behaviors and mindsets of men that are detrimental.

-He said that he would avoid eye contact to avoid negative attention. Avoidance of eye contact is a tell tale sign of submissiveness and insecurity. By avoiding eye contact, he is reinforcing that he will not stand up for himself or even respond to disrespectful, aggressive behavior.

-He didn’t state it outright in the post, but lack of eye contact goes hand in hand with slouched, inward body language and stiff, fast paced movement, which screams insecurity and unease.  It is easier said than done when your internal mindset is not one of confidence, but dominant body language is slow and expansive—you take up space.  You walk with your back straight, shoulders back, at a slow pace with a slight swing in your arms.  Never put hands in pockets unless your hands are cold

-Finally, he stated that he didn’t project an imagine of ‘toxic masculinity’.  This indicates that he has been socially conditioned to believe that traditional masculinity is inherently toxic. Society has beaten him down so that he accepts he must be in a submissive role to women. Despite what the loudest media and Internet talking heads say, strong women respect strong men who don’t act subservient. This doesn’t mean you have to act like a rigid asshole and believe men are better than women—men who are centered believe both genders have inherent strengths and deserve to be treated equally. Being dominant and projecting strength means you are not afraid to be a leader in your relationship, speak your mind, and not ashamed to display physical strength and confidence in your mannerisms.Hey guys, it's just a small thing, but literally minutes ago I just said "Hi" to a completely stranger girl on my way back to my apartment. (She lives in the same apartment house - she came out with trash bags in her hand) The importance: I kept eye-contact. I normally just look nervously away, but I kept looking in her eyes. She answered with a silent, kinda nervous "Hello" and began to smile and as I said it I felt a smile going over my face too.
I know it's no big thing but I realized that I can do it. I made progress and in this time and with my shy personality this might be a bigger one. 

Thanks for reading :)A couple days ago I came to terms with the fact that I 25(F) had been ghosted by a guy I really liked after we had been seeing each other for about 3 months. I had met his family and he told me he loved me so it came as quite a shock and I was quite devastated. 

I regularly visit a small mall near my place for coffee, and noticed a super cute guy working at the gym shop. I’m not into gym culture at all, but dragged a friend with me to the shop to pretend to check out the protein powder a couple days back so that we could strike up a convo with this cute guy. It was brief and playful, and we obviously left the shop empty handed. Today I decided to shoot my shot, since after the devastation of the ghosting situation, another rejection couldn’t really make things worse. And I felt like I needed to grab my confidence back. I am a HELLA shy girl. So it took like 10 minutes of building myself up. 

I walked in, and the guy instantly recognized me, smiled and said he had seen me earlier and tried to wave. Seemed like a good sign. So I wrote my number on a napkin, handed it to him and told him he was really cute and I’d love to get a coffee with him if he was single. And he’s already texted me! :)) 

This was my first time ever approaching an attractive stranger, and I couldn’t be happier with the outcome. He told me it was really ballsy and he really liked it. But more than anything else, having the confidence to do it made me feel really sexy. 

So fellow gals on this sub who think that approaching is limited to guys, 10/10 recommend writing your number on a napkin and handing it to that cute guy. Not just for getting the number but there is nothing like the sense of empowerment of knowing that even if it doesn’t go as planned, you probably made that strangers day. And did something that anyone can do, but most aren’t brave enough to do.**TL;DR: Having your shit together is the most attractive quality to have in college. Step 1: Be attractive. Step 2: don't be unattractive.**

So I'm guessing everyone saw [the top post yesterday](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/2ejy5s/the_ultimate_guide_to_hooking_up_with_endless/) on how to hook up with girls and college by that apparent idiot named "Raizo". That entire post was the biggest load of bullshit I've ever seen on this sub, but the topic of sex and college is one that frequently comes up and for the upcoming freshers there's a lot of misleading information in order to take advantage. So in the spirit of this sub, I'm going to try and give as much as accurate and honest advice I can.

Sidenote: the only reason you should want to go to college is to get a job at the end of it. That's your priority. Do not go to college because you want to get laid, or you want to "find yourself" or it's what all your friends are doing. You will (and deserve to) fail. The main point to take away here is that **the people who say college is the best time of your life did it wrong.** You should not go to a liberal arts college and study some bullshit degree like the author of that post said, because:

1.  You are fucking yourself up for later in life. (That's probably why Raizo's still studying at 26...)

2. By far, the most attractive characteristic to have in college is stability. Having a goal, plan or at least some sort idea of what the hell you going to do after uni is going to set you miles apart from the vast majority guys around you. Both girls and guys will gravitate to that ambition and as long as you don't consistently go on about yourself and how amazing you are, they'll appreciate the one friend or boyfriend who actually has their shit together.



But let's get down to business. This entire framework will based on [Mark Manson's approach](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/12rn3g/i_am_mark_manson_former_pua_coach_self/) and [Frank Yang's 100 girls in one year art project](http://youtu.be/fsgGpOMdF0s?t=8m36s), so none of the stuff here's my own, I'm completely ripping off these two guys.

The whole basic idea is self improvement. 

***Honest Truth #1***: Girls at college are going to be the most superficial and judgemental people you've ever met. This is because they have to be. They're going to be approached around 5 to 7 times a day (no joke) and because it's college, the majority of guys hitting on them will be idiots. In fact, there'll be so many idiots that unfortunately some of them will succeed. This why the majority of shitposts on how to get laid in college overarching advice is to be an idiot. Do Not be an Idiot. I repeat, DO NOT BE AN IDIOT. Remember why you're there, remember that college is only a stepping stone and you've actually got to have a life, job, house and responsibilities after this. So don't take liberties with your money and health chasing tail. You will regret this.

Best way to beat this?: Work out.

I'll never understand why /r/Fitness isn't on the sidebar any more, but the biggest key to acing college/life is working out and eating healthy. Because girls need to be judgemental in order to sift through the shits to the slightly-less-shits, you need to break through this barrier. The ultimate and universal way to do this is to workout. /r/fitness, /r/fitmeals, /r/EatCheapAndHealthy, & /r/loseit or /r/gainit respectively are your friends in this regard. Do not cheap out on this. There will never be an easier time to start working than in college, and if you haven't got the balls to the gym and pick up a barbell, you won't have the balls to even talk to girls. (Sidenote: If you're working out enough and good looking, girls will come up to you. Makes life much easier.)

***Honest Truth #2***: You will be the dumbest you have ever been at college. You will be. Everyone will be. People go into college thinking they're some hot shit, then fail epically. Why? The combination of freedom and fundamental lack of responsibility. Yes, they're responsible for themselves, but most aren't thinking about their future or what jobs they need or anything remotely important. 

Best way to beat this?: Read.

Read your course-books, (pdfs, don't buy that shit) then read everything else. It's going to give you something to talk about once a girl thinks you've worked out enough to deem relatively worth talking to. Secondly, it's going to give you an edge in getting top grades. If you're hot and you've got good grades, not only are you displaying stability, (remember that key characteristic in college), but girls will use it as an excuse to hang out/study with you. Always a plus. (Sidenote: Don't watch TV. Waste of time. You're not learning anything. Sure you might be excluded when the social conversation turns to Game of Thrones or something, but it's not worth wasting your time. If your friends keep talking about it around you, just say you've read the books and if they don't shut up you'll start giving out spoilers. Further Sidenote: Read the books.)

***Honest Truth #3***: College is the most socially exclusive time of your life. Everything and everyone is judged by who's knows/banging who. It was ridiculous the number of girls coming up to me and knowing my name because we had a high number of mutual friends on Facebook. Everyone's consistently judging everyone. And you have to, HAVE TO be able to avoid a negative stigma. 

Having said all that, when "Raizo" says that it's impossible to break into social group after the first month or so into a semester, **this is more bullshit**. People change social circles all the time college. That's half the fun to be honest, meeting new people, having new experiences.

Best way to beat this?: Aside from working out, joining the right clubs. This is by far the toughest to navigate, so give me a little leeway on this one.

Now in the post, Raizo says to join fraternities. They didn't have a Greek life at my uni, but judging him on everything else he said in the post, this also probably bullshit. Why would you join a society full of guys to meet girls? By far the quickest way to hook up with as many girls as you can is to know as many girls as you can. Plus fraternities don't sound great for your grades, but every college's social structure is different so I'll let you decide yourself. The best guide I can provide is going to have to be from my own experience so here goes.

I joined 4 societies. One academic (Guy to girl ratio 60:40), one non-competitive sport society (Ratio 70:30), and two social societies (both at 50:50). The key to social standing at uni is knowing as many people as possible. The more people you know, the more you're seen to be known and the more people will want to know you. Law of Social Momentum. By far, the two easiest societies to get laid in at most colleges are the biggest competitive athletics society (American Football, Rugby, Lacrosse, table tennis; whichever one is brought up is conversation most often) and the Christian Society.

If you're the star player on the biggest team, you're not going to need this subreddit. You're going to have a great time, but your life will effectively be: 

    Sports, Grades, Girls. Pick two. 
    
I've quite couple of friends who weren't able to balance it, so I'm not overly envious of the challenge. 

Religious beliefs aside, the reason why the Christian Society is my preferred choice is because the majority of girls who join the club have never been given the amount of freedom and contact to boys as they have in college, and to be honest most of the guys are dweebs so there's not much real competition. Slight warning though, religious and political societies do tend to have the most drama, so after getting with about a fifth of the girls there, be ready for some blowback. (Sidenote: The number of religious teens that believe that the [poophole-loophole](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=poophole%20loophole) is real, simultaneously hilarious and tragic.)

The goal of joining any society is social standing. If it's a sport society and it's continuously being brought up the guys in their are dirtbags or whatever; more likely than not, that's the society where most hookups are happening. It's a thin line though. If a society's something like Poker or Warhammer, and it's seen negatively, it's best to avoid it. Don't join a society because you share a belief, or you enjoy the activity. Join a society that has a reasonable number of girls, know the girls, know their friends, and you'll be away.

Advantage of a society is that the committee or leaders have an incentive for inclusiveness. They need everyone to have a good time so they'll want to keep coming. If you're shy this is the best to break down these barriers...after working out obviously.

***Honest Truth #4***: Not everyone gets laid at college. You're never going to read this on those "Just be an idiot" shitposts online, but this is me being honest. Not everyone gets laid at college. It's actually quite strange the number of people who go all Ted Mosby and think just because you didn't find the one in those 3 to 4 years, that you're somehow broken or you're going to spend the rest of your life alone. You won't. If you worked out, stayed healthy, got good grades instead of chasing tail, you're going to be fine.

Best way to get beat this?: Remember that it's easier to get laid as an adult than as a college student. Now this is going to sound controversial to those who remember college as the best years of their life, but if you figured your shit out earlier, you won't have to worry. Having a decent career and a healthy lifestyle in you mid-to late twenties is far more attractive then burning out early and spending your life fantasising about what could have been. Single women  after college in particular, fall into this trap via a "fear of the body clock". To be frank, most guys I know who did well in school but failed socially, reached 20-30 women within the first two years in work, so I wouldn't worry. Past performance is not an indicator of the future.

Couple of things to remember:

1. Always live in a dorm on campus. I was fortunate never to have a room-mate, but given the choice of sharing a bunk or social exclusion living out in the digs, I'd take the bunk. 
 
2. In terms of fashion, /r/malefashionadvice is a decent place to start. Just don't wear a suit everywhere. It's not impressive and yeah you'll get noticed but no one likes that guy.
 
3. Attend all your lectures. Good for grades, but the more you're there, the more you're noticed, and the more girls will recognise you on nights out. 

4. Sleep is vital to both working out and grades. You're aren't going to succeed at anything if you're pull all nighters, then heading out. Somedays you have to choose. Prioritise and decide.
 
5. Go out a minimum 3 nights a week. Slightly counter-intuitive given the previous comment, and never let your grades suffer. But if you've joined enough societies, you should be popular enough to manage a large enough social circle to select decent wingmen from. 
 
5. Drink Alcohol. Now if it's illegal where you are then that's a separate problem (...year abroad). And yes, alcohol is bad for your health and yes **if you need alcohol to be confident and game, then your game's weak.** Having said all that, most drinking is seen as a social habit, so if you decide to opt out of it, you're going to be seen as anti-social. Disaster. Some people balance this by offering to be the designated driver, but you might as well write off any hook ups that night. Also a disaster. My advice, drink enough to be feel the buzz, try to keep it under control, don't drink on your own and don't let it take control of your life. And good indicator of whether alcohol is taking over is the amount of money of you're spending on it. If you're saving money for an alcohol or it's coming out of your food budget, you're relying too much time on it and it's time to [work on your game.](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1db1fl/billys_guide_to_learning_pickup/)
 
7. Drugs: Same principle as Alcohol. You shouldn't need it if you're game's strong enough, but if it's seen as a social activity, it's kind of inevitable. Again, if legality's a problem, there's study abroad. Having said that I met my current girlfriend during a Mid-semester Rave in the Woods round the back of the dorm and I was nowhere near legal. So it's again it's up to you.
 
8. Take up Languages. Aside from the fact it'll get you a job, language classes are populated by 3 types of people. Guys who are native speakers. Girls who are native speakers and girls who are not native speakers who are either looking to pick up a foreign guy or actually genuinely want to learn a language. These classes are an untapped resources as the native speakers end up pairing up together. 
 
9. Stay clean. People's hygiene really goes to pot at uni. Shower and clean your room daily.


All right that should be about it. Hope that clears up some of the misinformation.  Stay safe and above all, remember, you've got the rest of your life afterwards.If two people just catch eye contact the guy always looks away so quickly, to a girl that's a sign he's not initially interested so why bother, if you maintain eye contact that's already a step, note girls will look away and lookback to see if ur still looking. 5 seconds is the max, it like a game I look you look we both look at then smile:D.

This happens to me all the time in cafes or busses even the shops they look interested but if they don't maintain eye contact then  I won't approach you, you won't approach me we move on, just take the hint.  but it's not always romantically interest I had girls come up to me too just because I looked and smiled at them.  so even if you won't approach them it just makes people's day to just feel seen.

(don't try to show you are interested by acting like you are not interested, it's the weirded thing to me, its this sense of superiority  "like I'm too good to acknowledge back cus I'm cool, but please notice me and feed my ego :)" iv noticed this in body language.

only made this post since iv saw so many ppl taking about approaching women in public. Lets keep it simple. Exercises you can try right NOW which improve you and your game. Find an area you want to improve and do it.


**Speech Improvement**

[Pen in Mouth trick](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19ucae/talking_with_a_pen_in_my_mouth_has_helped_me/) - Pronunciation

[Theatre projection tips](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/19w0t1/speaking_drills_for_clarity/c8s37f4) - Articulation/Pronunciation

[Ding Dong exercise](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CCwI2GAwH3c) - Lower vocal range

[Using the diaphragm](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CXoHdl_eitA) - Learn how to speak with your diaphragm


**Posture Improvement**

[Walking Technique](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-fD2TSL2s7I) - How to walk properly

[Save your back, Sit properly](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_-j5Haj9JY) - Posture improvement through correct sitting

[Posture warmups](http://postmasculine.com/posture) - Quick exercises to improve bad posture


**Building Proper Habits**

[5 second life hack](http://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/1aa4bt/reddit_what_life_rule_do_you_have_for_yourself/c8vgfe5) - Mental trigger for everything

[Charisma Myth summary](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1fsqz9/seddit_lets_compile_a_list_of_simple_exercises/cadkp2g) - Changing your thinking habitsI'm visiting a friend in South Carolina. I went to the Ingles (a grocery store) and was checking out beer when I noticed the cashier was smiling the entire time I was talking to her. I went to pay my card and normally I would just stare at the screen but instead I looked at her to see what she would do. She looked down and then looked at me and continued smiling. I asked about her day and what not. I eventually left and realized that "Wait a minute, I have an opportunity."

I walked back in and told her I forgot something. I pretended to search around for a bit, she asked what I was looking for. I told her that I think I left my number here, do you need it? She laughed and told me she had a boyfriend but me and her had a fun interaction that we'll both remember for a while. I was shaking the entire time but now I'm sitting here knowing that I'll be ok and that it only gets better and I know I'll get what I want in the future. I'm 24 and haven't been doing anything, socially wise, for a long time. I now have a direction to pursue. I understand that I'll be ok when I interact with women and just not care. I've been a long time lurker here and I wanted to share my first experience. Thank you for taking the time to read this. Have a wonderful day.It’s been approximately three years since I got my heart broken. Long story short, I met a girl, we became friends, friendship developed into attraction, I told her I liked her, she told me she liked me back, and a month later I got a text from her saying that she was no longer interested. As you can imagine, the long story is a lot more complicated. I won’t get into all of that. What I will do, however, is explain why things went wrong:

**Lack of courage.** It took me about 7 months to tell her that I liked her. I did not strike while the iron was hot. The ability to be courageous and to go for what we want despite the fear that others will think of us negatively and despite the understanding that there is a possibility that we will get rejected is crucial when it comes to dating and attraction.

**Lack of understanding of male-female dynamics.** This girl was feminine, and I am someone who is masculine at my core. During the 7 months when neither me nor her made a move, I sometimes asked myself “why doesn’t she make a move? Why does it have to be me?” Women will give us hints, but as men, it is our responsibility to be the ones to take the lead and to make the first move.

**Being overcome by infatuation.** As my attraction for her grew stronger, so did my level of infatuation. I started dreaming about her, and I found myself constantly thinking about her. The confident, interesting, and funny guy that she fell for had turned into a nervous wreck who was no longer able to be himself around her. One of the ways to overcome infatuation is to be outcome independent.

After I got my heart broken, I cut all contact with her, and I pretty much haven’t spoken to her since. I understood that the only way to get over her was to grow as a person, to focus on bettering myself and to gain new experiences.  The months following the heart break were difficult; I did a lot of soul searching and spent a lot of time reading about dating and attraction. Over the last three years, I’ve learned great deal about this topic. Here are 12 dating principles for young men.

**1)** **Treat dating as a skill set.**

Dating it not an esoteric practice, it’s a skill set. Anybody can become good at it. All it takes is practice. Successfully honing a skill requires consistency. If you want to get better at dating and if you want to gain more experience with women, put yourself in positions to succeed. Go out, join clubs, make friends, talk to people who are in your surroundings, and go on dates. Learn to consistently approach women you find interesting and attractive.

**2)** **Understand that you are enough.**

A lot of men have the unfortunate mindset that some women are “above” them. This is wrong, and it leads to desperate guys putting women on pedestals. Even the hottest women are human and have problems. No woman is special. There are plenty of fish in the sea. Don’t fall into infatuation. Have some self-respect and don’t treat her differently than you treat other people. Don’t try too hard to entertain her; you are not a clown. Understand that we are all intrinsically equal. Sure, some people might be more attractive than you, but attraction is somewhat subjective. Women are not into looks as much as guys are. With that being said, working on becoming more attractive is a good goal.

**3)** **Be courageous.**

Be confident and courageous. If you see a girl you find attractive, go up and strike a conversation with her. The key is to be outcome independent. Too many guys approach with the mentality "I'm going to get her number" or "I'm going to ask her out on a date". That's the wrong way to go about things. Simply go up to another human being, compliment them on something genuine like their outfit, or talk about your surroundings or something, and have a conversation. If there is a vibe, awesome. If not, that's okay too. Once you get to know someone and there is mutual attraction, strike while the iron is hot. Don’t be afraid to escalate sexually, as long as it’s done in a socially calibrated manner.

**4)** **Have a life outside of dating.**

Women should never be the definite chief aim of your life. As mentioned in my article, “What Is The Meaning Of Life?”, there are far more meaningful and important things to pursue, such as building a legacy, and working on projects that you are passionate about. A lot of men chase women because they are hoping that they will fill a void. A woman should not be solution to your life problems. Self-love should always come first. As the philosopher and writer Ayn Rand once wrote, “To say ‘I love you’ one must first know how to say the ‘I’.” Self-improvement is crucial. Work on becoming more attractive and on becoming a better person. This includes things like getting a nice haircut, wearing well-fitting clothes, and building your ideal body by working out and eating healthy.

**5)** **Be picky.**

At the end of the day, sex and dating are simply transfers of energy. Sexual energy is valuable, it can even be used for creative pursuits. Don’t give your energy to just anyone. Make sure that you are attracted to this person, that they are truly your type, and that you genuinely like this person. Time is your most valuable resource in life; don’t waste your time on girls who aren’t worth it and who show no promise.

**6)** **Never become resentful.**

Never become resentful of women, of more successful guys, and of the world. You cannot change human nature. If women don’t find you attractive, there is probably a reason. Maybe you need to work on your looks. Maybe there is something about your personality and mindset that is off-putting. Maybe you give off a bad vibe. Instead of becoming resentful, embrace rejection and work to improve yourself. Becoming resentful not only makes your situation worse, but it also serves no purpose.

**7)** **Be a good person.**

Make sure that your intentions are in the right place. Women are sometimes afraid of meeting new guys. Make sure that you are doing everything you can so that she is comfortable throughout every step of the process. If you are unsure about something or get the vibe that she might be uncomfortable, use your words and ask her. Be genuine and in alignment with your values and with all parts of yourself. Do not be manipulate. Furthermore, do not talk about other girls when you’re around her. Nobody likes to hear that.

**8)** **Don’t get overly emotional.**

As Tyler Durden says in Fight Club, “Let the chips fall where they may.” If things are not working out and she seems to be losing interest, that’s okay; it’s life. You can’t control what happens, you can only control your response. If you get upset, withdraw until you are no longer emotional. Responding in an overly emotional manner won’t help you in any way. Instead, take a step back, clear your head, and respond logically to what life throws at you. It’s okay to be emotional and to show emotion in a healthy manner. However, allowing your emotions to rule you and to control you is unhealthy.

**9)** **Never chase.**

There is nothing more unattractive than somebody who tries for force attraction. Attraction cannot be negotiated. It’s either there or it isn’t. Reciprocate her efforts and her level of affection and attraction. If it seems like she is losing interest, then take a break. You might realize that she isn’t right for you. Sometimes, distance will show someone how important you are to them. Do not plead or become needy or clingy. Outcome independence is crucial. When going on dates, don’t have expectations. Be mindful of the present moment. Remember that a woman should not be the center of your Universe.

**10)** **Understand that attraction is built in person.**

There is nothing wrong with texting, but it should primarily be used as a tool to meet up with her in person. Talk about the important stuff when you see her. Experiencing things with her in person is the best way to build attraction.

**11)** **Do not rush things.**

A lot of people rush into different stages of dating and into relationships. Don’t do that. Take things slowly. Do not ignore red flags. Make sure that a girl is a healthy component to your life before moving things forward. Furthermore, when first meeting a girl, do not compliment her on her looks; it’s shallow and she’s probably heard the same compliment a thousand times. Instead, compliment her on the things that she’s genuinely worked hard on and that she’s proud of.

**12)** **Always stay true to yourself.**

I understand that an important aspect of life is to “fake it till you make it”. With that being said, even when you are doing that, you should still maintain a core part of yourself. There is nothing more unattractive than somebody who creates a fake personality and acts in a disingenuous way just to attract women. Even if you do succeed, you will have done so at what cost? The cost of your integrity? The cost of your self-respect? The cost of your character? It’s manipulative and unhealthy. Do not use “tricks” to attract her. You want women to be attracted to who you truly are.

**Final thoughts.**

I’m not an expert when it comes to dating and attraction; not even close. This article is simply a collection of my own thoughts and observations. I’m sure that in the years to come, much of my thinking will either change or improve, as is usually the case with the passing of time. With that being said, I hope that some of you found some these ideas helpful. Best of luck!I saw this girl out of the corner of my eye. I saw that she kinda kept looking back at me when she finished her set. I've always been kinda shy, but thought fuck it, why not. I said hi, I know this may sound a little weird, but for some reason I can't stop looking at you. She giggled and i said my name is **** first of all, she said nice to meet you, I'm **** (IOI). I said we should grab a cup of coffee sometime, to which she responded with, "you're really sweet and you made my day, but i'm actually married...." I then said, "That's fair, I couldn't be the only fan." We hugged and went different ways. I am happy I made her day. I obviously left screaming FUCKKKKK in my head, but hey at least I went for it. 

Edit: hugging is weird I guess
 
Edit: thank you all for the kind words and for continuing to boost my confidence. 6.5/10 looking guy here, short for a male 5'8". I didnt dress great or anything. Didnt even have cologne on.

Was feeling down yesterday and went to a local bar all by myself with the sole idea to play pool. An hour after playing or so, 3 beautiful asian women walk in with a guy and sit not far from the pool tables sharing a pitcher. The one I thought was the best looking locked eyes with me a few times so I gave her a smile.

 After this I felt super intimidated as I had been out of the game so long, I also was looking about 60% of my full potential in dress, and style.  My recent encounters have either been women from the past, or friends of friends type things. I sat on my phone feeling nervous as to whether or not I should introduce myself. 

I went on this sub immediately for some encouragement, and read a couple of the top quotes. One stuck out saying "it only takes 20 seconds of bravery". I made up my mind right then, I wasnt going to not try anymore, and regret it later. I had nothing to lose. Next time she looked my way I smiled again, and walked straight to her and introduced myself to her and all her friends. Turns out shes a filipina pediatrician a year older than me (fiscally this is even out of my league). I escalated and kept conversation warm and funny. Would touch her playfully every chance I got, and what do you know.. 2 hours later as her friends were ready to leave, she wanted to stay back with me instead. I asked if she wanted to walk back to my house around the corner with me instead of hanging out at the bar. She obliged, on the walk I just held her hand, stopped to kiss her alot and the rest is history. Awesome sex in ways I forgot about. I called her an uber home later in the night. We chatted for quite awhile after she got home. Would definitely spend time with her again.

I have been rejected alot in the past I think with only minor success in these situations, if ever. Nothing ever like this.

Shoot your shot If you want to! I fully expected rejection but ended up having a beautiful woman to roll around in bed with for awhile.Lemme tell y’all about my night…

Normally I would spend any other Wednesday night smoking weed, ordering takeout, and playing Tekken. But as of lately I’ve been super hard on myself when it comes to confidence and approaching girls. You know that feeling you get when you see a girl that you wanna talk to, she’s exactly your type…and you just didn’t because you had “approach anxiety”, that regret? Yea, I’ve been feeling a lot of that lately. 

But tonight I said fuck it. I took a shower, got dressed and went to a local bar. The main goal was to talk to at least one girl. Literally, if I had just made a noise and got her attention, then just walked away, that would’ve been success to me. And honestly, I couldn’t even do that. I just got 2 rounds of beers and looked at my phone. Pathetic. 

I left feeling that regret again, and it fucking sucks. At this point I’m just hungry and ready to go home. So I stop by Sonic on the way home and order food. When I pull up and park I noticed two really cute servers. Now’s my fucking chance! My heart starts racing knowing I can still hit my goal for the night, but this time I remembered something Todd Valentine suggested. He suggested that instead of thinking of it as “approach anxiety”, think of it as “approach EXCITEMENT”. Your adrenaline is pumping not because you’re scared, but because you’re doing something that’s new and because you know it’s the right thing to do. So I’m thinking fuck it. 

One of the cute servers comes out to give me my food. I reach for it and notice a dope bracelet she’s wearing so I compliment her on it and we talk about that for a couple of minutes. I then say “I know you have to get back work so I don’t wanna take up too much of your time, but you’re cute. Can I get your number and take you out? :)”……. She then hits me with “I have a boyfriend” line 😂. 

And I honestly don’t even care that I got “rejected”, I didn’t die and it wasn’t harsh. It was actually fun and I learned something about myself. It felt fucking good talking to someone I was actually interested in and being direct about it. So now I plan on going back out tomorrow and trying again.I've been in this situation a few times. You start talking to a girl and you want to take her on a date, maybe you've already asked her out, but you don't do the date right away. There can be multiple reasons for this. You might be trying to think of the perfect activity, you might need a haircut, lose 2 more pounds first, buy a new outfit etc. You might even be held back by covid restrictions. Beautiful women have lots of options and plenty of guys chasing them. If you choose to do the date in two weeks' time instead of this week, chances are she'll say yes to go out with another guy this weekend. And you can't even blame her because she owes no loyalty to someone she hasn't been on a single date with. 

Now, women should not be your priority in life, but surely you can make time a couple of hours a week. Stop fucking about! Stop looking for the perfect activity, the perfect haircut, the perfect shirt. A walk in the park tomorrow is better than some crazy activity two weeks from now. Don't hesitate. Just do it!This girl I have been going on dates and having sex with recently told me I surprised her because she initially thought I was a player, but I turned out really sweet. Her saying she thought I was a player wasn't a bad thing. I honestly took it as a compliment and to mean "you seemed like you have a lot of girls and don't care that much." So, I asked her why she thought this and she gave 4 reasons:

&#x200B;

**1) I met her on Tinder.**

What I learned from this: Her initial reaction to all guys on Tinder was player and just in it to fuck. This means when they have hundreds of matches and have low expectations, **we are fighting an uphill battle**. You have to stand out which is very hard to do, so if a girl stops responding or something, **don't beat yourself up**. 

**2) I didn't text her as much as other guys.**

What I learned from this: She said other guys would always text her and ask to facetime, etc. Texting is always about meeting in person which is always what I made my goal. I told her my intention and built rapport, but didn't ever waste texts with "Hey, how is your day?" We also met before the lockdowns and went on a date after, so we really would snapchat about each other's stories now and then, and I would tell her I wanted to take her out. I think the main thing here is that **it's not about how much you say, but what you say and how you make her feel.** More talking isn't the goal, it's making her have a good time and getting her out.

**3) I went on a date with someone in her sorority.**

What I learned from this: **Girls want a wanted guy**. She saw me with another girl which made her realize I already had someone else's approval. It made her realize she wasn't my only option.

**4) I knew a lot of people at our first date.**

What I learned from this: I really only knew the bartender because I go to that bar all the time and a friend I ran into. But it made me realize, **social proof is important**. It is a cycle that feeds itself. It is hard to start, don't get me wrong. However, once it is started, it will continue to grow bigger and bigger. Do not just focus on girls, but friends too.

&#x200B;

TL;DR: Talk to as many people as you can, text her to make her feel good and get her on a date, and don't beat yourself up.I hope you'll be able to watch these and get a clearer idea or which ones you would be interested in reading fully.

**I'm releasing a new video every other day so if you're interested in that please consider subscribing :)**

Thanks, have a great day

**I've made over 50 summaries of the best self improvement books, the links are below.**

**Full playlist of them all here:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&list=PLaNTB6oQAa0AYuul0tqUscg1ZLj\_arZga](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&list=PLaNTB6oQAa0AYuul0tqUscg1ZLj_arZga)

**Here are the links:**

Make Your Bed:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c)

The power of the subconscious mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw)

Getting things done:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc&t=1s)

The power of intention:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY&t=1s)

Deep work:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA&t=8s)

The magic of thinking big:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8&t=3s)

The alchemist:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU&t=36s)

Blink:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk&t=246s)

Atomic Habits:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU)

The E-Myth Revisited:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g)

Mindset:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo)

The art of war:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8\_5qhA2y-E4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_5qhA2y-E4&t=32s)

Rework:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k)

The lean startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE&t=67s)

The hard thing about hard things:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl\_Q3E5d33U](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl_Q3E5d33U&t=2s)

Crush it!:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI&t=6s)

Delivering Happiness:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8&t=4s)

The personal MBA:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU&t=2s)

The $100 startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE&t=1s)

Zero to One:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc&t=1s)

Grit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s)

Start with why:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY)

The compound:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0&t=218s)

The Prince:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ&t=78s)

The willpower instinct:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ&t=103s)

The slight edge:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS\_ZU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS_ZU)

Meditations:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI&t=30s)

Who moved my cheese?:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw)

The One Thing:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM&t=16s)

The richest man in babylon:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs&t=20s)

The power of habit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA&t=24s)

Secrets of the millionaire mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g&t=1s)

The 6 pillars of self esteem:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB\_-w10](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB_-w10&t=8s)

The 7 Habits of Highly Effective people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_nGzZ9m\_Xsg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nGzZ9m_Xsg&t=3s)

Thinking Fast and Slow:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw&t=224s)

The 4 hour work week:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g&t=1s)

The power of positive thinking:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM\_19KBc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM_19KBc&t=1s)

The power of now:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w&t=35s)

Think and grow rich:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww&t=1s)

12 rules of life:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU&t=26s)

The 5 love languages:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY)

Rich Dad Poor Dad:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8&t=28s)

How to win friends and influence people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM&t=137s)

The inside out revolution:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo&t=31s)

Models:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo&t=5s)

Man’s search front:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk&t=18s)

The subtle art of not giving a fuck:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&t=253s)

How to stop worrying and start living:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug)

The millionaire fastlane:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA)

5 extremely powerful techniques to master motivation:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM&t=37s)

Quiet by Susan Cain:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzRcYLq63dU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzRcYLq63dU)

Extreme Ownership:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMWeEyqWHe0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMWeEyqWHe0&t=56s)For context I'm 25 and don't have a lot of experience dating. I've always been socially awkward and didn't lose my virginity until I was 21. Closest I had to a relationship is 5 months dating a rebounding emotionally unavailable girl that ended up breaking my heart. This initially tanked my confidence but eventually motivated me to improve my game.

Now onto the field report. 
There is a pharmacy/store close to my house that I go to sometimes late at night. One of the employees is a cute older woman that I occasionally chat with. She seemed very friendly and I got the feeling that she was attracted but I usually don't like hitting on people at their work. Well tonight I visited her again after a long time, she almost immediately complimented my hair and we started chatting away. She started telling me about how her coworkers tease her for talking to me. The old me would have played it safe and not said anything but I was feeling bold tonight. I started teasing her a bit and making it clear that I didn't mind that they thought we were flirting. She started getting more bold but I could tell she was a bit unsure about the age gap. Started talking about how her coworker was cute and close to my age and that I should be chatting her up instead. I said I'll decide that for myself, I don't think she expected that and after that point she was all in. I asked her to help me with this item that I was buying and she rang me up. I signed up for the discount card and that gave her the perfect excuse to get my number. She asked if it was ok that she got it, I said yes and she said that she'll text me. This was a few hours ago and she's still at work so we'll see what happens.

Takeaway: I've spent a lot of time on this subreddit I've also read a few books on seduction as well. I also spent a lot of time on YouTube watching videos on the topic. I finally reached the point where I felt comfortable implementing the lessons I learned. And guys it is such a good feeling to have it pay off.Every curve ball and shit test she threw at me was so easy to see through and beat. It was like Neo from the Matrix dodging bullets for the first time. I was able to stay in my masculine frame and not let her shake my confidence. Instead of anxiety and fear of rejection, I felt powerful and attractive. She felt it too and the longer we interacted the more excited she became. It got to the point where she didn't know what to say and was giggling like a school girl. At that point I knew I had her. Now it wasn't perfect, I should've made my move much sooner than I did and I should've got her number instead, but I could tell her coworkers were aware of our interactions and I didn't want her to get in trouble so I settled for giving her mine. Number one lesson I took from this though is that you need to learn to gauge interest level and at that point it's just a matter of escalating properly. Read the room and never ever compromise your masculine frame. If a late bloomer with subpar social skills like me can do it than so can you. 

TL,DR 
Finally escalated my flirting with the Milfy woman at the pharmacy, dodged her shit tests and concerns about our age gap. She asked for my number and I am so proud of myself for finally applying the lessons from this subI’m posting this here because I don’t know where else to share my story but it’s so absurd I have to share it.

I matched with a girl on Tinder in Mexico who lied about speaking English. I lied about about speaking Spanish.

Perro, we made it work. We spent our date cracking jokes on my phone on Google Translate. It has a nifty button to switch between source and target languages to pass it back and forth between two people quickly. I’d flirt, translate, switch the language order, and pass it to her for the same. We drank, laughed, and had a great time.

Panties were dropped. My dick was sucked on the beach.

Buenos Diaz amigos!This isn't a cure all just something that has really helped me personally become a better man and hopefully it will help at least someone.

First thing to do is buy a journal. (I know it sounds kiddish but hear it out). What you want to do is everyday write out what happened throughout your day. All the decisions you made and why you made them. Include as many feelings and thoughts as possible. Try your hardest to write in (he) form rather than (I) form. I'll explain why in a second. Now once you do that close it up and forget about it. Give it at least one week and read it. Just that day. Read it as if you didn't know the character or you were reading a book. Ponder on why he is making those choices. Should they be different? Now make yourself the character. How did you see yourself?

This may sound confusing so I'll give some examples. "He came home and noticed his bed was unmade and he had a big pile of laundry. He thought its only Wednesday I'll do it tomorrow. No rush and he played ps4." I read that and went wow that dudes a slob. Is that how others see me? Is that how I want to view myself? No. I have also used it with talking to girls. "The gorgeous lady said thank you as he picked up her dropped papers. There was eye contact and he felt a rush of excitement but he froze and didn't know what to say. He tried to be brave enough to ask her to coffee but couldn't and she walked away." I read that and went pussy. Worse case she would have said no. 

This won't fix everything in a night. Especially the girl part lol. Over the course of about 3 months though friends and family have noticed a huge difference in the way I act and treat my belongings. I still have a long way to go but I'm becoming the man I want be. Hope this helps at least one person. Thx for reading!

Edit: Wow wasn't really expecting people to comment or upvote this. I'm so happy ya'll like this and I hope it helps all of you.The guys who get the best results with girls are not shallow. 

They are also the guys who don't treat girls like objects or trophies, but see girls as human beings. They don't want to be respected for their 'skill with girls' or have an identity as a 'player'. Often they will deny being good with girls because they respect girls and don't see them as objects to use to gain validation or respect from others. Because they don't use or need girls for their identity, they are more relaxed and give off a different energy around girls, which is attractive.

The guy who sees girls as trophies and uses them to impress others, will not be able to reach the full potential of his social life.

SUMMARY:
- Don't be shallow. Judge girls (and guys) for their inner qualities, not outer appearances.

- Don't use girls to get validation from others. See girls as human being, not objects, and you will be better able to connect with them.This is the most simple, but effective way to assess your physical value. No hamstering, no bullshit - just wear a plain, fitted T (not super tight, but not loose either) and ask yourself one question: Do I look good in a t shirt?

If you don't look good in a T-shirt, you're not in aesthetic shape. You might squat 315, you might be able to do X or Y, but you're not capable of just putting on a 10$ shirt, going out, and being attractive.

If you can't feel and look good in a basic T shirt, you aren't going to have the confidence spilling out that you need. It's not just about looks; it's about you being able to look good and feel with 100% confidence that you know you're base - your body - is arousing to women.

This is all pretty much in "no shit" territory, but here's where guys fail to apply this test. You got some dude complaining that he can't get women because he's short, but of course, I'd ask the question "do you pass the T Shirt Test?"

No, they never do. They can't put on a t shirt and look good. If they uploaded a pic, we'd know quickly that it wasn't the height that was the problem.

Same thing with minorities. You can't get women because you're yellow / brown / black / blue / magenta.... OK, upload a pic of yourself in a T Shirt. We'll see what the problem is, and it's not your skin tone. It's your tone in general, you look like shit in a basic t shirt.

"But... but I don't wear a t shirt when I go out, I'm well dressed goddamnit, I read malefashion advice! I'm never actually going to pick up in a t shirt."

Well, you should be able to. If you cannot feel comfortable meeting and talking to girls in a plain T, then you've got serious work to do.

Before you talk about any problem or any limitation that's blocking you from success, I'd urge you to answer this simple question. Do you feel good about yourself and know you objectively look good in a fitted T? If you don't, then just take a step back and realize that your problems might be more simple and surface level than you think.

It might not be a grand conspiracy or a massive societal problem that's stopping you from getting laid; it might just be that you're not comfortable in your own body because you know your own body isn't attractive. It might just be that your body language sucks despite all the body language books you read, and this is because subconsciously you know your body isn't up to snuff.

After this test, there's really only two more things to worry about. Eye Contact and Voice Tone. Can you meet hot girls eyes and not look away / look down? Can you let your gaze linger and feel comfortable letting her know that you do want her? And with voice tone, can you speak loud and deep without going upwards in inflection? If you can speak through her - as though your voice is piercing through her like a lance rather than just reaching her - and you can avoid faltering, approval seeking voice tones that sound like questions, then you're going to get laid.

If you pass the T-Shirt, Eye Contact, and Voice Tone test, then just get your ass in front of enough women, and you'll fuck plenty. For everyone describing problems in their sex life, or even their relationship life, I'd advise you to just make sure you can pass these tests. Chances are, your problems will go away.

I have never met a short guy with a good body, good voice tone, and good eye contact who wasn't smashing some pussy. Everyone thinks they are the exception - "Bro I am Indian and 5'4'' and I am in good shape, no accent, and I can't get girls! I pass all these tests man, my SMV is high, but I can't..."

Okay, upload a pic. Record like 10 seconds of you saying ANYTHING, fuck read a Harry Potter book for 10 seconds. How much do you want to bet all the problems will come out? You sound like a timid manlet, you are skinnyfat, you don't look good in a T-Shirt. I would bet my left nut that when you talk a basic 7, like a low tier sorority girl with a butterface and passable body, you still get darting, shifting eyes. So your problem has nothing to do with race and height. You've got plenty to work on before you formulate an opinion on looks versus money versus status.

We probably have a million and one posts about fitness, so this isn't one about that. It's a post is mainly about hamstering and bullshitting - I see so many people agonizing over these minor facets of SMV or coming up with reasons for why they can't get laid, and coming up with these ridiculous solutions (I need to move across the country to somewhere where there's less asians/indians, and I'll be more exotic there! That'll do it!). When in reality, you just need to build a minimum viable product for the SMP. That's it..I have been coaching guys in this area for about 4 years, and I have noticed that guys that don’t get laid share several very common traits. Here they are. If you share these traits, cut it out.

**They have unrealistic expectations of women**

A lot guys without a lot of experience with women often hold unrealistic views about women. They basically are not interested in any woman unless she is a beautiful virgin who looks perfect and has never done anything wrong. Oh, and she isn’t supposed to care at all about height, money, looks, or confidence. Sorry, but that just doesn’t exist. Every woman you meet has probably already fucked a few guys, and some of those guys were probably douchebags. Every woman has faults, weaknesses, and has done or said something unattractive at some point. If you are waiting until you find the perfect woman, you will be waiting forever. 

A lot of guys have unrealistic expectations of women because they believe society’s lies about women. I can’t tell you how many guys I have seen that hate “whores” but these same guys will fuck anybody with a pulse. A lot of guys also fail with women because they believe that women are the same creatures they see in movies and TV shows – which is not true at all. Women want dominant, confident guys that stimulate their emotions – they don’t want the nice guy dork who buys them flowers and sings songs outside their balcony. The quicker you accept reality the more you will succeed with women. 

**They make false generalizations and assumptions about women**

“Women just care about money” “women in this bar are stuck up bitches” “hot women are crazy,” etc… The more generalizations like this you make, the more I know you haven’t interacted with a lot of women because there are tons of women that don’t care about money, tons of hot women that aren’t crazy, etc… I even heard a guy once say “women on the East Coast are bitches.” The guy generalized all the women in the entire fucking East Coast of the United States of America! 

As I said in the last section, there are a few facts about human nature that you need to accept, but outside those core facts women are extremely diverse. There are cool women, smart women, dumb women, crazy women, boring women, fun women, etc… And surprisingly, you can’t tell who is who just by their appearance. There are brilliant, interesting women that look like porn stars, there are crazy sex freaks that look very innocent, etc… 

Generalizing and making assumptions is lazy thinking. It’s your lizard brain saying ‘this whole woman thing is too complicated; let me just make a simplistic generalization so I don’t have to think anymore.” It’s the same thinking that racists and bigots use. Just because one hot woman you met was a certain way doesn’t mean they will all be. Knock it off. 

**They are needy**

Been ghosted recently? Had a girl lose interest? I obviously don’t know for sure why that happened to you, but it is most likely that you were acting needy. Neediness is the most unattractive thing to women because it implies that you don’t have a lot of options. It also puts pressure on her to perform. Who wants to be with a lonely, desperate guy whose only happiness is you?

Neediness is caused by scarcity and scarcity is caused by a low self-image of yourself. A needy person subconsciously thinks “women don’t find me attractive, so I don’t have a lot of options, so if the cashier at McDonald’s smiles at me I need to get her number because that’s my only shot at getting laid this calendar year.” 

Neediness, scarcity, and rejection create a vicious cycle for a lot of guys. They get rejected, so they feel scarcity, so they feel needy, which causes them to act in unattractive ways, which causes them to get rejected, etc… 

**They get emotionally invested too quickly**

It’s a fact of human nature that men get emotionally invested much more quickly than women. Men are primarily visual, which means that if a woman looks good he can quickly become emotionally invested. Women are more complicated and are looking for a partner who is reliable over a long term, so they need some time to determine whether they are attracted. Men almost always immediately decide “yes” or “no” when they meet a woman, a woman is always “maybe” until she has spent some time with you. 

Because men get emotionally invested so quickly, they often act needy or overly aggressive. They do crazy shit like take her to a 5 star restaurant on the first date or proclaim their love for her after talking for 20 minutes. They can’t understand that the woman simply does not feel the same – yet. 

**They are selfish**

When you see guys that suck with women in conversation, you quickly notice that they are selfish. They just want to talk about themselves or whatever shit is interesting to them whether or not the other person gives a fuck. As you can imagine, that’s extremely unattractive. Selfishness is also related to neediness – it’s like saying “I’m going to talk your ear off about some shit you don’t give a fuck about because I can’t find anybody else that will talk to me about this stuff.” Selfishness also shows that you need validation. If your conversation is all about how awesome you are, you are subconsciously indicating that you are begging her to agree that you are awesome. 

People that are good in conversations are selfless. They let the other person talk about what the other person wants to talk about. Of course, ideally, you will find a subject that BOTH parties are interested in, but you never monopolize the conversation and make it all about yourself. If you ask women what the biggest mistake men on dates make is, they always say something like “he talked about himself the whole time” or “he talked about a bunch of boring shit” or “he bragged and acted douchey.” 

Being selfish is tied to having unrealistic expectations of women. Men who suck at women have this unrealistic vision that women will share all of their interests, will agree with all of their opinions, and will sit there and be a shoulder to cry on while they vent about whatever they want to rant about. Sorry, bro, no woman will want to do that.  

**They do things for women that women don’t deserve.**

Simply put, being a “nice” guy means that you do things for women that don’t deserve those things, secretly hoping that she will pay you back with sex. That’s not being “nice,” that’s being manipulative. Ask yourself this: “if I bought this girl a drink right now and she immediately walked away and talked to another guy, would I be mad?” If the answer is “yes” then you are buying the drink for the wrong reason. 

The rule should be this: you only do something for a woman only if she has already done an equivalent thing for you. This goes for everything: doing her favors, buying her stuff, texting her, even giving her attention. Your time, energy, and attention is important, and you must show that to women. If a woman thinks she can steal your time, energy, or attention whenever she wants by doing nothing then she will not feel like you are a solid guy with boundaries. 

**They feel like they need to entertain women**

Women are not attracted to clowns or men who think their job is to entertain them. Women are attracted to men who entertain THEMSELVES. They want a man who is enjoying a fun emotional experience, so they can vicariously experience his emotional experience through him. 

Whenever you go to a club or a bar, you will see tons of guys dancing and having conversations not because they enjoy it, but because they are trying to get laid. Guess what – women can tell you are just doing that shit to impress them! And they lose interest!!

**They obsess over their one weakness**

Tons of guys think women will never find them attractive because of one particular weakness: they are poor, they are short, they are bald, etc… And the reality is that these things often do make you less attractive to some women. But fortunately, women look at a lot of different factors when determining what men they are interested in, so if you suck at one of these factors you can make up for it elsewhere. Tom Cruise is short, Vin Diesel is bald, tons of poor guys get laid, etc… A lot of men make the mistake of thinking that women only care about looks because men only care about looks. Wrong! Women are different than men. 

**They are closed minded.** 

Women are looking for open-minded, non-judgmental guys. If a woman tells you that she is bisexual, or that she used to strip, or that she is the opposite political party/religion/whatever as you, and you do or say something shitty and judgmental, she will lose attraction. Period. Women are naturally more compassionate and emotional than men, 

**They overthink and mentally masturbate**

My biggest obstacle in coaching guys is preventing mental masturbation. These guys are intelligent and want to solve the problem by thinking, but you can’t solve every problem by thinking. Sometimes you need to just do. Sometimes the more you read PUA articles, the more frozen with anxiety you get. Just go out and do! 

Another aspect of overthinking is trying to rationally analyze every single thing you do in the field. I’m sorry, but it is too much information for any person to remember. To succeed with women you need to act naturally, not like you are reading from a script. 

**Their ego won’t let them improve**

A lot of guys can make a few small improvements to get much better with women, but they refuse to do so because of their ego. They don’t want to change the way they dress, their hair, their openers, etc… 

It’s a fact about human nature that mens’ self-esteem is naturally tied to how much women like them, so no man wants to admit that he sucks with girls or that he can improve. I basically have given up on giving guys advice on women unless they ask for it, because most guys don’t want to hear anything that indicates that they may have been doing it wrong before. 

**They are negative** 

One thing you will learn about gaming is that women absolutely hate negative guys, especially when they first meet them. Women want confidence, and confidence is just positivity but directed to everything. You don’t have the right to unload your negativity on women until you have a deep relationship with her. 

Sometimes I see guys post hateful and negative shit on this subreddit, and then I click on their post history and I see that it is all negativity. If you are stuck in that mindset, you need to get out of it. 

**They hate women**

This is the number one trait I see in men that suck with women. And look, I get it. Women are often emotional, shitty, impulsive, rude, stupid, and vindictive. They often lie, reject you in shitty ways, humiliate you, etc… But guess what – these aren’t traits of “women” – these are traits of “people” – men do this shit too. And you can’t project the behavior of one woman or a bunch of woman onto all women. To succeed with women, you need to form an emotional connection with them, and you simply cannot form an emotional connection with somebody you hate because you inevitably do something that shows that you hate them. 

The main reason men hate women is because they have been tricked by society into thinking that women are a certain way, and when they see women acting contrary to this idealized image they get angry. But the fault is not with women – women are just being women – the fault is with yourself for holding a false view of what women are. Just like you don’t get mad at a 2 year-old for acting like a 2-year old, you shouldn’t get mad at a woman for acting like a woman. 

An important skill in game is empathy. If you can understand and acknowledge what women are feeling, what kind of bullshit they have to deal with, and what they do and do not like, you will connect with them much better than if you just say “there goes those crazy women again.”

&#x200B;

My website: http://www.woujo.comFUCK!!...I don't say it out loud, that's how I feel inside

*-Dave Chappelle*

Yea, I know you guys probably don't wanna hear it but I need to lay it out like I see it. **This subreddit has become (majority of posts anyway) all pep-talk with little to no game plan.** This is the "norm" it seems in the pick-up community. **Why!?** 

Guys, this current paradigm really needs to shift. Let me explain.

When a coach of a football team sits down with his boys to give 'em **"the talk"** before the big game, he does so in order to heighten the inner-game of the players necessary to win. The talk heightens their spirits, and if done right...put's them in the zone to outmatch the competition. It could be argued that without building a strong inner-game, a player can never truly become a great one, only an amateur at best...and I would agree fully agree with this notion.

----
***Have you forgotten all the meticulous training exercises, the practice runs, the tactical plays, positioning, counter-plays, and overall game plan that is essential to every great player's (of any sport or game) success???***
----

These "pep-talks" of inner-game only work for people who know what they are doing but for some reason have psyched themselves out of it for the given situation. *Who the fuck do you think browses this subreddit?* Newbies, amateurs, and would-be masters who seek content; content that is *simultaneously* useful and inspiring to get them to step their game up to the next level. 

The current paradigm here: "Blah blah blah natural this, natural that. Blah blah she'll see right through your phony routines. Blah blah it doesn't matter what you say, it's how you project yourself."

Well good for fucking you Mr. affirmative natural. Here's your karma for sounding profound. But you know what, you just made me "the-not-so-successful-with-women guy" feel inferior in the fact that you can talk to yourself and beast it up, while I fail like a loser when going in with such self-talk because I've got nothing to go on once in set.

----

***Strategy without tactics is the slowest route to victory, tactics without strategy is the noise before defeat***

*~Sun Tzu*

----

*Example of seddit's popular inner-game centered post:*

"It is up to you to decide that you are the man. Are you somehow an inferior man if a woman rejects you? No. You are still the man, and only you can make that reality for yourself. Only once you believe beyond a shadow of a doubt that you have exactly what it takes and that you truly deserve the hottest girl in the room, can you actually get her. It doesn't matter too much what you say to her...do the approach with the knowledge that no matter what happens, you are still the man. Be completely outcome independent, present to the moment, and don't take yourself too seriously. Women will pick up on it and you will in turn, pick-up the women."

*Example of less popular outer-game centered post:*

"Hey guys I've just used this really awesome set of techniques. When you see the HB you want at a club, stick your tongue out at her. If she smiles, go in and talk to her. Follow up with a 'Hey I'm Anon, who are you?' Move in with a cold-read, 'you look like a person who is willing to work really hard to get where you want to be, I bet that hasn't been all that easy for you has it?' Go off that tangent until it begins to die. Then move in with the passions and interests. Pry for hers first, then when she asks you...make an absurd, yet plausible passion and be serious about it 'I'm very much want to be hot-dog eating champion, I train every week...blah blah blah'. Let her buy into it a little before busting her balls. This is a great way to tease her. Then move on to your real passions (be ready to deliver clearly, concisely, and passionately) if the situation calls for it."

----

*Now let me ask you, which post is more helpful?*

The outer-game one obviously. Because it has material, it has actual useful information that can be tested. Inner-game "wisdom" has the edge because in the end it is a far more attractive image than the one of some guy using lines and routines to run his game. 

Let me say though, ***I have had outer-game save my ass when my inner-game was failing.*** Once when I was taking a girl home to my place (I had lived with my mom when this pick-up happened), and she was adamantly refusing to go back with a guy who lived with his mom. I was very anxious and feeling like I could lose her. She wanted to get a hotel...I didn't have to money for it. She then told me to take her home because she was not cool with staying at someone's mom's house. 

So I had used what I had learned from *Influence* by Robert Cialdini. I worked my way up using the "foot-in-the-door". I told her, "Hey, we are just gonna stop by my house as I needed to get something and then we could go to a hotel" She said okay. Got to my place. "Hey, we're already here you should just come in." She was NOT having it.

"I am not comfortable with this at all. Take me home now! I am not sleeping at your mom's house. I've done this before and it's always fucking awkward and the parents always fucking come in or wake up or something! NO, take me home, this is not cool!"

I thought I was pretty fucked, but I had remember what Adam Lyons had said about a similar LMR story he had with a Latvian (or Estonian) girl in Las Vegas. She was refusing to go into his place even though he had solid plausible deniability. And he said if you ever had trouble to look at her sincerely, and calmly yet affirmatively say, **"Trust me, it will be fine"** and repeat however much necessary. 

Thank you Adam, because I did just that. I played my cool outside, dropped this line. Did some explaining and reassurance that she would not meet my mom at all and I'd have her home by morning. Met with some but less resistance and request to go home again. Said that's fine if that's what she really wanted, but [insert more explaining and reassurance] finalized by "Listen, trust me everything will be fine." 

And ending with the victory of, "I hate you" said in a resentfully playful manner while she exited the vehicle and walked with me to the front door. We both tip-toed to my room, got in bed, and got down to business. This was a class-A example of how without outer-game I would have been fucked (and not in the way I was hoping for). 

So please Seddit, let us pay more attention to it and perhaps mix the best of both worlds in the same post. 

**TL;DR: Nowadays everybody wanna talk like they got something to say but nothing comes out. When they move their lips just a buncha inner-game gibberish. And mothafuckas act like they forgot about outer-game.**

----

EDIT: Some folks have pointed out to the sidebar or noted the plethora of old mPUA routines that already exist. I am seeking *new* content as so many others are. I don't like telling a girl she looks fashionable to open, the Jealous-girlfriend routine runs like a disaster for me. I like to gauge intrigue right off the bat and "Hi, I'm Anon I'm being myself" runs a little flat for me. I am looking for content I can really connect with that has chemistry with my own style of seduction. So that is why I ask: Where are the latest developments in field tested material. I'm looking for the new shit guys, and reddit has the best layout to deliver new material.

EDIT2: Really glad to see strong support for this guys! I'm feeling very inspired to test some new/lost styles of seduction (congruent to my reality, not popular demand) that I have been developing. Will do field reports and I hope you guys promote the same. Hope there is a shift in demand for details regarding both inner and outer game that are both unique, specific, and testable in the field. Oh and as the name suggest, I am very very sick of white knight parades on this subreddit. The FRs I seek can and will be taboo if I can help it. But most importantly, I will pay attention to the "why and how" mechanics of seduction. Hope to see more of the same. Thanks guys!
Hey guys. Had an awesome date last night and I thought I’d post up my experience for any newbies here still learning about THE GAME.

&nbsp;

So, kitted out in my matching pink cardigan and Converse All Star pink Hi Tops (I always peacock HARD), I roll up to the bar exactly 40 minutes late (gotta make her hungry for that D). I’m looking around for a minute before I recognise her at the bar, and get this – she’s chatting to this douchebag bartender and laughing at his jokes and shit. My opinion of this girl instantly plummets. I’m about to show her the night of her fucking life and she thinks it’s okay to flirt with some other guy in front of me? It’s time to drop an epic NEG BOMB on this bitch. 

&nbsp;

There’s people sitting on the stools either side of her, so I just waltz up and slide myself right in there, about 6 inches from her face.
Her eyes light up as she recognises me, “Oh, hey -”

I interrupt: “Cool dress, Grandma!” and pull two handfuls of loose cashew nuts from my pink messenger bag and make them rain on her. I call this the CASHEW STORM, never fails to get a reaction; all of you newbies better get on that shit. Don’t use regular peanuts because some girls are allergic to them and I had an incident one time that totally fucked my night up with an ambulance and later a big lawsuit. But if a peanut can stop the oxygen from going to your brain then maybe you shouldn’t be in a hot club containing vast quantities of modern alpha males like me you stupid whore Jessica Allen I hate you.

So right from the beginning this girl decides to hurl shit tests at me and play the whole ‘hard to get’ thing. Lucky for me, I have years of experience dealing with the shit tests my step mom would lay on me every day for 13 years. This cashew-covered ho has no chance.

“DUDE, not cool!” as she brushes the cashews off of her lap. “Hey! I got those at the farmer’s market, that organic shit's expensive. You’re going to have to buy me a drink now, little lady.” I point in the bartender’s face, “triple Jack Daniels, served in the biggest glass you got.” He looks away and shakes his head, obviously intimidated by my effortlessly natural masculine vibe.

At this point she’s starting to fidget in her seat, I can tell her attraction for me is rising and she’s fighting to maintain control of herself. Without the stones to even look at me, she says “you’re being kind of weird, man.” A pathetic attempt at testing my confidence. NEWSFLASH BITCH, my confidence is 100% real, 100% bulletproof, and I’ve got an answer for every single thing you throw at me. I look her dead in the eye:

“Cool dress, Grandma!” 

I am the neg King. I have perfected the subtle artistry of this technique and no longer need to even come up with situational-specific ones. So if you see a rad fuckin dude out at the club wearing pink army camo cargo shorts, calling all the hottest babes ‘Grandma’, you know you just witnessed the Lord Pink Panther himself in action.

&nbsp;

By now this girl’s attraction is so obviously reaching critical mass because she’s STUTTERING the words out as she gets up and walks off, “I- Uhh- I just have to- I’ll be back in a- Oh God-”. I laugh to myself at how easily I’ve collapsed this bitch’s frame. I smile at the bartender, “I think she’s gone to the little girls’ room to wipe down her soaking wet vagina!” He serves me the whiskey in a big glass vase without looking at me. Little bitch afraid to make strong eye contact like an alpha who’s comfortable with himself. Maybe I’ll take him under my wing some day.

So it’s been two hours now and I’m pretty tanked from a few more of those vases, and the girl still hasn’t returned. They’re starting to put the chairs on the tables, and I’m wondering is this wretched skank after ODing on my dick’s awesome pheromones in the bathroom or what.

Ben the bartender, who I’ve since taken a liking to, chimes in: “She’s gone, man. She’s been gone a whole while now.” Pure apache rage flows through my body for a moment. I’m incredulous. The NERVE of this slut to think she can skip out on ME. I drain the last of my vase and throw it over my shoulder for good luck, like the Russians do. I’m quarter Ruski so s’all good. There’s no room for vases in THE GAME.

And then it hits me. Her purse. She left it right there on the bar, right there for me to find, and right inside it is her business card with her home address on it. I start laughing maniacally, “Booooy does this girl like to play games!” The bartender tells me to “Get the fuck out.” Haha, Ben you absolute joker! I throw two fifties at him from her purse before stumbling out of the joint.

I woke up in a ditch three blocks down the next morning, my pink fedora covered in vomit. Fuck it, you gotta burn the candle bright at both ends, right guys? Anyway I’m driving to her place in an hour to no doubt seal the F-close. This is everyday shit guys, girls don’t want to feel like sluts so they’ll pull crap like this so YOU have to initiate. It’s just part of the game.

&nbsp;

Time to lay some pipe. Newbies take note. Pink Panther OUT.Even if you are a nice guy.. Own it.. Be a nice guy properly. Don't half ass it. Don't hate being a nice guy while being a nice guy.


Q - Then why do nice guys do not get girls🤷🏻‍♂ and they get friend zoned

A -  Bcoz I think they are not being nice properly.. They dropped niceness the moment they get rejected even a little bit.. If they have carried the niceness a long just by enjoying their niceness, girl will get interested. She don't hate you for being nice. She hate you for acting and thinking yourself as a nice guy when clearly you are not one

When you are actually a nice guy, she will never leave you

Most guys only pretend though and carry the niceness like a opportunistic mask

If you are not proud of yourself and feel like you need improvements, then own this fact. Tell her.. You are not perfect and you are working or want to improve yourself. Right in this confidence of your weaknesses, you impressed her bcoz now she know that the one who can even accept such weaknesses must have some solid soul.You guys seemed to really like the last post I made so I figured I’d make another.

Bonus tip #1 : When taking a woman on a date for the love of god do not wear a graphic t-shirt. I’m not saying you have to look like James Bond or anything, but purchase adult clothes. If you can’t afford nice clothing H&M or Uniqlo are extremely affordable. Buy some henleys and some dark wash jeans. Do not show up to your first date wearing a Rick & Morty T-shirt, you will look like a man baby. 

- Moisturize your hands, no one wants to hold hands with someone who has hands like ritz crackers. 

- if a girl stops texting you, do not double text her. Take the hint. 

Bonus tip #2 : This one I find important. When exchanging numbers on a dating app ALWAYS give the girl your number first. She will feel much more comfortable knowing she’s in control and you will also know that she’s interested in you because the ball is in her court. 

-  Get a haircut. If you have a beard have your barber line it up for you. Your beard will look much better and much fuller. 

- Be honest with your intentions 

- Do not text other people on the date unless it’s important 

- Don’t order food with too much sauce/grease/peanut butter. You’ll feel like shit, and you’ll look like shit. 

Bonus tip #3 : Hit the gym you lazy fucks. I’m not saying you have to look like The Rock but Jesus. I see so many of you on here talking about how “hot” women don’t like you. Then I see your pictures and you look a pasta noodle with shoes. 

- Don’t be ashamed of who you are and don’t make jokes about yourself if you want to be taken seriously 

- Don’t lead anyone on 

- If a woman cooks for you, eat it. I don’t care if she baked you a rock. That’s the most kind shit anyone can do for you. Eat that food you ungrateful bastard and you tell her it’s amazing. 

Bonus tip #4 : I had a bunch of you telling me you struggle to get matches on apps. I’ll tell you this right now. You’re not ugly, you just take ugly pictures. If you have a close female friend ask her what she thinks about your photos, she will be honest with you. 

Bonus tip #5 : Don’t worry about your height. Men are always so worried that women care about height. To be honest most women could care less. I’m 5”7 and it’s never once been an issue. Zac Efron is 5”8 and most women would kill their grandmother to be with him. If you are short however avoid baggy clothes. Wear slim pants and slim shirts. If you wear shirts that are too big for you, you will look like a child who stole their dads uniform. The bottoms of your shirts should rest slightly above where your pockets are. 

- Museum dates are amazing 

- Be kind to your waiter/waitress. First off it’s the right thing to do in general. Second you will look like an asshole if you’re not. 

- If she has kids be respectful of her responsibilities. They come first, not you.

- Be funny but not at other people’s expense. Don’t make fun of other people on your date.

Bonus tip #6 : Own it. If you feel inadequate because you’re not where you want to be in life that’s okay. If you only make $10,000 a year be honest. Not everyone is born Elon Musk, you’ll get a lot more respect being honest. Don’t lie about your career. Let her know you have goals however to be more than what you are. 

- If she says no, don’t repeatedly try again. Pressuring people is the slimiest thing a person can do. 

- If you guys live far from each other be polite and offer for the date to be somewhere in her area. Don’t make her drive an hour to see you. 

Bonus tip #7 : If you want to seem interesting take her to do something that you’re knowledgeable in. If you’re knowledgeable in art, take her to a museum. If you’re a foodie take her to a nice restaurant you know. Don’t be pretentious but show her what you like.

Bonus tip #8 : Get invested in her hobbies. If she likes to knit, ask her questions about it. Offer to do it with her. If she likes to bake, offer to bake with her. She knows you’re not Betty Crocker but she will appreciate you making an attempt. 

- Flowers are okay, just not for the first date

- If you’re driving, play appropriate music in your car. Do I love NWA? Of course, but she might not. Ask her what she likes to listen too or even offer her the radio. Who gives a fuck if you’re the one driving, be considerate. 

Bonus tip #9 : Cheesy but true. If you are not where you want to be in life and you’re sad and depressed, sleeping with people and going on dates or being in relationships will NOT fix you. Work on yourself. If you really and truly want to find someone amazing, you want them to see the best version of you. Get your shit together. 

However if you’re not going on dates for a relationship the same rule still applies. If you’re only going on dates because you want to fuck people, that’s cool too. Still work on yourself first. Everybody wants to fuck James Bond, no one wants to fuck the weird guy who works at Arbies with a drinking problem. 

- Spend the extra $3 on nicer body wash, please.

Anyways I hope you guys liked this one too. 

If not you can tell me to go fuck myself.This girl at my gym. Literally 10/10. Everything I’m looking for in a physique. i seen her around and been trying to find a way to approach. 

I forgot my keys at a squat rack she was at. So I’m flustered af, hoping nobody drove off with my car, turn the corner there she was with my keys to the side. I’m happy and nervous at the same time.

I go up to her rack she looks at me, I grab my keys and smile looking at her say “Thanks for not stealing my car” she pulled her earphones out and laughs and smiles and says “Yeah” theres a slight pause and I. Fucking. Froze. I just say 

“I appreciate it” 

I walk away wondering if I have severe down syndrome for missing out the perfect opportunity. Guys I am a Class A dumb ass. I went in the locker room thinking of a way to go back. I do a couple extra sets for the day, thinking. I want to die. 

Guys be ready at all fucking times.1. Do not try to buy or barter for a person’s attention or affection.
2. Speak honestly and be willing to disagree.
3. Do not be desperate for another person’s approval or for them to like you.
4. Do not be ashamed about your genuine interest in a person or opportunity. Don’t act like there is a reason why you may not be good enough for them.
5. Do not actively chase a person.
6. Do not react involuntarily to other people's actions, but respond comprehensively.
7. Do not act jealous.
8. Do not try to actively impress, qualify or prove yourself.
9. Do not enter interview mode and feel that its your job to keep a conversation going.
10. Do not try to force something. Assume your value, make your intentions known and let it naturally occur.

Full Video: [https://youtu.be/aPZk1lQWkfI](https://youtu.be/aPZk1lQWkfI)No idea what to flair this as...

I lost my voice from an injury to my neck, like I can *almost* speak but I sound like a squealing chain smoker rat that's being snuffed out and extremely quiet so like I just don't it. I used to have a friend that would help me in social situations even before I lost my voice I was extremely shy, had poor social skills and Extreme social anxiety, and I've never been intimate with a boy.

Now I have moved to a new city and I'm attending a new school. I have no friends so meeting a boy through my social circles isn't an option. Half my classes are special education, I have short term memory lapses from my injury, so many people immediately assume I'm retarded and avoid me. I do get approached by boys and men but I feel so insecure about how I have to communicate with them often times I freeze up and I either get looked at like I'm an idiot or some stuck up cunt. When I do manage to "talk" back, usually with a notebook or index cards, most guys just give up.

It's my last year of high school and like I just want a boyfriend. I've tried online dating haven't had any luck finding anything other than fuckboys or sex obsessed men older than my Father and I'm not asking for some 6'4 Adonis that makes 7 figures. Someone in halfway decent shape average guy and doesn't view me as a walking Fleshlight is all I'm really asking for.

I'm come to the conclusion I'm probably going to have to actively chase a guy if I find one I'm attracted to so what the fuck do I do? Anyone have suggestions for how I could flirt with a guy?Habits that are promoted—or generally deemed to be harmless by society—are the ones that should be questioned the most, and met with the highest degree of skepticism. 

Society at large tells us that porn is a harmless release without consequences for the user. However, those of us who have ever been heavy users of pornography know the negative impact it can have on social cues and eye contact when interacting with others. 

Caffeine is rarely viewed as a major contributor to anxiety, since coffee, arguably the most popular way Americans consume caffeine, is derived from natural sources and has health benefits. 

Caffeine, which increases levels of the stress hormone Cortisol, can significantly affect who are susceptible to social anxiety, particularly if consumed first thing in the morning.

Although alcohol abuse is already known to be harmful, in terms of anxiety, alcohol is seen more as a temporary escape rather than a root cause. When alcohol is consumed, Dopamine levels spike on a temporary basis. When Dopamine levels go back down, feelings of anxiety can come back more intensely, especially in those with high baseline levels of anxiety.

It takes a very high level of self-assurance and independence to reject socially accepted habits that are potentially detrimental to one’s mental health.

“I watch porn all the time and I’m fine.”

“A cup of coffee is too much for you to handle?”

“How can having only a few beers make you depressed the next day?”

Always prioritize your own quality of life over the opinion of others, be aware of what is best for mental health, and defend it boldly.***1. Oneitis***

**Oneitis** is a **toxic mindset** (or disease) where a man falls deeply and wholly in love with a woman to the point of obsession in a short period of time. Oneitis occurs to men who don't approach women and have **limited dating options**. Such men are often considered as **incels** (involuntary celibates). When these men find a woman, they put her on a **pedestal** and do all their best to impress her and to attract her (**neediness**). Oneitis occurs when you see a world of **scarcity** and not of **abundance**.

***2. Example***

Before going further, I'd like to give an example that is inspired by a story that occurred to me a year ago and that has certainly happened to you as well.

\- Bryan is 30 and works for Google. Because of his toxic shame, he hasn't dated any woman in his life. He is afraid of them and doesn't dare to approach and ask them out.

\- One day, Tatiana joins his office. Her being friendly, she initiates a lot of conversations with her colleagues, including Bryan. As a result, Bryan starts to like her. Him being unable to ask her out, he just talks to her and becomes obsessed with her, he falls deeply and wholly in love with Tatiana.

\- 1 month later, Bryan expresses his feelings to Tatiana and tells her he likes her, which confuses her because he had been acting as a friend and a colleague all this time and wasn't expecting him to express his emotions. Her being a very nice person, she politely tells him that she's not interested.

\- Bryan becomes frustrated and blames Tatiana for rejecting him. Why would she reject a guy who had been **so nice** with her?

***3. Are you a nice guy?***

A nice guy is an adult male who portrays himself as being nice **but does it to get something in return**. That's what we call a **covert contract**. In other words, the nice guy is **needy**. He prioritises the perceptions others have of him before his. As a result, he puts **girls on a pedestal.**

Nice guys are nice with every girl and expect something in return by being nice. Neediness means that nice guys feel the need to be approved and validated by girls. **Fundamentally, this is the same thing.**

The nice guy behaviour is toxic in every aspect of the relationship: 1/ for himself, 2/ for the people who are around him. Nice guys are not assertive, they make covert contracts, and blame the girl when she doesn't reciprocate.

Nice guys are also very boring because they tend to agree with everything or to shape the things they say to be validated by girls. **Examples:**

* Girl: I like Justin Bieber. You (who don't like Justin Bieber): "oh nice - *smiles*".
* Girl: I don't understand why my boyfriend left me. You: I don't understand either, you are beautiful and amazing !!!!!!!
* Girl: are you looking for sex? You: No no no no.

***4. Being honest makes you non-needy***

If you want to stop being a nice guy, you must carry your fucking balls and start being honest with yourself and people (including girls).

And I said "carry your fucking balls" and not "be confident". I see many men victimising themselves when someone tells them to "be confident": QQ EASIER SAID THAN DONE, QQ BE CONFIDENT HERE, BE CONFIDENT THERE. **Carry your fucking balls** you pussies. Do you think it's easier for me? Do you think it's easier for all the guys who are carrying their balls?

If you want to succeed in life and with girls, you must be **honest**, **bold** and **vulnerable**. You say and do things because you think them, not because you want to impress someone. Being honest makes you bold. Being bold makes you vulnerable.

* If a girl tells you she likes Justin Bieber but you don't, tell her that you find JB stupid.
* If a girl tells you her boyfriend left her, don't try to get her approval. Don't try to dodge the subject either. Instead, you should try to reassure her unconditionally, to make her feel better, not for you.
* If a girl asks if you are looking for sex and you do, answer yes. You can say "right now, yes" if you mean it, instead of just "yes". This very bold statement will make her polarise very fast. That's the key of seduction.

***5. Girls are neutral magnets that must be polarised***

Consider a girl as a neutral magnet and you as a magnetic field.

If you try to impress her and get her attention, you will shape your words and acts to get her approval. This is **neediness** and **nice guy behaviour**. The magnetic field that you will emit will break the neutral magnet and make it **unreceptive**. You will turn off the girl and make her unattracted.

If you are bold, honest and vulnerable with her, you will portray confidence and non-neediness because you won't care about what she thinks of your words and acts. By being yourself (honest and authentic), you will portray a magnetic field that can potentially activate the magnet and make it **receptive**. Sometimes, the magnet can still break.

***6. Approach girls***

You will seduce girls if you are honest, bold, and vulnerable with **people in general.** I remind you that you must be authentic even with your friends and other people in general, not just with potential girls.

You can even approach girls with that mindset, **it will work**.

Regardless of your objectives, if you approach girls and you are honest, bold and vulnerable with them, you will polarise some and get some numbers

If you tell a girl "excuse me, I know this is random, but I like your umbrella, and I want to ask you out, can I get your number?", this will probably be random in your eyes but if you really mean it, the authenticity of your words will make her laugh and she will give you her number.

So start approaching girls to see abundance in your world.

***7. Abundance and scarcity***

Oneitis is a disease that affects men who see **scarcity** in their lives. If you want to no longer see scarcity, you must see **abundance**.

To see **abundance in your life** you must meditate and thank life for all it gave you. By doing this, you'll hopefully realise that you don't need anything else to be happy. You don't need a girl to be happy, you don't need sex to be happy, you don't need a girlfriend to be happy. Nothing makes you happy but you.

To see **abundance in girls**, you must approach women, define your objectives and your criteria.

***8. Be a picky man***

I look for a partner who is very honest and vulnerable, who is very curious, has life objectives, is a good communicator, doesn't need me to be happy, and is emotionally mature. A partner who is basically like me, because **we attract what we are** and **we are attracted by what we are**.

I don't need a girl to be happy, so I don't want a girl who needs me to be happy.

Looks-wise, I only approach girls I find beautiful with decent looks.

Being picky doesn't make you less successful with girls, on the contrary it makes you more valuable.

***9. Authenticity***

Everything I said in this post must come naturally. It shouldn't be forced.

* You are honest with girls because you want to be honest with people.
* You are picky because you have a list of criteria.
* You don't text her because you don't feel the need to text her, not because you want to ignore her.

***10. Texting girls just for logistics should be authentic***

Many people in this subreddit tell you to text only for logistics. Although this is true, it shouldn't be forced. It should be done because you mean it, because you don't feel the need to text more than that. You don't want to invest more time in the girl because you are not interested in her yet, not because you want to manipulate her.

I for instance don't text girls because I don't feel the need to get their attention. I have multiple dating options and can approach other girls if I want to hang out with them. So, I don't need to get anybody's attention. When I see them, I make them spend a good time unconditionally, without expecting something in return. If I don't like them, it's okay. I will just finish the date with them without changing my mood and I won't recontact them.

* If you are overpresent by texting, you are being a **nice guy**, **very needy** and a **blue pill** taker. These are all synonyms.
* If you manipulate girls by ignoring them on purpose, you are being a **narcissist** and girls will see through your bullshit very fast.

You are now wondering "so should I ignore them or text them??????". There lies your problem.

***11. As men, we must own our life and don't try to blame or impress anyone***

When a girl postpones a date, I give her a 2nd chance. If she postpones again or can't seem to make time for me, I stop texting her. I only want to see people who want to see me.

One girl that I asked out cancelled our date twice (in advance). The 2nd time, I just told her "listen, if you want to see me, let me know". I didn't reject her but I wanted to let her know that I wouldn't bother asking again. 2 weeks later, she recontacts me to talk to me about something that happened to her life. I replied normally, I didn't feel the need to "ignore her" because I had other dating options and didn't blame her for cancelling the dates. At the end of our discussion, she asked me out. I hadn't brought the subject of the dates in the discussion.

The key here is that you don't need to blame anyone or impress anyone when you are 1/ confident in yourself, 2/ see a world of abundance.

***12. Αlpha males***

Alpha males are **self-centered**. They don't try to impress girls (neediness) but they don't blame them either (narcissism). They are just themselves: **fierce, strong, competitive, and sexually proud.** Because they are what they are and do what they do, prospective mates are attracted.

***13. Conclusion***

Seduction is not about impressing people and it is not about doing something you are not comfortable with. Seduction is about being honest with yourself and with people. You are honest with yourself by acknowledging that you want to meet girls, don't deny it. You are honest with people because you value honesty and don't feel the need to shape reality or give half truths.

By being honest with yourself and with people, you will be really loved but also really hated. That's the key of seduction, you are yourself and are not afraid that some people hate you because you know that there are people who will like you for who you are.

If you can't be yourself, you won't polarise anyone. Nobody will hate you but nobody will love you either. So, don't try to impress people. Just be yourself. You don't need to use "pickup lines" to seduce girls. What you need to do is to clearly tell them you want to date them and ask them out. There is no problem in being honest with people.

***14. My current experience***

You don't have to do it directly if you are not comfortable with. There is nothing wrong in doing things progressively.

Like for everything, you can go step by step. Look, I stopped eating sugar for instance, although I have always been very fit. The first step was to stop soda, then I stopped eating sweets and chocolate, and now I don't even eat biscuits/cake or anything that contains sugar added artificially. I am very happy like this. I don't feel the need to eat sugar, although I'd still eat your birthday cake.

My current self-development went step by step as well. I started asking female friends out, just to start being more assertive, and it worked very well. I made them spend a very good time and they were happy at the end of the day. I then planned 3-4 city trips with a particular girl and again, I made her spend a very good time unconditionally, because I invited her to something I really wanted to do. I invited like 3-4 girls like this. I was very honest with the girls and stopped putting them on a pedestal. These changes made me realise what seduction was about.

After these pseudo-dates, I asked other girls out. Last week, I have had the occasion to get laid with 2 girls. The first one we were in a Netflix night and I ended up being caressing her hair and her head was on my lap. Her behaviour was screaming "fuck me" (I can read her very well), yet I didn't go further because there wasn't an emotional connection. The second one, I invited her for a drink and 3min into the conversation, we were already talking about sex. She basically knew my intentions and we could have gone further, yet she was too stressed of her life (not me) for anything to happen that night.

Right now, I can ask girls out, I can make them spend a good time unconditionally, without feeling the need to get laid with them, and I can be honest, bold, and vulnerable with anyone. My next step is to increase my cold approaching. I have already approached 1 random girl and she gave me her number, yet I'm not comfortable with cold approaching yet because I haven't done it yet. My current dates are scheduled in social media or texting. I just text for logistics as I don't need to talk to the girls.

At the end of the day, what matters is that you overcome your fears so you can be honest, bold, and vulnerable with anyone. It doesn't matter how long it takes you, it doesn't matter how you do it, what matters is that you do it. The journey is as exciting as the dates themselves.

***15. References***

Everything I wrote comes from my own mind and reflects my current mindset.

What allowed me to get there was reading 2 books:

* No More Mr Nice Guy by Robert A. Glover
* Models by Mark Manson

I read these books only once **a month ago**. You don't have to read them 5 times. What you have to do is to start applying these changes in real life, like I did.Hi. I lost my virginity last Sunday after being alive for 26 years. I’m a really quiet person and usually I am I pussy when it comes to girls. I’m decent looking, tall, hwp, and white.

I honestly had never even hooked up with a girl or even kissed one and then last week I did everything all at once.

I met this girl at a job site one day and I introduced myself and didn’t even think much of it. We don’t work with each other, but work for the same company. 

A week later someone who is friends with her told me she thinks I’m cute, so I gave her friend my phone number to give to her.  She started texting me the next day and we arranged to go out after she was done work.

We met up at 11:30 at night on a Sunday at a bar. We started chatting and we each had 3 drinks. She told me I was cute and we kept getting closer together. Eventually my hand was on her thigh and her hands were touching me. I then said we should go somewhere else and I payed the bill and we left.

We went to a park across the street and things started to escalate. I just went at my own pace because I knew we were out in public. I basically just kissed her and put my hands over her. 

I asked her if she was down to come to my place and she said yes and the rest is history.

It was pretty fun, but honestly my life is still the same as before I got laid. All I can say is that I am not a virgin.

We’re going out again next week.

Thanks for readingI teach guys how to get past their fear of meeting women. To do this, I recommend they regularly go back to mundane places such as supermarkets, malls, stores, public transportation, parks, happy hour bars, etc. Going back consistently to these predictable places will give you a foundation to practice your approach skills and learn how to initiate interactions with strangers.

However, this is a very different thing than actually having a life where you do interesting activities and things you enjoy. Almost anywhere you live in the world, you can find a ton of hidden activities that can enrich your life.

I used to be friends with a guy who *always* seemed to know about great activities to do. If liking him as a person wasn’t enough, the fact that he always knew where to go and what to do was enough reason for me to keep this guy in my life.

Be that guy. Become the expert at finding fun things to do. When you always have your plate full with fun activities, you naturally start to draw people into your life. You have a base for relating to other people. 

I like to ask my clients, if you had the perfect woman in your life, what kind of things would you be doing with her?

Yes, pickup can teach you to become proficient and confident in any environment you’re in. But beyond the first date, if you don’t have interesting things going on in your life, it will be very difficult to keep women in your life. And the ones that you do keep will be *boring*.

Here are some important tips to finding great things to do every night of the week:

**Make It Your Job to Find Fun Activities**

There are a number of magazines, events lists, and websites that talk about all the great things going on in your city. My favorite guide right now is Time Out. They have Time Out magazine in almost every major city. Once a week, I sit down and go through Time Out New York. I read it like it’s a homework assignment. Anything that interests me, I put into my calendar or look it up online. I buy tickets to upcoming events. I sign up for classes that interest me.

There are a lot of other events in your city. You can Google events and your citya nd  you'll find some. I’ll list a few here, for my location, New York. Feel free to add more in comments. I’m sure there’s a bunch more I’m missing. 

[Time Out](http://timeout.com/ )

[Flavorpill](http://flavorpill.com/ )

[Nonsense NYC](http://www.nonsensenyc.com/about/) events list

[Brooklyn Based Events](http://brooklynbased.net/event/)

[Field Trip Day](http://www.fieldtripday.com)

[Atlas Obscura](http://atlasobscura.com/blog)

[The Moth](http://themoth.org/events) storytelling

[Artcal](http://www.artcat.com/) Gallery Opening listings in NYC

[Upright Citizens Brigade](http://www.ucbtheatre.com/) improv theater

[Secret Science Club](http://secretscienceclub.blogspot.com/)

This is just a sampling of some stuff I like to do. There are also classes (art, dance, cooking, sailing, scuba diving), volunteering, political groups, health (like yoga, hiking), sports (climbing, soccer, softball, basketball leagues), boardgame nights, trivia nights, festivals, burlesque, literary readings, theater, etc. 

**Go Alone**

This may be the most important piece of advice here. I don’t wait to ask someone before I buy tickets to events. I’ll invite friends to some, but many events I end up going to alone. By going to events alone, I can go to a new event every night of the week without worrying whether I have a wing or a chaperone. It gives me a lot of freedom. 

Planning to go to events alone is great because when that second date rolls around, you've already got something great to do and she can simply come along if she wants. You have a life that you can bring her into. That's so attractive.

You can also take more risks when you go alone. You may be hesitant to invite a friend out to an event if you're worried it's going to suck. But if you go alone, you can explore and find out what is good and what you really like.

**Simply Show Up**

Whenever you go out alone, there’s always that fear. What if people see me there without anyone, will I look like a loser? What if no one else is there and I feel weird? What if everyone else is there with friends but me?

For this I tell myself: Simply show up. Woody Allen once said, “Eighty per cent of success is simply showing up.” Simply get yourself to the event. Whatever you need to do to get yourself there, do it.  If the event totally sucks, you can pretend you got a phone call and walk out the door right away. At least you showed up. 

If possible, try to hang out for a bit after you get there. Sometimes you need to hang out for a bit to actually get a feel for if it's gonna be good. Walk around. Stand at the bar and have a drink. Pretend you’re waiting for your friends to show up. 

**Start Small**

If you have a lot of anxiety planning and going to events alone, start small. Find *one* new activity to do every week. Don’t put pressure on yourself to do something new every single night or you’ll burn yourself out.

**Focus on activities where there will be women**

Since meeting women is part of what this subreddit is about, you’ll want to foster interests that have a higher possibility of meeting women. Some activities are more geared toward meeting women than others. 

While it’s worth going to gaming conventions, star-trek conventions, and comic-book conventions if that’s what interests you, you may find a much lower number of women at these events then say yoga, art gallery openings, or theater events. If you’re looking for new interests, put your energy toward those that have a lot of women.

**Avoid Home**

As introverted guys, our home is our refuge. It's so easy to escape there. There are so many excuses to simply go home. After work, you're tired. There's no one to go out with. The event will probably suck. I probably won't meet anyone. etc. And once home, there is a lot of momentum to stay there. 

Avoid the tar pit of your home. Nothing happens there. Life happens when you walk out your front door. With a little consistency, planning, and bravery, pretty soon you'll have a more exciting life than you can imagine. And *that's* attractive!

Eric Disco

[ApproachAnxiety.com](http://ApproachAnxiety.com)
So I met a chick at a bar last week and we decided to go out for lunch yesterday. At the end we went back to my place and we’re drinking some wine and talking. After a while we started making out and things got abit heated, she tried to unzip my pants but I stopped her and she thought maybe I wanted to foreplay a little longer. We kept going at it for another 10 minutes and by this time she was literally begging me to fuck her. I then told her I’ll make her wait for the second date and she got pissed off. I feel like this was the first time anyone has declined sleeping with her. Now she’s super responsive and I feel like we’re going to be having a lot more fun with mind gamesIt’s not money, nor looks, and nor is it statues. It’s safety and comfort. A woman needs to feel safe and comfortable with you as a man. If she feels uncomfortable with you your chances of getting with her have sailed. Make sure that you’re focusing on her comfort with you. She’ll open sexually once she feels that she is safe and comfortable with you.Went to this new gym yesterday morning and got a tour of it from this beautiful girl. We hit it off and talked for about an hour but I wimped out on asking her out. I couldnt get the conversation we had and how much I enjoyed it off my mind all day and I knew I was going to regret it if I didn't ask her out. Went back this morning and told her exactly what I just said about not being able to get it off my mind and asked her if I could take her mini golfing and to dinner next weekend. She said yes. This is amazing.So I’ve lurked on here for the past year and have learned so much so thank you everyone! 

I will start by saying that I was like most guys here. I was afraid to talk to women out of fear of rejection or ridicule. I passed up many opportunities because I was too scared to make a move because I didn’t want to “come across as creepy”. I’ve failed numerous times and have embarrassed myself more times than I can count but you know what I did with those “failures”? I learned from them. Simple as that. If you look at failures in life as a learning opportunity do you really fail? 

You WILL make a fool of yourself. You will be denied, turned down, maybe even ridiculed but that doesn’t matter because life keeps going. I told myself I WOULD NOT be the same person I was. Someone who could pull women but was too afraid to. Fuck that. I’ve been scarred because of past women and it held me back for many years but just recently I’ve began to understand the game. Im 22 y/o and JUST now learning game so don’t give me that bs of “im too old to learn game”. 

Some very useful tips I have learned within the past year that have tripled the amount of women I get. 

1.	Eye contact: God I cannot stress this enough. I always believed that I had good eye contact but I was very wrong. Looking a girl in the eye with intent while talking to them shows confidence. Not many guys can hold a gaze of a woman because they are afraid. What are you afraid of? Practice by holding eye contact with everyone you talk to. Gets easier over time but like every tip I will give, practice makes perfect. 

2.	Body language: this is something that took a while for me to understand. See girls look at small details a LOT more closely then men do. The hardest part of learning game is trying to understand it from a women’s point of view. Stand straight up, shoulders back. Walk with confidence. I mimic my walk after  McGregor, but the difference is I’m not faking it. I walk arms loose, looking around making eye contact with people. Just that alone shows a lot of confidence. When talking to a girl keep good posture and just relax. Girls will be able to tell if you are nervous just by how your body looks while talking to them. 

3.	Tone of voice: Say things with intent. Say them with full confidence. Most of the time I’m chatting up girls I say the most random stuff. See what you say doesn’t matter, but how you say it is KEY. If you mumble what your saying or say it with little confidence they will notice. Like I said previously girls notice the SMALL details. We can’t wrap our brains around it but I promise the small things are key. 

4.	Kino: Whenever I meet a girl, regardless of who she is I always go for the hug. I used to just do handshakes but I realized how beta that is after seeing friends go for hugs then i give a handshake. Hugging right from the bat shows your comfortable, and that your not afraid of girls. After that I’ll chat them up for 3-8 min at most. While I’m talking with them, esp if I’m in a loud setting I’ll lean in with an arm around them and tell them something. It’s all about how you do it. I show no hesitation or timid ness when I do that. If you do more than likely she’ll pull away. Playfully touch her every now and then too while talking. She’ll say “oh I really love San Francisco!” I’ll be like “no way I love it there too!” With a big smile and I’ll touch her as I say it. There’s better examples but that’s what came to mind first lol. 

5.	Having girl-friends: When girls you meet see you chatting up other women it turns them on. They see you as a guy who doesn’t NEED them but can go for any girl he wants. Make friends with EVERY girl, hot or ugly. I’ve gotten laid many times because I decided to make friends with the fat girl who had a lot of really hot friends. She liked me enough that she was EAGER to introduce me to her friends. Make connections. The best wingman is a woman I can promise you that. Your buddy can prop you up all day long but if a girl hypes you up it means a whole lot more. Surround yourself with women and you will get many more opportunities. 

6.	Conversation: The absolute biggest issue I had was being IN MY DAMN HEAD TOO MUCH. God, I can not emphasize this enough. Your mind is your biggest enemy. It’s simple guys I promise you. Just LISTEN first then speak. I feel like a lot of us have so many thoughts running through our mind on witty things to say but the problem is it’s as she’s talking. Breath, relax, and listen. Girls will do a lot of the talking and you can bridge off on different topics that they mention. I usually start with basics: where are you from, age, grade( I’m in college), etc. after those basic ones you usually can find a talking point, but just sit back and LISTEN. Be in the moment. Get out of your head and be present in the convo. I guarantee you will become a better conversationalist just by listening. I usually will chat with them for 5-8 min then move on to get a drink or meet someone else. Talking for way too long shows too much interest and girls aren’t about that. Girls CRAVE the chase. Go do your own thing and meet other people. Another reason I leave after a short encounter with them is 1.) Shows I don’t need them and 2.) I go talk to other girls ,which then makes the girl I just met even more attracted to me. Girls have time and time shown me that if they know they have some competition/confirmation that another attractive girl is flirting with me, it tells them I have plenty of options. As good as I am, a lot of girls won’t go home with you the first night I meet her. After a good initial flirtatious, lighthearted banter, I tell them it was lovely meeting them and walk off somewhere else. The reason it’s a long game is because usually the second or 3rd time I see them out they were down to fuck. The short fun, playful interactions keeps her thinking about you, that cute guy who seemed like a lot of fun. When I see them out again, it’s usually a much more sexual hug because I got them emotionally thinking about me. A lot of guys will talk to one girl and stand by them the whole time, which comes across as you not having other options. 

7.	Have fun: life is too short and we all go through our own shit so have fun with whatever you are doing. Showing others that you are fun and can let loose get girls to open up more as well as getting them interested in you. I was so afraid to dance in front of people for being judged. After I went to my first edm festival that all changed. Now anytime I go clubbing I let loose. I go there with the intent of having fun and meeting people. That’s it. I never go out expecting to get laid. I can’t tell you how many times my group of friends will start the dancing because we’re not afraid and guess what! Women come over to us because they see we’re having a great time and want to be apart of that. Girls are all about emotions and want to be apart of a group of people having fun, not the ones sitting awk in the corner on their phones. Let loose and just have fun guys! 

8.	DO NOT PUT GIRLS ON A PEDESTAL: I struggled with this for years. I had insane oneitis and would fall for girls just because they showed interest. You know how many of those worked out? 0. Have other options. Girls like guys who have other girls they can go to. I rarely snap or text girls because why? I’ll see them in person so why use all my talking points when it’s not even really to them? Keep it short and sweet. If your interested in them go on a date, and then don’t text them again for another day or two. Every time I would msg immediately after a date I’d usually get ghosted. Why is that? God only knows why women think the way they do but it’s reality. They want a man who has his own life and doesn’t depend on a single girl. 

Guys I promise you it’s not as difficult as it seems. Take it from someone who was insanely shy for most of his life. Practice makes perfect and ultimately it comes down to whether you TRULY WANT TO CHANGE OR NOT. No one can force you to, only you have that power. I told myself enough is enough. Put yourself out there and live or look back with regret for doing NOTHING. Go out there and make a fool of yourself but DONT TAKE IT PERSONALLY. Learn from it and move on. It’s been a long journey but I’m finally starting to see the promised land and I tell you there’s nothing more exhilarating than the game, so treat it like one. Relax and don’t take it too seriously. 

One YouTuber I HIGHLY recommend to everyone is thatwasepic. Now I know what you’ll say, he’s tall and handsome so it’s easy for him! (Step 1. Be attractive. Step 2. Don’t be unattractive) Watch him for his phenomenal conversation skills. Watch how calm he is, and how he listens before replying. His body language and tone of voice. 

Alright guys this is way longer than I intended it to be but the ball was rolling so why not lol. Thank you again to everyone who gave me great advice on here over the past year. I wouldn’t have been able to grow if it wasn’t for you guys. Stay strong and PUT UP OR SHUTUP. 

Edit: wow I didn’t expect to have this many replies! Thank you everyone who commented. Im more than happy to help in anyway I can. 
I am still learning new things constantly and improving my game. I’d love to hear more tips and tricks so that I can continue to grow!EDIT: shoutout to /u/falli67 for the Reddit gold! Much appreciated mate. 


**[Disclaimer: So I initially made this post around six months ago, and from it I ended up getting *numerous* PM's about how it inspired many people to start their journey of self-discovery. That post was recently re-discovered and I have again been getting more PM's about it, not to mention I keep seeing more and more posts asking for help on inner game. So, I've decided to just post it. Hopefully you guys can gain something out of it, because I know I gained a lot from writing it.]**

**TL;DR:** In the span of ~two and a half years I went from a socially-deprived, uninteresting college student to, as my friend described me, *”by far the most interesting person she’s ever met.”*. The road to changing myself was incredibly difficult, but the gist of it all is *learning to accept yourself fully*, because you are who you are. The only person who has and will spend their entire life with you, is you. You owe it to yourself to be the best YOU that YOU can possibly be. What does that entail? *Have interesting stories by doing interesting things.* *Ask* people the right questions to get to know them at a deeper level. And most importantly: *GIVE PEOPLE VALUE*! If you give them value, they WILL appreciate and like you more. 

**BACKGROUND**

Let’s wind the clock back a few years to Fall of 2014. A frustrated, lost, and possibly depressed 20-year old university student stands in the hallways of his school, watching others go by whilst not knowing what is going on with himself. After all, why should he? He had few friends, commuted to school, and didn’t have much of a life outside school. He didn’t have any cool adventures or stories to talk about. If you could’ve seen this person, your eyes would automatically have skipped over him. He wasn’t interesting, he was *forgettable*.  
That was me. I was just a number. If people could have gotten to know me better, they would have known that I was a deep person. But so few people even bothered to get to know me, that nobody really knew me at all. I was angry and frustrated at the world because everyone else was having fun and I wasn’t. I was stuck in purgatory. Up till this point, I felt so unfulfilled with my life. I would sometimes let loneliness carry me off to sleep under a sea of tears. 
So, as I finished up the first semester of my third year in my program, I hit the very bottom. I knew that I had to improve my life. I *must* improve my life, or I was destined to drift away forever into ambiguity and loneliness. 

**DIVE**

I found r/Seduction. I thought, “Great! I’ll just read this subreddit and find tricks to make people like me.” Easy as, right? So I checked out the sidebar, read some of the top posts, and my initial thought was, “What the hell is this philosophical bullcrap? I’m not here for mental coaching, I’m here to find the best pickup lines!” Right off the bat I hit my first test – I failed to recognize that a better you starts with a better mind. I started reading some of the top posts and they all said the same thing – “change your mind” or “inner game IS seduction!” If so many people are saying the same thing, surely it must be true? So I read the sidebar stuff again and this time started to take it seriously. Maybe I *was* lost inside. 

Slowly, *very slowly*, I began to realize myself a little bit more. More and more I began to reflect on my feelings and my mood; how do I feel at this moment, how did that make me feel, etc. I didn’t know it yet, but I was essentially meditating – I was becoming more and more aware. I realized that it won’t kill me to talk to people. They’re just people like me, and we all have our flaws. How is someone supposed to like you if they don’t know you? So, little by little, I started talking to people more. In the hallways, in classrooms, whatever. I started by making really small small-talk (ie., “Hey, what room is the test in?”) It was small, but it was a start. (Now I’m able to have full-on and meaningful conversations with anybody). 

I heard people saying how important good eye contact was, so I tried doing more of that. At first it went atrociously – at first I would get scared after making eye contact for longer than one zeptosecond, but after a while I got good at holding it for a millisecond. Then 5 milliseconds. Then a second. Then 5 seconds. Then I fell into the trap of staring *too* long and getting creepy. Okay, less now. Still less. Repeat a thousand times until it became second nature to have a conversation whilst making good, strong eye contact. Throw in a smile every now and then to deter “creepiness” away. 

Good, good. After a thousand attempts, eye contact has been locked down. Wait, my conversation skills are still terrible! Now what? Alright, same thing: Practice. I said I could make small-talk with people, but now it’s time for *actual* conversations. A conversation goes two ways; you can’t just nod your head and smile the whole time. Start asking questions – but *which* questions? Well, knowing which questions to ask is a part of being a *good listener*.  

**NEW WORLD**

Excellent, I’m making good eye contact and asking questions. But why don’t people like me yet? Why don’t they seem interested? At this point in my life I was given mind-blowing advice like no other: *”People aren’t interested in you, because you aren’t an interesting person. Why should somebody invest their time into you? What **VALUE** can you give them?”*

Oh shit, I offer no value. You *must* give people value in their lives for them to spend any time on you, and in essence, to *like* you. What do people value? More than anything, it’s *good listeners*. Why? Because to be a good listener you must be *actively involved* on other peoples’ stories and lives, and they like that. They will think, “Wow, this person is genuinely interested in what I have to say. I like this person.” Being a good listener, like anything, takes practice. It stems from within. Before you can be a good listener you *MUST* fully understand that it’s not always about yourself – ie, you don’t always HAVE to talk about yourself. Just listen for once.

Okay, listening goodly. Continuing to listen bigly. Oh shit, she stopped talking. It’s my turn to talk. What do I say? I have no similar experiences or interesting stories to add. She walked away. *Note to self: Must have interesting stories to progress further in the game.*

How do you get interesting stories? By doing interesting things. How do you do interesting things? By asking people to do things. So that’s what I did. In the summer going into my 4th and final year of university, I started asking my few friends to hang out. We started doing small things – getting coffee, going to the movies, whatever. “Be bold, damn it!” Fine, I’ll be bold. I, quivering as I did so, started asking acquaintances and people I didn’t know very well to hang out. In group activities at first, of course, but then slowly the groups got smaller and I found myself inviting people I didn’t know very well to hangout one-on-one with me. Seriously, I went from going on coffee runs to breaking into an abandoned, sealed fort with my friends at 3am one night because, well, why the hell not? I went from “wanna go to the mall?” to “let’s go sail to that old, abandoned ship in the middle of the lake at midnight on this tiny rubber boat, even though we are all terrible swimmers.” Such tenacity was unheard of in the old me. 

Wait, people are actually saying “yes”. What is this sorcery? Well, it turns out that when you *invite* somebody to something, you are giving them value. You are saying, “hey, I think you’re cool. Come hang out with me.” They feel valued. They will begin to like you. 

**ASCENSION**

It is the summer of 2016. I’ve increased my circle of friends, I have interesting stories under my belt, and yet…I feel so unfulfilled. Surely I would have thought that I would be happy after I got what I was so desperately wanted, which was a social life and interesting experiences? I walked around with this *hole* in my heart, so to say, for a while. Why did I still feel so empty? What was I missing? I had to reflect within to find out. I started meditating, I started keeping a journal, and I slowly came to a crushing realization. 

*I was in a desperate need of myself.* The thing I was missing the entire time was not friends or money or having fun adventures. The thing I was missing so dearly, was my love of *myself*. After all, if I couldn’t love myself, why should somebody else? 

To love yourself, to *truly love yourself*, is to accept yourself and KNOW that you’re good enough. Your flaws, your strengths, your personality, your abilities…you must learn to accept them, for they are what make you, you. 

Easy to say, harder to do. What does “loving yourself” mean, anyway? It means you must accept that you are a human being, and human beings are prone to making mistakes. As a human being you are entitled to having your own opinion. There **WILL** be those who do not agree with you, but it is not your problem if they do not agree. Hold on to your opinions with conviction, or else you are only betraying yourself. You, as a human being, have the right to *be happy*. Sometimes this means making decisions which benefit you more than they benefit others. This does NOT make you a selfish or bad person, because you OWE it to yourself to be happy. To be happy, you must be the best you that you can be. It is not selfish to only want the best for yourself. In fact, it would be selfish if you DIDN’T want the best for yourself. Besides, having an opinion and going against the grain is admirable. So many people don’t want to have a differing opinion for fear of standing out, but so what? Be uncompromising. Stand out. Be somebody. People will love you for it.

Loving yourself is inherently tied to not judging other people. Why? Because by judging other people, you’re only exposing your own insecurities. Don’t believe me? Let’s say somebody calls you stupid, or yells at you, or somehow says something demeaning to you. Most people would be angry and say mean things to that person. But not you, because *what other people think of you is none of your business*. You have so much value that you can’t be bothered to waste YOUR valuable time & energy by being worried what other people think of you. So somebody thinks you’re stupid, let them. You know you’re not, and that’s all that matters. That is ALL that matters. Nobody knows you like you know you, so obviously people will say things without ever having the full picture.

The confidence to not back down with your opinions and convictions is truly difficult to acquire, because it relies on attaining the hardest thing possible: Accepting yourself. And it WILL be the hardest thing you ever do.

**REBIRTH**

Fall, 2016. I started my masters program. I am living in the graduate student residences and quickly became friends with the rest of the people on my floor. When I met these people I was genuinely interested in their stories. Who were they? Why were they here? Where were they from? I would try to probe them to extract their stories. One person particularly connected with me on a deeper level, the girl at the end of the hall. 

She, like many people, was shy and reserved. I, being myself, tried to be as friendly as I could be and continued asking questions about her life. Slowly she opened up to me. Then a lot. Then a few times she cried. The entire time I would listen attentively and offer the best advice I could. “It is okay to express emotion, because emotions are what make you human”; “No action is inherently right or wrong; what matters is if YOU think what you’re doing is the best action to take at that time”; “Nobody is universally liked. There will always be people whom, no matter how hard you try, won’t like you. And that doesn’t make you any less of a person – some people just aren’t compatible, and it’s not your fault.” Etc etc etc. One day, as we are just laying down and talking about life, she tells me the most profound compliment I’ve ever gotten about myself up to this point:

**”You are, by far, the most interesting person I’ve ever met. Your way of thinking is so far beyond anybody else that I’ve met. I’m so amazed how you do it, and it’s such an inspiring feeling.”**

Indeed, I myself was amazed. I was not expecting to hear that. How did somebody with no friends and no life become the most interesting person this girl had ever met? I reflected on what she said. Maybe it was true. I spent so much time and energy bettering myself, that maybe along the way I just forgot about it. I truly *had* bettered myself and I didn’t even realize the transformation had happened. 

I suddenly realized why so many people open themselves up to me so deeply, usually faster than I’m expecting. I’ve been told because I’m very easy to talk to, very trustworthy, and most importantly, a *good listener*. But I wasn’t always this way. Remember a few years ago when I had none of those abilities?

When you can be so comfortable by listening instead of speaking, because you *know* that you don't require validation from anybody except yourself, then you will truly be at ease with yourself. 

**FINALE**

To be liked you must love yourself, and to love yourself you must first *accept* yourself. You are destined to be the best you that you can be, so do yourself a favour and make it happen. You owe it to yourself to be the best. So be happy, noble heart. Let yourself be free.For example me:

After me and my coworker finished working at 11pm, we went out to get taco bell and eat it together in the car.
It was a great night with a lot of talking and listening to music…and eventually an explicit/sexual song came up and I jokingly was like “damnnn girl my virgin ears are bleeding” and she laughed and said how she’s honestly really innocent (which I believe) and with direct eye contact I said to her: “That means there’s a side of you to unlock”.
Like it came out so smoothly and her reaction from it was honestly pleasing and perfect. Honestly felt like such an accomplishment.This, of course, does not apply to everyone, **mostly beginners**.

There is so much information out there on how to get girls that it's easy to get caught up in studying it. How to get over approach anxiety, how to keep up a conversation, the perfect opener, etc.

The problem is, a lot of people are using this as an excuse to not go out and talk to girls. "I didn't do any game today, but I did do more research on Seddit, so it's all OK!" Here's the blue pill for you: **if you want to get better at talking to girls, you need to go and talk to girls.**

In my experience, it's actually the only way to get good at talking to girls. There is no magic formula, there is no secret sauce. There is a lot of trial and error and pain and joy.

So ask yourself, "Am I putting off actually doing game to do more research?"Here's my favorite opener. It's best for those big scary events with lots of people who I don't know.

"Hi, I don't think I've met you yet."

That's it. It shows:
- You're in the habit of meeting people
- You have met a lot of people, so it's easy to get them mixed up
- An indirect compliment

Trust me, if I can use this effectively, so can you. The purpose of an opener is to start a conversation, and this does just that. Other than this, I'd have no idea how to start a conversation and I'd be that guy awkwardly standing around while everyone else is socializing.

Typical responses to this include:
- Their face brightens up and they smile
- They introduce themselves
- They introduce their friends
- You're now in the middle of the conversationThe amount of negativity I see on here is mad, I see some trashy ass comments, look at their profile and that's literally all some of you guys do, all day, every day. You bounce between posts being negative and pessimistic because you aren't seeing any success.

Learn to give value and energy, if you suck energy out of people you will have 0 success with women. Complaining and arguing in the comment section is getting you nowhere, if you want to comment something make it positive.

Almost a decade ago, this stuff was underground. We had a group of dedicated people from one of the forums who met up every night on a web chat. We were accountable to each other and pushed everyone to try and improve at this shit. Everyone was hyped as hell if you went out an approached and if you didn't, you'd get shit for it. There was even some guys who'd record regular in fields and damn, if I hadn't done anything that day I'd feel like total shit seeing that.

Take a moment to realise that you aren't flaming some faceless person, that guy is likely just like you, in the same boat and a big part of growing in this area is learning to offer value. Create your own groups like this and go do some awesome stuff together. Message some guys on here who post regularly and offer value. Keep doing that, ask him regularly, "Hey, did you implement what we chatted about yesterday?". He might say no, in which case, offer some solace but get him back on the right tracks "Ah shit, yeah I get it but remember you need to do this shit, let's get it done tomorrow! don't give me any excuses". If he did take action, fucking awesome, celebrate his victory with him, "Yes! good shit man! how did it go?".

When you interact with women that positive attitude will be so ingrained that every time you open, you'll be asking yourself, "How can I add value to her life", if she's sad, make her smile and then tell her how beautiful she looks when she's happy. If she looks bored, inject some fun into her life by doing something ridiculous. Just like how you chat to the guys in your circle, celebrate her victories and give her some accountability. Maybe she sends you a snap of her at the gym this morning, "Fuck yeah, get that sweat on! I bet you've got a few extra reps in the tank".Then a bunch of other guys with no experience will upvote it because it fits their particular way of thinking, or it makes sense to them. An example is if a guy writes "Call a girl 10 times a day before your first date". And that might make sense to another guy, because he thinks this shows he is putting in more effort. But someone with experience, or a different way of thinking, will know this doesn't work.

What a person THINKS will work is different to what actually works. You never know if there is a flaw in your logic or way of thinking. I used to think dressing up as Superman and standing on a street corner would get me girls. It doesn't. The only thing I learnt from that was teenagers can throw eggs with great accuracy.

EXPERIENCE is what counts, especially in social situations. This isn't like solving a maths equation. Just because it looks good on paper, doesn't mean it translates to success in real life.

Even if it works for someone else, it may not work for you because you're in a different country, have different personality, looks, circumstances, etc.

The THEORY you read is at best only a GUIDE. At worst it can mislead you and give you toxic beliefs - like thinking you have to convince a girl you're gay before you can sleep with her (I wish I could say I made that up, but guys have written that). 

Don't blindly trust THEORY. Use common sense. If it's not HONEST, or if you wouldn't want someone treating you like that, then don't do it. Also compare it to your own EXPERIENCES. If you don't have enough experience, go out and get some.

The problem is most guys who are good with girls are not sitting at home writing pages of notes, or arguing with anonymous people online. They are outside talking to girls. Finding good advice on this topic is hard and rare, so bring a healthy amount of scepticism to what you read.

EDIT: This does not mean everything online or on Reddit is useless. A lot of what you read might be useless, or not applicable to you, but there will be some useful information. The way to know if it works is by using common sense and experience. If you want a shortcut to finding good articles on Reddit, then look at the sidebar which I think used to be here or the mods will be making soon. The mods seem to be good at finding the useful posts, so check those posts. Apart from that, just remember to be careful of what you read in this area. The dating industry is not regulated like other industries, so a lot of rubbish that can make you worse gets sold for a high price."What do I say to get women to like me?"

"What one word can I say to get women in bed?"

"How do I sound cool to women so they can like me?"

In the beginning of our seduction journey, we wanted to know what to say to get women to like us, however, if you focus on learning how to hold good eye contact, you will get much better results.

Women  speak with their eyes.  They can tell if a man is confident, needy, or very shy by the look in his eyes.  When you can hold good eye contact, you can say a lot with a closed mouth.

"I don't want to come off as a creep"

When you learn how to hold good eye contact, you will learn the language women know using their eyes.  If a woman is not interested, you will know by her eye contact.  If a woman is interested, you will know by her eye contact.

So instead of trying to say something cool, give a simple good morning with good eye contact.  Instead of holding long conversations trying to impress her with your words, give good eye contact and listen to her.  Don't fake listening to her, let her talk to you and pay attention.  You gain more of an advantage by listening than talking:

1. You can catch if she's being honest or not
2. She will tell you what she likes/dislikes
3. She will feel more connected to you because women love being heard

I had a female co-worker at my previous job. I couldn't really talk to her the way I wanted to because she had a boyfriend who worked at the job, but we always gave good eye contact to one another.  I could tell she was interested, she could tell I was interested.  We barely spoke, but we spoke with the eyes.  When we actually did speak to one another, it was very brief.  She would do things to get my attention (talk loud, talk to people in my general area to get my attention, etc.) and I would look around to see what section she was working in.

"That sounds like a whole lot of nothing"

The point of me sharing that was not saying that I got the girl, but I knew she was interested due to eye contact.  I never impressed her with my words.  Being that I held good eye contact, she became more interested.  I can transfer that to anywhere and everywhere.  If I'm at a restaurant, I can tell if the waitress likes me or trying to get a good tip.  A woman can convey interest from across the room, making a cold approach a warm approach even though I never met her before.

"I'm intimidated by looking women in the eye.  Especially in this day and age"

You're not trying to get her to like you with eye contact, you're conveying a message.  Looking her in the eye is an invitation, her holding the eye contact is an acceptance to  the invitation.

Practice looking women in the eye for 5 secs.  Don't worry if she looks away or not interested.  The goal is to hold longer eye contact.  Work your way up to 10 seconds.  That may sound stalkerish, but being comfortable holding eye contact that long will increase attraction for women who are interested in you.

Once you've established mutual interest via eye contact, give her a normal greeting and speak to her like a normal human being.  Even though you're having a normal conversation, continue to look her in the eye when you talk to her.  You may notice that you will have more chemistry with women because you're no longer intimidated talking to them or looking them in the eye.

"How do I look her in the eye?  You said women can tell if you're  needy or shy through eye contact"

Look women in the eye like you're interested, but you don't need her.  Looking away if she's looking at you conveys that you're really shy or intimidated by women.

There's a term I use called "needy eyes".  This is when you are looking into a woman's eyes and you have a look of "You're so beautiful.  Please like me".  This type of eye contact is not sexy to women and it gets you rejected.

This is why a lot of men don't get the results they want with women because they sometimes come off as shy and timid or give women "needy eyes".

Practice your eye contact with every attractive woman you see, every where you go.  Work your way up to 10 seconds of good eye contact.  After a while, the first place you go when meet a woman is the eyes.  You're no no longer avoiding eye contact, but you are welcoming good eye contact.I often get the "you so beautiful dada" I get it. it's nice every once in a while don't get me wrong but it's fucking tiering seriously, l just say thank you and move on, it's not like anybody choose their appearances, we are just born so it's not a reflection of anything really,(except genes) .**complimenting my sense of style** is guaranteed a conversation, I'm not shy so I compliment strangers and make new friends or relationships, and I've noticed both guys and girls get so much more flustered when I stop them to admire their shoes, makeup, bike whatever lol. and they often tell me where they got it or a funny story behind the item .. and we exchange contact if we get along. Extra points in you noticed they made it themself.

but be honest which complaint is better 

1. you are so beautiful.  
2. you are such a beautiful person. 

I live for interesting conversations so to me to like talking about the weather, people saying they like my style is so much more meaningful because we all lowkey care about how we present ourselves in the world and it's nice when it's noticed and I have something got work with without it being awkward. if you feel it's necessary further down, tell them you find them attractive if you think they gymed or worked hard for their appearances. 

Plz dont attack me saying I should grateful, I am, but if all people cared about me was how I look I'd feel so empty and hate the world for being so superficial, I'd rather be liked for being funny or that you enjoy my company. cuz looks fade, its an advantage now sure but it's very temporary.There is no shame in asking a woman out. It's one of the most natural things in the world. Be confident while doing it. Don't be like "I was wondering if... maybe... you'd want to.... go out with me sometime".

Don't beg for her to grace you with her presence. **You are inviting her to join you on an epic adventure!**  Your life is an epic adventure regardless of her reply, but you're inviting her along for (part of) the ride. That's the mindset you need when asking her out. If she declines, no big deal. You'll be having fun with or without her.Best advice I could give. Use your analytical brain and talk to as many pretty girls as possible. You could literally talk to a different girl as soon as you are out of the view of the last girl.

There IS no pick up lines. I mean, not any that will work on anything but the most immature/stupid of female. If you want girls to want you. Then be the best version of your physical self that you can muster and brother that takes effort. On top of that, don’t lower your standards but also think about what sort of girl you actually want. If you’re just after her body then you don’t have to think too hard about it, just see pretty girl and then try to make pretty girl intrigued enough to sleep with you, if you fail quickly abort and try on the very next pretty girl. This is how you get “laid”. 

The same strat is used when looking for love but you have to not look for quick lays lol



TLDR: If you want to get anywhere with women then you have to talk to women. The more you talk to the better you will get at talking to them and the more you will get “laid”. I’m starting to realize nobody in this sub is looking for “love” lol...


Update:

I have said certain things multiple times so I figured I’d just copy and paste a response I gave someone that sums up a lot of things I forgot to include above:

Bro, I am funny looking. All that means is that women whom are full of themselves will not fuck us. Big fucking whoop. There are PLENTY OF BEAUTIFUL women with deep and unique personalities that can bring some serious mfing joy to your life.

FUCK the ones that are mean. They’re dumb as fuck, those ones. It’s like being mean to someone who is telling you that they judge you to be worthy of pursuit. What a stupid thing to be mean to. If someone is dumb as fuck then who cares about their opinions.

Then, the people who simply aren’t interested in you are just doing THEIR best to find what THEY like. It’s normal and expected to have some people not be into you. If you don’t fit the “alpha” body archetype then you will find that you cannot randomly fuck bimbos because they exclusively go for alpha archetypes. Who CARES though? Yeah I want to fuck them too because my brain tells me that their big tits and big hips will bear children... but it doesn’t mean that they would make a good partner! 

That comes AFTER looks. Once you get a chick to deal with you, you might find that she’s a horrid person. Then you have to reject HER.

Look at the big picture. If you’re letting rejection hurt you then you’re letting yourself be selected out of the gene pool. If that’s what you truly think you deserve then I guess do you, but I think that you deserve the best you can get and the only way to do that is to be the best you that you can muster, and SEARCH for the girl you want. That means that you actually have to CHECK AND SEE. That means that every “beautiful girl” you see MIGHT BE HER, and you can’t sit with your thumb in your just because you’re afraid that she MIGHT NOT BE.

Had I not been willing to go up to pretty girls and tell them I think they’re pretty (basically) and then represent my best self to them I wouldn’t LITERALLY HAVE THE GIRL OF -MY- DREAMS.

I didn’t know it was her though. Prior to talking to her and then getting to know her she was just a beautiful girl. Had I let my dude speak to her because I was scared I wouldn’t have her now.

Me “Damn dude... have you seen her before?”

My associate “Nope. You gon talk to her?”

Me “Not sure. Not really feeling it today”

Ass. “Haha, there no day bad enough to not talk to THAT”

Me “You’re right” *engaged in pursuit*

Why WOULDNT I have pursued her? What did I have to lose? So I went and made contact. No waiting for the “right” moment, no, you take the FIRST moment.

You hesitate. You lose. There are men out there like me that will scoop up your dream girl. Don’t wait my dudes. You have EXACTLY what it takes to be able to be the kind of dude that the kind of chick you would be happy with would want. Nobody can get ANY chick, but anyone can get a chick they can be happy with if they put in the effort.

Good luck.Hey guys I want to share an experience I just had to hopefully help out the guys out there who used to be like me. 

Today on my lunch break I decided to have a nice lunch outside by myself. That was until I saw a cute girl down the street and thought I would ask her to join me. She agreed we sat at the table got some drinks and enjoyed our meal. At the end of our lunch together she said that I was really cool and asked for MY number.  Mind you i am 20 and she is 26 .

I will tell you how I did it.

I remember when I used to chace women I got slim to no results what so ever. It was when I finally let go of that idea that men have to chace women is when I started noticing a change. I used to approach women all the time TRY to make them laugh and TRY to get their number. 

Not until recently I decided to stop TRYING is when the results started to come naturally. I approached her and I was very confident, relaxed, and indifferent. I said "Hi im having lunch by myself over there I thought you were cute and was wondering if you'd like to join me." She responded quickly and with no hesitation which I was kind of surprised by but was like "ok that worked"

When I approached I had no expectations of her to agree. EVEN if she rejected me i would have still enjoyed my lunch and had a great time by myself.

So when you give off that vibe. That vibe that says " I dont really care what you do I will enjoy my time regardless" is the vibe that women are attracted to.

So guys stop TRYING. Literally do not try and it will come. I know this is contradictory but trust me when you "try" its such a turn off.A few girls told me that last night. I hear this advice all the time but I can never truly believe it.

I’m 6’5 and quite attractive but I’ve often avoided approaching due to me not being sure what the fuck to say with no notice. I’m a pretty good conversationalist when I want to be but I put a lot of pressure on myself to be extremely charming, funny etc when I’m interacting with girls.

Even though part of me understands this advice I just can’t seem to actually believe it because it seems like the emphasis is still very much on what you say - especially in a cold approach.

But no, they tell me that even the vocal tone is more important than the words themselves.

Do you guys agree with this or think it’s a bit of an exaggeration?*But I'm not ripped enough yet*

*But I have a shit job*

*But I have no job*

*But I still live in a trailer with my mom*

*But I still have braces*

*But I still have acne*

*But I hardly have any money*

*But I still drive a beat up shitbox car*

*But I don't even have social media*

*But I've got no texting game*

*But I still have a stutter*

*But I'm on medication which make it difficult to maintain an erection and orgasm*

*But I haven't had sex in a year*

*But I've never even had sex*

*But I haven't read through 280 seduction posts I bookmarked, read Models by Mark Manson, read The Game, watched 200 hours of in field pick up videos, watched the 212 sex education videos in a pornhub playlist, watched all of Jason Julius content (to give women explosive orgasms!!), experimented with every sex toy, written a thesis about how to pleasure women, condensed my learning into 35 pages of notes*

Fine then.

Go ahead and spend the next 3 years cloistered in a cocoon of basically avoidance anxiety under the guise of self improvement, meanwhile precious time and opportunities are slipping through your fingers.

And you get more and more pessimistic and paralysed, and the thought of connecting with women feels more distant and unattainable.

Because now you're not just talking to a girl - you're trying to recall a thousand canned lines and pieces of advice and literature to calibrate everything you say and do. Like you're trying to crack the fucking da Vinci code. Where the fucks the fun in that? What the fuck happened to just being yourself and going for what you want?

You might get rejected, ghosted, sneered at, labelled a creep, heartbroken and so on. You probably will. You might also have some of the most gratifying experiences of your life. If you avoid the risk you preclude the reward.

By the way, reading the map and walking the trail aren't mutually exclusive. by all means you can refer to some courtship literature from time to time...but make sure that's a supplement to actually putting yourself out there and living rather than just researching.

I'm writing this to keep myself accountable because I tend to slip into that trap, and also as a kick up the ass for anyone who needs it.

&#x200B;

**Caveat:**  There are a few circumstances where I believe it's valid to assert that someone truly isn't in the right place to be dating/courting; battling a serious mental or physical illness or injury, grieving, broke to the point of being homeless, seriously drug addicted, awaiting prison sentencing, harbouring sadistic/illegal fetishes which can't be suppressed. In those cases you do have more urgent priorities in your life.

Otherwise you're readyWe all have heard this before and this is a warning for you guys to approach before you regret it. To approach IMMEDIATELY. A week ago I had left my work place to buy some food from a super market and was feeling pretty good...in my leather jacket....about finally going to the office again. As I was leaving the supermarket I locked eyes with an absolute stunner for 5 seconds and she was getting off of her motorcycle. She shook her hair and I looked away feeling so much anxiety on the situation. I made an excuse and thought to myself "Maybe she is looking at someone behind me" (bullshit, I know) so I continued to walk towards my workplace but something compelled me to look back at her one last time. We locked eyes again and this time she smiled at me. The excuses were now in full swing. The leather jacket was now useless. had now I was now completely inside my head. "I'm not wearing the right clothes", "I have a mask on", "I'm not her type", "I'm a black guy and a minority", "What if she thinks I have coronavirus and runs away" It was too late and at some point she gave up and walked away. A week later, I'm still regretting the "what if" enounter. Don't be a fool like me. The longer you wait to approach the harder it will get. Don't give your brain that oppotunity because believe me, it will every excuse not to approach. Rejection is always better than regret. Please remember that next time you see that stunner.Hey fellas, I’ve been a long time lurker on this sub. While there are a lot of things I don’t agree with people saying, I just wanted to remind you guys that your worth is NOT found in your body count or how many women you’ve been with. Learning to love yourself regardless of outside factors is the first step to finding long term joy. Keep a smile on!

EDIT: Gold?! Y’all are wild over here. Thank you!!Stop waiting. Stop. Right now tell yourself that you are going to stop waiting for the right time in your life to go attract women. When you are out at a bar stop waiting for the right time to approach a girl. 


The people who do significant things in life are the ones who never waited. I read a biography about Elon Musk recently. One major thing that stood out to me is that with all his success, the one prominent theme was that he took action. 



He started a fucking space company that was launching rockets into space with an impossible budget. He had little experience and no security. HE DIDN'T WAIT. He went out there and took action. He made it work.



You have to embody this mindset right now. Your life will never be perfect. Men who live powerful and successful lives are the ones not afraid to take action when they didn't have money, security, ease. Men who took action when they have a giant pimple on their forehead. 


Men who do every single possible thing they can in this given moment to succeed. They do the very best they can today and go out there and say I'M DOING THIS SHIT. Stop waiting to master the content. Stop waiting to finish that pick-up book. Stop waiting for a promotion. Stop waiting to move into your new apartment. 


Every single second you spend waiting or procrastinating is a second wasted. And a second that could be spent towards bettering yourself. 



Stop waiting. Stop putting it off. 



Stop using this subreddit as an excuse for talking to women.




Go out there, and share what you are today. And tomorrow you'll be a bit better. But you can only be a bit better tomorrow if you take action today. 

llamaSo I recently met a girl and we were hooking up. The sex was going good then mid way she pulls me in and says I want to feel you inside me and damn near rips my condom off. Im the sort of guy that if I am not regularly sleeping with the girl or don’t know a lot about her lifestyle, I will definitely not have raw sex. When she was trying to get it off I stopped her forcefully because ain’t no one tryna catch an std or have a kid right now. How would you guys handle this situation ?# Create abundance for yourself.

That's it.

I'm not saying abundance in general. I don't mean have a life of abundant experiences, successes, or finances. Those things are great and I strive for those things and recommend everyone else does too but those things will only help you in this area of life peripherally at best.

What I'm really saying is to create a life of actual, *tangible* abundance of the kind of girls you're attracted to.

Its not just an abundance ~~mentality~~, its getting to a position where you know beyond a shadow of a doubt that the kind of girls you're attracted to are also attracted to you and you have a very good chance with them.

The level of certainty you should be shooting for is to have *evidence* proving that you attract the people you want. To know *actual names* of girls who would want to jump your bones, to actually have a lot of intimate experiences with different girls.

Every other proposed solution, including working on yourself, are things that do help to an extent but are mostly there just to make you feel like you're getting something done while avoiding the uncomfortable but most productive thing that you *actually* need to be doing to produce the specific results you're looking for.

Its like a person who decides he wants to write a book for the first time but ends up making himself busy preparing materials, organizing his workspace, or reading books and watching videos about writing for ages instead of just sitting his ass down and actually writing something.

If you want to improve your dating life, *work on your dating life.*

# This is how you build tangible abundance

**I. Make sure you can afford an active social life.**

Everything costs money and unless you wanna attract girls that hang around guys who don't really do much, you're gonna need to be able to afford at least basic stuff.

Having a job that's above minimum wage is usually enough for this so even if you don't have a very high position at work yet, you should be good.

**II. Join social groups around your interests and hobbies**

If you have a hobby or you're looking to get into something then join a social group around it. It not only puts you around the kind of people you'll naturally get along with but its also one of the best ways to enjoy and learn more about your hobbies and interests.

If you're into dance join a dance class, a dance crew, or enter the competition circuit.

Same with music, attend open mics, form a band, try to get gigs, take lessons, etc. It doesn't matter if you don't become as successful as Linkin Park you're just doing it more for fun and you'll learn later that you have the option to stop a lot sooner than you think.

If you like video games competing is good too. Even just attending competitions is good. There are also conventions around gaming. Same if you're into comic books and stuff like that, you can cosplay and attend conventions.

Just because it's nerdy doesn't mean you won't meet any hot girls. Have you seen the girls on Twitch and female cosplayers lately?

If you're more active, join groups around the things you like, like trekking groups, paddleboarders, surfers, hikers, etc.

Even if you're more focused on building a business right now, you can attend seminars or join networking events around the industry you're trying to get into.

**III. Build your core group**

You want to join a number of social groups around your different interests and hobbies.

One is alright too but it'll be more restrictive and it'll grow your social life slower.

You don't want to only focus on making friends around the social groups and you don't need to worry much about attracting the girls in them at this point, the most important thing you're looking for at this stage is people who will follow you.

The way you do that is to just have things going on and invite all the people you get along with from the different social groups to join you.

Just go to all the places in your area that you wanna go to, attend all the events you wanna attend, and do all the activities you wanna do and invite everyone you get along with from the groups to join you. They don't have to be big things, they can just be restaurants you wanna try, hiking trails you wanna go on, sports events, concerts, parties you wanna attend, etc.

Don't wait on anybody, just invite everybody and go do stuff. This will naturally filter out the people who wouldn't follow you, who wouldn't really enjoy the other aspects of your life anyway, and who don't get along with your other friends.

The only ones that'll be left are the ones who will follow you, the ones who like you for more than one thing, and who all can get along with each other.

At this point, you can stop going to the social groups if you so choose and just fulfill your interests and hobbies with the people in your core group but if you still love whatever you do with the social groups then by all means, continue.

**IV. Time to get the girls**

Once you have your core group of people who will follow you, you should now organize regular stuff with that group. You can have parties every week, go on regular trips together, have a regular activity you do with each other, etc.

When you have that, go meet girls. Cold approach (you didn't think I was gonna let you avoid this, did you?), use online dating apps, start talking to the pretty ones in your social groups etc and invite all of them to your regular get-togethers all at the same time.

Also encourage your core group and the girls you meet through various ways to bring their friends to your get-togethers. The people in your core group might know girls that you'd be attracted to and you might also be attracted to the friends of the girls you cold approached.

Telling girls to bring their friends also keeps them more comfortable and the whole thing is an overall easier sell than a 1 on 1 date.

Just keep doing this for a while and eventually you'll be in a situation where the kind of girls you like will just come on their own, especially when you do this next step...

**V. Tell everyone what you like**

Literally.

Just be very open about the types of girls that you like, both physically and personality-wise.

The more candid you are about describing the types of girls you like, the easier it will be for everyone who hangs out with you to identify girls like that and introduce them to you.

One of the biggest things holding back your friends from setting you up with someone is just not knowing whether you'd be into the girl they're considering. So the more open you are about what you like, the more your friends will be able to identify a girl you like when they see her and having a regular get-together gives them a very good excuse to bring them over to meet you as opposed to doing something like setting you up on a blind date which is a lot more high pressure and harder to say yes to.

And if you think your current friends aren't like that even if they know what you like, odds are, those are friends by circumstance. As in, you're only friends because you just happen to be in the same place everyday like co-workers or classmates. Also, if you have "friends" that do things like saying embarrassing shit about you in front of a girl you like instead of helping you out then your standard for what a friend is might be too low.

I also suggest that if you invite your current friends along to join you as you live your life, don't wait on any of them either so that they will also go through your filter. Not waiting on anyone means you don't try to coordinate schedules, you do what you want when *you* want, the people who wanna join you either have to have time or make time because if they never ever have any time to join you then they don't make it through the filter.

You can still be friends with the people who can't be there all the time, them not getting through the filter just means you shouldn't expect them to help you much with your dating life.

Having people go through this filter and treating all of them with decency and respect will ensure that you'll end up with a group of people who are most likely to help you meet the girls that you want and achieve other things outside of dating as well.

**VI.** ***Don't*** **be sexually or romantically forward**

Not knowing this is usually why some people who try social circle game think it doesn't work because you will screw everything up if you are very direct.

As soon as girls see that you're blatantly hitting on someone, everyone else will close themselves off to you.

Also, if you try something with one girl and she rejects you, she will talk shit about you to her friends and you will have to get rid of that chunk of people otherwise they will spread things to the entire group and mess everything up.

And if you do succeed, everyone will see that too. What does that mean? That means everyone knows you fucked that one girl and that's all and good if you want her to be your girlfriend and don't want anything to do with the other girls but if you just wanted a casual thing, you won't be able to go back and get another girl from the group because she will know that she'd be getting sloppy seconds.

So what do you do instead?

You wanna be a flirt.

What's the difference between flirting and *being a flirt*? If you flirt with one girl, you're already flirting. But being a flirt means you flirt with *everyone*.

Flirt with everyone and never zero in on anyone until the last second and do it in secret.

If you flirt with everyone and never zero in on anyone, the girls will just think you're playing around, you're not being serious, and that flirting is just part of your personality. Hence, why its called "*being* a flirt."

The thing is, regardless of whether they think you're serious or not, flirting still affects them and all it takes is one girl to flirt back with you to start a chain reaction.

You see, if you have enough girls around and they can all see that you're the leader of the group, and everyone in the group has nothing but good things to say about you, once a girl starts flirting with you others will become competitive and will flirt too and that will cause even more of them to flirt.

What'll end up happening is that *you* will be the victim of sexual advances and from there, once you see a bunch of girls competing for your attention, you can just pick one and try to subtly disappear with her.

It'll kinda be like taking a girl home from a club where you make an excuse to leave except you're doing it more to give yourself an excuse so that everyone else won't know for sure that you slept with someone, they might suspect that you did but they'll also give you the benefit of the doubt.

**And the most important thing**, your top priority should not be getting laid. The girls will already be competing for your attention so odds are you'll get laid anyway as long as you give someone a chance.

***Your priority should be to make sure everyone is having fun and things are all good.***

That's what a good leader does and that will avoid the girls thinking you're just trying to fuck all of them which will make you look very sleazy and will make everyone want to stop hanging out with you.

Don't focus on getting value from others, focus on adding value to everyone.

This might sound like a lot of work but its only in the beginning. Once it gets big enough it becomes very passive, to the point that cold approach or online dating become unnecessary, all you'll have to do once it gets to that point is show up to your get togethers and you'll always have a plethora of pretty girls to choose from.

And that is how you stop the mental gymnastics and build real, tangible abundance that kills your neediness and gets girls chasing you.

...

**This part is for everyone reading this**

Building this type of abundant dating life where you're the one who is pursued and you're the one who gets to choose is the main focus of the Facebook group I run so if you want to join us and learn more ways to build abundance and more ways to have women pursuing you then send me a direct message.Ok, so you fucked this up. She was into you – you got the number, you set up the date, but she flaked. You showed your hand too early, and acted a bit needy. It’s ok. You’ve lost. Move on. Delete the texts, delete the number, and stop thinking about it. Focus on your fucking job, focus on school, focus on yourself – a year from now, you’ll be extremely angry if you let a girl you barely know get in the way of your career or academic success. Do you want to lead an interesting, meaningful life? Thought so. So grind it the fuck out and stop being a little bitch. Great men don’t let a girl they barely know take over their life. 

Those intense feelings you have swirling around in your head? Yeah, that’s just biology – in order for us to keep existing as a fucking species, we need a strong incentive to reproduce. So as real as your “attraction” may seem, keep in mind that you don’t know her that well – its biology speaking, not your heart. 

Oh and you are most fucking definitely not texting her again in the next few weeks to set up a date. If she texts you, go, but don’t fucking hope for it.

Now don’t you dare turn this into a “wow what a bitch for rejecting me” or “how could she not be interested in me” thing. She has every fucking right not to be interested in the little sycophantic bitch you’ve been. You’re better than that, so fucking show that to women; don’t be a needy loser. 

I know she might have been interesting, smart, emotionally stable, and hot as fuck. But there are other girls who fulfill those criteria. The reason you feel so bad about this has nothing to do with her specifically. It has to do with a general sense of dissatisfaction you feel with your life; feeling bummed that you haven’t scored your dream job, feeling bummed that you’re not in peak physical shape, feeling bummed that you’re not a Rhodes Scholar with an undergrad degree in math from MIT.

So here’s what you’re going to do. You’re going to go fucking running today. You’re going to start fucking working out. You’re going to find a new hobby that you’re crazy about. And next time you see a cute girl, you’re going to fucking approach her – chances are she doesn’t fit your criteria, but there’s no downside. Talk to women to learn what they’re like – not to impress them or “pick them up”.

For the next little while, though, your focus is your career and working out. Keep your fucking eye on the prize, because you’ll be dead eventually. 

Tl;dr: Have some goddamn self-control. You are not your emotions. You are not what a girl thinks of you. 

Edit: I didn't expect this reaction at all - thanks so much guys!
Original post: https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/hvn5pv/i_moved_a_curl_behind_his_ear/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf

Some background, one of my coworkers Christie (not her real name) is friends with my crushes best friend. Christie knows I have a crush on this guy but hasn’t said anything to his friend. 

Anyways yesterday I was working, he hadn’t come in all week. Christie comes in with this grin on her face. She says that her friends are all going to a drive-in theater that night. I know she’s friends with one of his friends so I ask if her if he’s coming. She doesn’t know his friend hasn’t responded yet. Anyways gotta try, at least I’ll get to see a movie. 

So we get off work and get ready. His friends says he’s coming but still nothing about him. We get ready and go to the house where were gonna split up into cars. When we get there, there’s already people. But he’s not there. My heart sinks.

Of course, he shows up. Walking up to us he sees me and kinda cocked his head like dogs do. It was adorable. Just says hey with a smile. I just say hey with a smile back. Christie takes it upon herself to organize everyone. The math works out that we have two full cars and one extra person. 

Christie then asked if my crush if he could just drive himself. He said yeah and turned to me and ask if I wanted to keep him company and ride with him. I used this to tease him a bit, saying “I don’t know stuck with you for a whole car ride”. He responds “sorry it’s gonna be the whole movie and drive back too”

So this drive-in is a hour away. The whole time we’re talking. I made it a point to try and touch him just to turn up the intimacy. So a sarcastic put down comes with a pat on the back. Once I got really excited because we both like the same band. I grabbed his wrist with both hands. Which I know is aggressive, I forgot myself for a moment. He was also wearing a nice watch so I took his wrist to look at it. Then I took it off and put it on. 

We drive into the theater. All three cars park next to each other. We get popcorn and the movie starts. The whole time we’re still talking. He’s really great about adding commentary. He made me laugh so much that my sides hurt today. 

I start to feel more comfortable with him. We talk about more personal stuff. As we talk he’s leaning on the center console of his car still looking forward though. He’s wearing a button up with the top two buttons undone. I notice he’s wearing a necklace. Asking “what’s this” reaching into his shirt to grab it. “St. Elmo” he says “patron saint of sailors”. The necklace is still around his neck so holding it brings our faces close. “How long have you been saili—“ I wasn’t able to finish before he kissed me. The first kiss was a soft one. A brief pause, then a few more. 

I start to giggle a bit while we’re making out. “What?”, “I’ve wanted to kiss you for so long” I say. “Like since March?” He asked. “Yeah I guess I can’t remember the first time I saw you.” A sly smile comes across his face. “What?” I ask. “I remember the first time I saw you” “oh yeah sure you do”. “I was picking up Chris after his show at the coffeeshop you were working. You were wearing a silk handkerchief in your hair you went to leave and you asked for one of Chris’s cards”. Shocked I say “you’ve liked me this whole time and you didn’t say anything!”. “You’re not supposed to hit on the barista, I thought you were just being nice. Plus the whole age thing” to that I playfully punch him in the arm. We watch the rest of the movie. We didn’t pay attention to the first half so we just continued to talk and make out. 

Eventually the movie ends. All our friends immediately know what had happened I was holding his hand while he threw out the trash or they looked over at any moment and realize we weren’t watching the movie. Christie gave me this big smile all I could do was laugh. 

We’re dating now. Thank you to everyone for your advice and encouragement. Please anybody out there if you like someone. Even if you can only handle a small interaction with no flirting, try. You never know.It should go without saying that being good in bed is just as important as being able to get someone in bed. Being able to get someone into bed will get you laid once, but if you want more than a bunch of ONS, you're gonna need to know how to make sure they enjoy fucking you.

So without further ado, here's how to be good in bed:

**Skill:** This one is easy enough to mention, because it's the most talked about aspect of being good in bed. It's also the easiest to improve because of all the material out there dedicated to this part of bedroom performance. If you're worried about your technique, Google is your friend. I was a teenager during the infancy of the world wide web, so I had to read a lot of books about everything from foreplay to dirty talk. Nowadays you can just look for it on a Google search. I was a religious teenager so I didn't have sex until I was 20, but I became good in bed very quickly because I did my homework first.

**Communication:** Most folks just focus on skill but do poorly in bed because they think that they know what their partner will like without asking them. Sometimes your technique is good, and it'll work for 95% of the people you sleep with, but there's always going to be someone who isn't into what you're doing. Sometimes your technique is good, but they just don't like having that done to them. For example, many women I've been with don't want a partner going down on them during foreplay the first time they've had sex. For a lot of women, combinations of self-consciousness and/or past sexual trauma can make someone sticking their face down there an unpleasant experience unless they're very comfortable with their partner, no matter how good their head game is!

Other times you meet someone that likes rough sex, and others more gentle. It's important to ask how they're feeling, and not just to ask, "Does this feel good?" Partners will lie to satisfy your ego. What works for me is to touch or lick a body part and ask, "Do you want me to go harder, softer, or is that just right?" A few weeks ago I took on a new lover who told me beforehand that they had a LOT of sexual assault trauma (this is far, far more common with women than you think-keep that in mind). I made it a point to do this discovery/foreplay for 45 minutes before I even penetrated her. I felt like an optometrist the entire time I was giving the "better, worse, or the same" routine, but the reward was big when I ended up being the first man to make her cum through intercourse. The combination of long foreplay and learning how to please her gave me some serious bragging rights and a major boost to my ego.

Make it a point to ask them what they like beforehand. If they don't have a lot of experience or are introverted they might tell you they don't know, but a lot of people will know and tell you. And then do it! A lot of women have told me that a lot of men will ask what they like and then not do it. It's annoying and tells them that you aren't going to listen to their needs.

On that same note, if they're doing something you don't like, tell them but be polite about it. Nobody wants to be lousy in bed, so if you tell them, "I really like the attention you're giving that spot, but I like it better this way..." they'll work on it unless they're some idiot that only cares about their own needs.

**Emotion:** If your partner doesn't think you're enjoying yourself, neither will they. Are you enjoying yourself? Let them know! Compliment their body. If they're doing something that makes you feel good, let out a moan. There's very few moments of foreplay I enjoy more than when a woman is going down on me and I see them have a shit-eating grin because they licked just the right spot and I screamed, "JESUS FUCKING CHRIST!" If you're giving them a reaction that's making them feel like a sex deity, they're gonna want to fuck you a lot more!

That's just some very simple things to remember to being dynamite in the sack. Getting someone into bed is half the battle. The other half is getting them to come back. Now, go forth and have great sex!I see a lot of comments saying, "oh I went from no muscles to having muscles and not that big of a difference, focus on something else." GUYS, the biggest thing working out does for you in terms of increasing your attraction is not the muscles, it's improving your posture, strengthening the right muscles that allow you to stand up straight with your shoulders back, chest out, looking like a man of confidence and value rather than slouching and closed off chest and a protruding neck resulted from years of just sitting in front of a computer gaming or whatever. Seriously look at a gamer loser who never hit the gym in his life vs someone who hits the gym, the gym guy doesn't have to be muscular or whatever but just look at the way they stand and carry themselves, big difference.

What does this mean? Means DO NOT, just go to the gym and ego lift, DO NOT just do bro curls 7 days a week, and ignore important muscle groups like your posterior chain, and end up being disproportionate and imbalanced. DO NOT, be lazy and be content with not lifting because "muscles don't matter". DO, hit the gym, focus on compound lifts, build a solid foundation with proper technique first and slowly progress, train hard and eventually the muscles will come, and by then the muscles are just added bonus, unless you're Ronnie Coleman big (which you'll never be in your life), no girl is ever gonna look at a fit dude who lifts and go "ew, I don't like his muscles"

Bottom line is, get off your ass, go hit the gym, stop making excuses for yourself.

Source: am a certified personal trainer and strength and conditioning coach, been through this process with many guys in my clientele already, if y'all have any questions about anything gym related, don't hesitate commenting or shooting me a DM.Not status in terms of car or having lots of money. Most educated women don't give a fuck about this stuff as long as you can support yourself and live an interesting life. (For this some money is important of course)

I mean having a big social circle that values you. I'm a tall, decent looking guy and I do well on tinder (at least with matches, many girls will flake on you) but I currently have no social circle where I live. I've seen short dudes, regular looking dudes or slightly good-looking dudes do far better with women than I have despite me having a looks advantage.

Unemployment, no social circle and no interesting activities = social death sentence and instant repellant to women.

If you need one thing, it's this. Approaching pales in comparison to being socially active. When you're at gatherings, women observe how you will interact with people and what your value is. And then things will happen. Been hanging out with a natural I met. He’s very outgoing so game to him is second nature. I read a few books and did some of my own gaming, but he taught me something I didn’t think about. 

Pro tip. 

“Believe every girl has a boyfriend, even if they don’t, they will correct you”

Super simple shit. Talking to a girl “hey what’s a good place that you and BF went too?” 

She will immediately correct you “I don’t have one” and go off that, or respond to your question and you have info to take a date somewhere, without the awkwardness. 

Carry on.“What the fuck do you mean how do I learn ‘The Game’? First off, stop calling it that because that’s the kinda shit that’s the reason you’re still a virgin.

Secondly, realise that all this cringe ass pick-up stuff is just teaching you how to pretend to be an attractive person but eventually if you’re not at all attractive you’re gonna get called out on your bluff. Maybe you drop your facade here and there and let your insecurity show. Or maybe you manage to convince a girl you’re genuinely confidence but do you really want a relationship based off you lying about your identity?

So to answer your question, you don’t. Stop fucking searching around on websites and stop reading books written by Mr. I’ve Smashed 800 Chicks at a Gala Dinner. You ironically learn ‘The Game’ by not trying to learn it. What you’re referring to as ‘The Game’ is a communication of self-worth, confidence and status as an attractive male and how do you attain this level of communication that gets you laid? Precisely, you fulfil the requirements of being hot shit first. 

You keep complaining to me about not being attractive enough or that you’re too short well yeah sure maybe some girls find you that way but have you really done the best you can to make yourself as attractive as possible? And even if you have and a girl doesn’t find you so, then move on — why’d you wanna be with someone who isn’t the least bit interested in you?

Look buddy, I’m just tired of you doing the same thing over and over again. Go hit the gym, take care of yourself man, become interesting as possible and live a great fucking life and don’t do it for a girl or someone else, do it for you.

Get your head out of your ass man, stop emulating a high status attractive male and focus on becoming one. Your stupid ‘Game’ will come naturally.”

Edit: Hey everyone, am OP’s Friend here. Been seeing some comments here pointing out that this is a load of crock shit and that MUH GAME GETS ME PU$$Y

Well that’s fine and I don’t doubt that your pick up skills get you pussy. The point I was trying to make to my friend is that you’re still focusing on girls and pussy way too much. Sure you’re scoring but at the end of the day all you’ve really done is manipulated women into having sex with you for a day and then you go back to your life —however interesting and fulfilling or not I won’t assume.

The entire point I was trying to make was that yes getting laid is good but after awhile it gets boring. It’s a false god, pleasure because all it does is makes you feel good without having really done anything good for you.

Edit 2: Yes, pick-up works as a short-term solution but the reason you need pick up lines and skills is because who you are as a person isn’t enough, so you have to fake being someone you’re not and sometimes it works. The lines you’re saying didn’t come from you, you’ve been taught what to do and that’s fine but if you’re still insecure and needy, your intentions will show and high quality chicks can see right through that and tell you to fuck off.

If you want meaningful and fulfilling relationships, you invest in yourself and become the best version of who you are. Yes, that includes trying your best to become attractive. Once you’ve reached somewhere you’re happy to be, approach women you’re interested in and be honest with them about your intentions.

No more shitty pick up lines or false identities, now you’re talking to her from a place of security and confidence. You constantly make yourself available for rejection because you’re fine with rejection since you’re that secure (it’d be nice if she’s receptive but I’m cool if she isn’t because I’m happy as it is).

And when you’re telling her she’s cute, it’s because you mean it and now that compliment is honest and coming from a genuinely interesting, high-status, confident man. And yes, I fuck.

Edit 3: Mandatory thanks for the gold :)I was having drinks with some of my class celebrating the end of semester and the topic of dating and nice guys came up. 

The consensus among 4 girls was this; 

- Nice guys are off putting (especially guys who are doormats for everyone)

- They hated themselves/felt guilty about it because most of them had been treated like dogshit by ‘badboys’ time and time again and admit that a lot of nice guys are genuinely just nice people not doormats 

- They made a resolution to only go for guys from now on but knew they probably wouldn’t 

- Admitted that nice guys (overly charming or sycophantic guys) can still turn out to be abusive 

- Guys who tease, challenge them and hold their ground are more interesting to be around 

- they’re strangely attracted toward mysterious guys, even if they find them slightly creepy. (This is where I fail because i have adhd so I tend to just spill my guts) 

- Don’t deliberately not be nice, just be true to yourself - it’s very unlikely you’re going to agree with everything everyone else says if you’re being congruent. 

- Confidence is really attractive, even tho it doesn’t necessarily mean anything these days and there are a lot of people who are frankly a lot more confident in themselves than they should be 


Yeah so basically the whole thing is a big fucking farce and there’s no logic to it 

But a reminder to be confident (not arrogant), to be slightly mysterious by not revealing your hand immediately, and to stand up for yourself and not be doormat. **FYI: I recently started a blog that talks more about this kind of stuff:** [**Socialite Magazine.**](https://socialite.substack.com/) 

---

Disclaimer: these mindsets are easy to adapt if you're already taking action and getting some quick wins.

If you need help getting quick wins, read my Snapchat Guide to Game [Part 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/5cmrub/a_snapchat_guide_to_game_how_to_create/), [Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/5e1dld/24_a_snapchat_guide_to_game_the_four_areas_of/), and [Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/5f8ypl/34_a_snapchat_guide_to_game_how_to_seamlessly/).


...


*"The power of the mind is not a joke."* - **Drake**


...


Hey everyone,

Below are the mindsets that helped me become more confident in all aspects of my life.

I went on 40+ dates within a 9-month span with some of the most attractive people I've ever met. In this time, I also happened to get a new job + raise (so these mindsets work well outside of game). 

The way I see it, most guys don't actually need help with the tactical aspects of game. Humans are born to be social and everyone is capable of killing it in the game or social interactions. Instead, most guys just need the right psychology to back them up while in field.

For example, imagine if a dolphin told you it can't swim. You wouldn't teach the dolphin how to swim because the dolphin was born to swim. Instead, you'd probably just tell it to shut up and go swim, lol.

That's basically the same thing I'm insinuating here. If a human told me it doesn't know how to be social, I'd have the same reaction. Humans were born to be social so go out there and be social. But have mindsets like these in place, as well, in case you feel stuck!

I've tested and refined these mindsets over time. They've been of great use to my overall happiness and well-being. Hope they are of use to you too! 


...


**Mindset #1: If they don't get you, they don't deserve you.**

If they don't understand you and your sense of humor, they don't deserve your company.

I learned this after I got laid off from my first job after college. I had 30+ phone interviews and 6 in-person interviews (each lasting 3 hrs, so a total of 18 hours in-person interviews).

I had to find a company where I would fit in well. In other words, my personality could easily be mesh within the existing company culture and values of the company.

So, I started being being a little goofy or funny during my interviews in order for companies to "vet" or "qualify" my personality. I wanted them to see the real me, so I made sure to be professional but also a little expressive.

I knew that a company that passed me over as a candidate was a company that I would not be happy with anyway. I'd be miserable because I wouldn't fit in (despite how good my qualifications were). The social vibe within that company would not be a good one for me.

When I finally did land a job, it was with an incredible company with an exceptional team that I vibe with extremely well. It was the perfect fit.

Being myself is what kept me out bad job opportunities.

I applied this same concept to my social and dating life because it was a great way to vet out people who I had nothing in common with.

For example, I'm purposely a little dry in my humor or awkward in my behavior sometimes. It's because I find it hilarious and I want to attract more people into my life who are okay being awkward or having crappy but funny senses of humor. Simultaneously, I want to push away people who don't understand my way of being because those are people who I'd have trouble building deep, strong relationships with. We could get along, but it isn't as easy going.

If a girl didn't understand your sense of humor or personality, she probably wouldn't be a good fit for dating you. Doesn't matter how attracted you might be to her, you are still incompatible probably. I think a lot of guys chase girls who aren't worth their time simply to prove that their "game is good" or something.

Then, there are girls that love you no matter what. They seem to find everything you say funny or interesting. They like your personality and sense of humor even if it's a little goofy.

Those girls are the ones we should spend our times chasing.

For example, my girlfriend loves my annoying curly hair. She thinks it's the sexiest thing in the world.

But other girls might find my hair completely unattractive. Fuck, I'd be lucky if they noticed me!

So I spend my time chasing girls like the former, not the latter. Because I know they'll like everything about me. They're "my type".

Spend your efforts on people who like you for you and accept you for who you are.

Be yourself to filter out people who aren't like you. The world is friendlier when you're surrounded by common-minded people.


...


**Mindset #2: What do I feel like doing or saying?**

Ask yourself this as much as possible. Then go with your gut instinct.

*What do I feel like saying or doing in this moment? What would make me happy and satisfied with myself?* I ask myself this every day and every hour.

Ask yourself this as much as possible and you will become a more natural, intuitive guy that has to rely less on tactics or lines.

Go with your gut or instinct.

By doing this, I started doing more of what I wanted and less of what I didn't want to do. Now I just do whatever I want. Rarely do I make the wrong decision or take the wrong action.

Over time, your decision-making process gets really sharp with the help of this mindset.

This mindset is especially fun to try while going on a date. I'm constantly asking myself what I feel like doing or what feels right. Then I go with my instinct. It adds a lot more spontaneity to a date.

*NOTE: Yes, a not-so-good decision might be made with this mindset. Trial and error fix this over time. You'll be shocked by effective this will improve your decision-making process across ALL aspects of life (this extends far past game). Try this for a month and you'll see improvements.*


...


**Mindset #3: "I'm a likable and social guy. I love meeting new people and talking to people, just for the sake of talking. Conversations don't always have to lead anywhere, but when they do, it's great."**

This is the mindset you should have moving forward in dating and social situations.

It's a way of thinking that I learned from observing high-level businesspeople here in Silicon Valley. I realized people are constantly socializing, meeting new people, discussing potential partnerships, grabbing a coffee to ask each other questions, etc. It's a way of life here.

What I learned is that people are constantly meeting new people. It's a normality to talk to or befriend a stranger. So I took a similar approach to my social and dating life...

You're just a social dude. It's normal to talk to a lot of people and meet a lot of people. Everyone does it all the time.

You aren't a pickup artist.

You aren't some creepy dude going out to practice approaches.

You're just a regular dude who enjoys meeting new people and socializing. People do this all the time (in Silicon Valley, we call it "networking").

Sometimes, things move forward with these people. Sometimes they don't. It's all okay.

When girls in the past would give me the shit test of, "Oh, you're such a player!"

I would respond with, "No, I'm not. I'm just a regular guy who's friendly, social, lives in a big city, and enjoys going out and trying new things. Inevitably, I'm going to be meeting a lot of people. Some of those people will be girls. And some of those girls will like me and I'll like them. That's it!"

Which was actually true.

This is a very beneficial state of mind to be in.

Your reality should be this one.

I don't even consider going up and talking to people as "approaching" anymore. It's just "meeting" people. Everyone does it. People are meeting new people all the time.


...


**Mindset #4: The best course of action is always being yourself.**

This one I learned directly from Todd himself and it hit me to the core.

When he gave me the green light that it's okay to be myself... I felt extremely empowered. Prior to that, I used to feel like I needed to get down every method or tactic before taking any action.

I even felt a shock across my body upon hearing this quote for the first time.

It basically means that whatever you feel like doing or saying is what should be done.

I've applied this principle far outside game. I've applied it to my social circle and to my business development conversations in Silicon Valley.

People seem to enjoy someone who has no problem being expressive. Shy people get overlooked.

The best course of action is being yourself.


...


**BONUS MINDSET: If you don't feel like socializing, then don't.**

This is contrarian to every mindset I just shared above. But I get asked this on my Snapchat all the time. 

*"What do you do if you don't feel like socializing or are in your head? How do you force yourself out of that mindset?"*

Everyone who follows me knows that I work in business development here in Silicon Valley. Part of my job is cold-calling into Fortune 500 companies and speaking with C-level executives or Vice Presidents.

Some days I kill it! I'm at the top of my game, super sharp and witty. It seems like I'm the friendliest guy in the world...

Other days, I'm pretty introverted. I don't really want to talk to anyone and barely acknowledge anyone in the office. And when I talk, I'm awkward or stumble over my words lol.

The truth is, everyone has those days. Nobody is 100% extroverted or social at all times. That's a myth. 

So when I don't feel like talking to anyone or feel a little anxious, that's okay. I just accept it. I don't have to be this unstoppable, smooth character all the time. That's unrealistic. 

You do not have to be like George Clooney, Johnny Depp, or Ryan Gosling who are smooth 100% of the time. 

So if you've got days where you aren't as sharp or social, it's fine and 100% normal. Just accept it. 


...


I recognize some of these mindsets might come off narcissistic because they are too self-focused. I know they aren't perfect.

But before I had these mindsets, I was pretty stuck. I didn't know how to act or what was allowed in terms of self-expression. This psychology brought me out of my shell and out my head.

I think the reason why is because the mindsets helped me accept myself. 

Self-acceptance is the key to radiating confidence, imo.  So if after this post you have a feeling of self-acceptance too, then I'm glad I've helped.


**FYI: I recently started a blog that talks more about this kind of stuff:** [**Socialite Magazine.**](https://socialite.substack.com/)"If you put someone up on a pedestal they will have no choice but to look down upon you."

I see so many guys worry about what to text, how to phrase it, and when to send it. If this is you, then chances are you're probably way more invested in a girl than you should be. You're worried about how she's going to react and if she'll text you back probably because you have nothing else going on in your life. I promise you she does, and it's not attractive to anybody when you're sitting around thinking ten different ways to ask her what she's doing Friday night and wondering when she'll get back to you.

I give you my rules, and I promise you it's all you ever need.

1) Send your text and forget about it.

2) Put down your phone and go do something else.

Go take your dog for a walk. Hit the books for your exam coming up. Cook your own dinner for tonight. Play your favorite video game. Go do something and keep yourself busy. Stop worrying so much.This could be about anyone. A best friend, friend, ex girlfriend/boyfriend, etc. You shouldn’t care less about them when they left you. Why? Because they left you because they needed better. That’s just the truth. They thought they were better than you and left you because they wanted to associate themselves with someone who they thought was at their level in life. Now allow that to sink in. 

Why shouldn’t you care? Because they didn’t see any point investing in you despite what your potential could’ve been. Tim Cook CEO of Apple could’ve acquired Tesla at 60B when it was at the worst period of its existence as a company. He didn’t. Now that company is worth $600B and worth the entire automotive industry.

My point is don’t take it personally when people leave you because they’re leaving an image of what they think you are and not what you actually are. You are worth way more than what people think you are. When you do eventually become the best version of yourself they will try and come back because their perception of you was false. Don’t let them come back. Protect your energy and keep improving.I got a PM a few days ago from someone in r/seduction about my time working at Abercrombie & Fitch. 

...Overall I didn't make much, wasn't a huge fan of their clothing, and due to allergies was constantly plugged up due to the smell BUT it was a perfect training ground.

Part of the job, that's insinuated not told, is that flirting sells. This, of course, applies to all sales. Especially in clothing. These are some of the techniques I used then and that I still use today.

**1. Don't Be New** - This is something that I hear little about around r/seduction but has been incredibly effective for me.

...This involves seeing a girl, before she sees you, that strikes your interest. You walk by, I'd often do this carrying clothing or going off to fold, so that she sees you (but doesn't think that you've seen her).

You're now consciously (if she was checking you out) or subconsciously (you were in her gaze, but she wasn't checking you out) in her mind. Whether it's conscious or not doesn't matter. What does matter is that you are no longer completely foreign to her (whether she knows it or not). 

This will always make the girl you're interested in more comfortable when you begin to talk to her. This is very applicable on college campuses. If she has seen you, she'll feel more comfortable knowing you're not a complete stranger.

**2. Frame Her** - I was told this by my manager when I first began. When talking you want to engulf her frame of view without being in her face. 

...You do this by forming a V with your feet, with a wide stance. Ideally, if there's something by her (table, bar, chair, etc) you want to make it so that to the left there's something, to the front and right you're completely in the frame (by making the V), and the only open space is from behind.

This gives the perception of just talking but makes you the focal point. It also makes it tougher for people to disengage the conversation (since they have to either step back or walk backwards). 

This works well in all settings. Try doing this at work. Body language is not just how you control your body from the waist up, by standing upright, but also by how you frame conversations.

**3. Leave Early but Come Back Often** - By framing you're asserting an implied level of dominance. By leaving early you're showing that you're in control of the interactions.

...If you're at a house party and as soon as you see the conversation is dwindling eject. Go get yourself together, think of good topics, and then place yourself back in.

Ideally you want to recognize what the peak of your conversation would be (in terms of her interest in you and your conversation) and then eject. Not eject while the conversation itself is fading. 

With practice it becomes quite easy to tell when you're about to hit this peak. 

**4. Compliment What's She's Done, Not Her** - Between r/askwomen and r/seduction there's a bit of a discrepancy when it comes to randomly hitting on girls.

...r/Seduction normally goes with a general statement about her (i.e - I had to stop you because you're so cute) while r/askwomen always stress that they want to hear what they've done that makes them cute (i.e - I love your style, hair, whatever).

An employee first taught me this using the explanation that most women, like men, know their base attractiveness. They know that they're a 6, 7, or whatever. 

...Trying to tell them that they're a 9 based solely on "looks" most recognize is a thinly veiled attempt to get with them.

But telling them what makes them so attractive is something they are actively putting effort into (style, hair, even body) makes them (girls and guys I'd add) feel like they're reaching above that base attractiveness which is what everyone tries to do.

Of course, a reason we did this at Abercrombie is because everyone coming in was buying relatively expensive, usually revealing clothing. Buying into a very sex-driven atmosphere.

**5. Side Talk is the Best Talk** - We had to walk a fine line, especially since most employees were over 18 and our average cliental was in the 15-25 range.

Our stores always tried to convey an intimiate feel: dark rooms, soft lighting, loud but soothing music, and "fragrance" everywhere. 

But whispering in ears goes a little too far. So what many would utilize is side talk. It's when, due to how loud the room is or whatever, you lean to one side, slightly lean forward and talk.

This isn't intimiate, you aren't *really* getting much closer, but you're initiating a position related to intimacy. You may be making her more insecure by not speaking directly to her. And, if you're wearing cologne on your neck, she'll get a slight whiff of it perhaps (although that's redundant in our stores, I know). 

**6 - Your Eyes Say It All** - Eye contact is always a major factor. But I'll be a bit more specific. Again, advice from an older co-worker.

You *always* want to keep eye contact. You should initiate with eye contact and not break it until she looks away. Eye contact is always the first prelude to intimacy. 

BUT, even if you're the most attractive guy in the world, too much eye contact, especially in the wrong setting, can be a bit odd/creepy. 

So how do you break eye contact without breaking the intimacy that you've built up?

Don't look to the side! She'll think you're looking at someone behind her, or to her side.

Don't look down! It's a sign that you've lost interest, she makes you uncomfortable, or that you're shy (which isn't inherently a bad thing).

Look just slightly *above* her. This breaks the eye contact but nothing is implied by looking above her. Especially if you're taller this could just be you stretching your neck. But it does break the *feeling* of eye contact so you can reinitiate it. 

**7. The In and Out** - No, this is not about burgers. No, this is not about sex.

...This is something I first picked up from the movie Alfie (the new one, with Jude Law, great movie by the way if you haven't seen in) and shared with some friends/co-workers.

You should, in most settings, never crowd the individual your talking to unless it's at a party or club. You should be a good foot or so away, at least initially. 

When you're telling her a joke, or telling her a little secret, walk half-a-step towards her (still framing her), bend forward (if she's shorter than you) just a tad, and say your joke/secret/whatever and then step back smiling. 

This works *really* well with sarcasm. I'd normally say, "Can I tell you a secret about this store?" She'd say, "Yes?" and I'd lean in saying, "We actually spray cologne in here all the time. It doesn't just naturally smell this way" then I'd lean out. This would always get a "Oh, *realllly* I never would've guessed" type response. 

Breaking intimacy, like you break off conversations as discussed in point 3, is really effective. By saying you're telling her a secret and leaning in you're building intimacy, making her heart beat a bit quicker, and then quickly snapping it by telling a sarcastic joke instead of a true secret. 

**That's it...**

So that's it. Hopefully these help you out a bit. I still think about them and apply them whenever I'm out and about. Doesn't matter the setting.


So after many months of being in a relationship, I ended up having an extremely honest conversation with my current partner/girlfriend about how fucking hard it is being an average-slightly average looking guy in online dating.

Much to my amazement, my partner agreed with me on a number of issues. Here's some insights that she openly admitted to, and I felt would be useful for the community.

1. Getting sex is easy for most women, but she was surprised how hard it can be for men. Yes, I know this is fairly obvious, but she straight up told me she was shocked when I told her I went without any sexual contact for four years, excluding a few kisses after semi-successful dates. She told me she'd have gone nuts after four months, let alone four years. She also told me that she found it incredibly surprising because she considers me to be above average in terms of looks (I consider myself average at best, although my style has improved drastically over the years).
2. A lot of nice girls look for the bad boys for one night stands/casual relationships. Low level drug addicts. Guys who are assholes. Guys who aren't interested in them as people at all, but are just looking for a warm body to keep them company for the night. These are the guys many girls will take home with them or swipe right on when they're looking for something casual. This may seem nuts to decent guys, but it has a fairly simple logic to it: if a guy's an asshole, it's easier not to feel hurt if a girl hooks up with a guy and he never calls back. If he's a good guy and doesn't call her back, even if the agreement was for something casual, this stings a lot more.
3. Some girls make little/no sense when it comes to sex/dating/relationships. She talked to me from her own experience, as well as watching what some of her friends did, that when it comes to attraction/sex/dating, she has no idea what made her and some of her friends make certain choices, particularly when they were younger. Her own words: "Girls are weird."Case in point: when she and I went on our first two dates she found it incredibly surprising that someone "out of her league" (in my opinion, I'm not) would have any interest in her. She was still dating to see what her options were, and between our first and second date a guy she went on a date with (trance party drug user who switched to weed because he was too broke to get anything else) kissed her. Despite feeling a strong emotional and physical attraction to me, after the second date she dropped me in "favor" of the other guy simply because he'd made a move first.When she told me she wanted to see where things went with this guy and turned me down for a third date (I didn't know the context then), I did what I call "putting my cards on the table". I told her that I was really disappointed that things had turned out this way, but I thought she was really cute and cool. I would respect her boundaries if we ever hung out at any point, but I made it clear that things were not platonic/let's just be friends from my side. What's interesting about this is she said she found this incredibly arousing. I knew what I wanted, and even though she tried to "friend zone" me, I made it clear who I was and what I wanted. This was when she realized she made a mistake, but it was too late for her to go back now.Not long after, the guy who had kissed her first broke up with her. Despite everything she still was pretty upset, and took the time to put herself back together. It was after this that she slowly started trying to find excuses to hang out with me, and after things didn't work out in terms of timing initially, one night she put her cards on the table and asked me what I was doing. Needless to say the rest is history.
4. Even girls that are attractive and who you think have their lives together on the outside, can have really shitty self-esteem and not date decent guys as a result. Basically my gf got cheated on in her first relationship. Since then she considered herself "not worthy" of a decent guy and really only went for guys/relationships that wouldn't go anywhere in the long run because when it didn't work out, it didn't hurt as much, because she could see it coming.
5. Keep it cool. Before my girlfriend straight out asked me to hang out with her one night, our paths crossed at a local event (turns out that was intentional from her side). She was surprised how relaxed I was despite how things had turned out, and it just made her want me more. Since then I've opened up a lot more with my past/emotions/history, but I wouldn't advise doing this too early.
6. Get the deal breakers out of the way early. Don't want kids? Find a casual way to bring this up early on in dating. Looking for a partner but not necessarily marriage? Same story. You want to find stories/light conversations that bring up discussions that allow you to filter out women early. This was something I used to do, and did with my gf/partner on our early dates, and even though things didn't work out initially, she was glad I brought these things up because they highlighted important stuff she eventually shared that she would want in a relationship.
7. Edit. Some girls really like to be chased. My gf and I didn't discuss whether she had done it, but she shared that some of her friends really liked some guys but never wanted to look too eager/slutty, so played hard to get.

Quick lessons to take away:

1. Stop trying to figure out women. Know yourself. Know what you want. And go for it.
2. If you're interested but aren't sure if you can go for a kiss, at the end of a date put your cards on the table and walk away. Tell the girl why you like her, that you're interested, and that she should call you if/when she feels the same. Then walk away. Literally. Tell her she doesn't have to give you an answer then and there. Some girls can be like a "deer in the headlights" after this sort of thing, so it gives them time to figure out what they want. If she reaches out, then you know you can proceed to physical stuff. If she doesn't, you just saved yourself a whole lot of time/energy.
3. Vulnerability is for after you've hooked up. At the start of the relationship, you want to keep it fairly chill. Focus on fun, share the positive stuff, get physical, and don't let your emotions run away with you. If she's still around after a couple of months, or she starts to open up about things, then you can start opening up about the more serious shit.
4. Edit. Just be honest. I'm now in my late 30s, and my life is a lot simpler since I adopted the "I'm getting too old for this shit" mantra to all aspects of my life, including dating.

I probably won't be back for a while. I just had this on my mind and wanted to share it.I felt it was worth sharing an impressive story about a guy I've known since College. His name is Steve (I have given him a pseudonym to protect his anonymity).

Ever since I first met Steve, he had terrible luck with women and a generally negative demeanour. He was insecure about his height (for context, he’s around 5”6), he had bad skin and "a face only a mother could love" (his words, not mine). 

He hated himself and it was obvious to many around him. 

He was a lovely guy, but his lack of self-assuredness and insecurities around women made him a bit of a killjoy.

Steve and I shared a couple of classes, we were never best mates but always got on well.

We lost contact after College and hadn’t really spoken since.

Fast forward 12 years (we are both 32 years old now), Steve sends me an Invitation to connect on LinkedIn.

After a couple of messages back and forth, it turns out we work quite close to each other, so we agreed to catch up for Lunch.

When the time came to catch up and I arrived at the Cafe, I have to say, I didn’t recognise him at first.

He looked, spoke and held himself in such a way, that he was a far cry from the shy, downtrodden kid I knew in College (for context, his LinkedIn photo hadn't given much away).

After some initial small-talk, I couldn't help but blurt out something that had been on my mind since the moment I saw him: "Man, what the Fuck happened to you since College?"

At first, he laughed, then, he proceeded to provide me with a detailed explanation of how he turned his life around.

I can’t tell you what he said verbatim, but here were the high-level details of how Steve made his transformation:

# Steve's transformation

I stopped complaining and started learning. I took stock of all of the things I hated about myself and decided to do my very best to fix them. Here’s how:

**I’m short**

Instead of making myself a miniature bodybuilder, I focused on building a lean, muscular frame and retaining great posture. I’m also conscious to never try and act tough or overbearing, as people will be quick to label me as someone with ‘short man syndrome’.

**My skin was terrible**

I developed a strict daily skincare regimen (and still use it to this day).

**I was depressed**

I realised my depression was brought on by a few different things, namely, that I had no passion for anything. I started experimenting with hobbies until I found something that gives me a sense of purpose. It’s cooking. Which is great for three reasons:

1. No matter how bad my day is, I always have a sense of relief knowing I can go home, unwind and focus on something I love doing.
2. Women love a man who can cook.
3. Women find it sexy when a man is passionate about something.

*Disclaimer: I am in no way saying that finding a hobby is an instant cure to depression. As someone who has his fair share of experience battling with his own mental state, I realise it’s more complicated than that.*

**I had terrible anxiety**

I started doing Yoga and practising Meditation (which, by the way, has been an awesome way to meet women.)

**I hated myself**

I learned to accept my situation and realise that no matter how much I disliked my personal circumstances, I was never going to magically transform into a better-looking, naturally confident guy.

I promised myself that with time and practice, I could learn to respect myself. I can’t remember the last time I felt *truly* terrible about myself.

**I surrounded myself with the wrong people**

I used to hang around people who were fixated on making me as depressed as they were.

At first, I stuck around out of pity, but with time I’ve distanced myself and now I only surround myself with other positive people.

**I have shitty hair**

I stick to a classic short back and sides haircut and visit the barbers every 3 weeks.

**I was deeply afraid of rejection**

I dealt with it head on.

The first few hurt like hell. The next few hurt a little less.

Nowadays rejection means nothing to me.

I guarantee I’ve been rejected by more women than most guys out there, but in turn, I’ve also been told yes a hell of a lot more than men who let rejection prevent them from making many approaches in the first place.

**I used to love making excuses**

I realised that no-one wants to hang around with somebody who constantly complains.

I learned to stick to positive discussions with others, which, in turn, manifested into positive internal thoughts. I rarely complain about anything, anymore.

**I was terrible at communicating with women**

I have developed a strong circle of female friends.

I understand what makes them tick, I’ve learned to appreciate them as human beings (as opposed to targets) and the empathy I’ve developed for them has helped me realise that looks are nowhere near as important as I used to believe them to be.

**I’m not a naturally funny guy**

I learned to be light-hearted and develop a good sense of humour.

While I’m still no Ricky Gervais, I know how to enjoy myself and appreciate the humour of others. I’ve even been told by a number of women that I’m a really funny guy.

**I have a very average fashion sense**

I bought a bunch of neutral coloured T-shirts and slim-fit blue jeans and stuck to wearing just that.

Thankfully, as a man, I can get away with wearing the same outfit every day without anyone questioning me.

**My teeth were terrible**

I got myself one of those at home dental kits (if you use my discount code you get 10% off - I'm joking. This is not an elaborate advertisement for at-home dental kits).

# Final thoughts

All of the effort Steve has put into improving himself have made him an awesome, desirable dude.

His impeccable grooming, healthy lifestyle and positive sense of self are all attributes that make him attractive to women. More attractive than conventionally better-looking men who don’t make an effort.

If you want to sit around feeling sorry for yourself because you weren’t blessed with a chiselled jawline and a muscular frame, then you’ve already lost.

If you choose to make the best of your situation, work on yourself to such a point that your confidence will outshine your predisposed physical self, you’re in for a much happier, more fulfilling dating life. In fact, strike that, you're in for a much happier, more fulfilling life in general.

Also, in case you're wondering, Steve has been in a relationship for the past 18 months with a woman he describes as 'amazing'. They live together and he plans on proposing to her over the next 12 months.

[Here is a link to the original article.](https://www.menwithmanners.com/advice/confidence-is-more-important-than-looks)Best thing to do is read a little (use a resource recommended by others who got results). Then take action.

Live in reality. Not in the imaginary world created by other people's theories. Too much theory is bad for social situations. You don't need to do 100 things to connect with women. But if you believe you do, it might just become a self-fulfilling prophecy. And you will find yourself trapped in a fake reality.Was in the gym and saw this cute indian girl who was soooo my type. After much back and forth and my with my heart racing faster than a f1 car i went up to her and told her "hi i think youre kinda cute"

She giggled a bit but told me she had a bf and i just said sorry to bother you and left. Im super proud of myself though as its my first experience doing something like this and i cant help but smile and giggle to myself lol

Rejection makes you a stronger person and i know it will be a lot easier the next time :)

Edit: Thank you so much for the awards guys and all the love i cant tell you how much it all means to me!! This is such a wholesome community and you guys and girls are all kings and queens. I know i lack a lot of experience and maturity but please dont ever let rejection and heartbreak make you think your life is over or the world is gonna end. Nietsche was so right when he said what doesnt kill you makes you stronger and i promise all you guys that the pain in your lives all has the purpose of naking you better people. Much love folks :)

Edit 2: Holy shit this has got a lot more of a response than an i initally thought it would! You guys are all beautiful motherfuckers and dont you dare let anyone tell you otherwise!! I cant thank you guys enough for all the love and wonderful advice you guys have given me and while i do acknowledgement that perhaps approaching in the gym isnt the best place to do it. Lifes too short imo and i know i wouldve regretted it if i never said anything to her if you get what i mean.It's incredibly easy for a girl to lose interest if you are too available and persistent. It's happened to me so many times where a girl cancelled plans on me or didnt exactly follow through and I would try to suggest a follow up. Many times when I did the girl was less responsive, or in some cases, straight up ghosted me. Always be just out of reach. Play it cool and shut up. If she wants you she will make the effort. There is no point in pushing anything. She already knows you want to see her but she doesn't know how much you do. Better to keep it that way

Edit: to clarify things, this doesn't mean don't show any interest. This means don't push your interest when you feel she's pulling back a bit.Hey guys,

I'm a 5'6'', 28 year old Asian guy with an average physique. I don't work out and primarily focus on verbal game / day game to seduce women. I've been gaming consistently since November, 2019 - February, 2020. Took a (forced) three month hiatus due to the lockdown. Started back up June, 2020 - present.

So far, I've gotten 4 notches, 9 makeouts, and a ton of instadates. I'm currently at the point in my game where I'm able to hook + instadate girls, get a solid number, but I'm learning physical escalation.

However, I stagnated in my game. Like, I was able to kino, but it felt mechanical akin to doing an action just because.

After speaking with John Sonmez of Bulldog Mindset, he gave me invaluable advice which I think will take my game to the next level:

 *Sexual Mindset (aka Sexual Demeanor)*

  According to John Sonmez – the Bulldog Mindset himself – all my sets should come from a sexual frame. *“I want to fuck her”*, should be my mantra. Look her in the eyes, and say no matter what I have in my mind, with sexual desire.  

What’s more important than physical touch is a **sexual demeanor**. 

 Don’t focus on the techniques – what I do – but rather, *how I say it*. I can say the most mundane things, but the way I say it, and what I do with my hands say\* alot\* more than words alone. In fact, it’s usually way more powerful, because saying and doing “sexy” things while uncalibrated comes off as creepy.  

Hell, make strong eye contact and say things that are non-sexual, but say them in a sexual way.

You want to make it seem like she’s seducing you. Like she’s got some sort of magical power that’s making it difficult to control myself over her.

I am having this normal conversation, but I keep getting distracted by thinking about what I want to do to her.

 **Don’t say that, but be that.**

 Practice saying, “I want to fuck the shit out of you.”

 Then practice thinking, “I want to fuck the shit out of you,” while saying, “I really like the dress you’re wearing.”  

John strongly suggests I practice too far in order to figure out how far I can go. So, pretty much always go for the kiss during a date. Try your limits.So this is my first field report. I'm going to try to point out important moments along the way instead of just narrating my experiences. I hope someone finds it useful.

The Scene: A new coffee shop that opened in my neighborhood. I'm a writer and have been going there to get work done (and look like the soulful, tortured author). If you haven't done a coffee shop approach, they're fucking brilliant because there is precisely zero competition and plenty of girls who are there unaccompanied. Get an espresso, jack up your inner game, and go for it.

Anyhow, I walk in and immediately spot a cute brunette with glasses who's dicking around on Facebook instead of reading her biology textbook. I take a seat at the table kitty-corner to her and ignore her. She looks up, I pay her no mind. I pull out my laptop and get busy. Out of my peripheral vision I see that she looks up at me every couple of minutes. I'm trying to convey that I've not noticed her and have better things to do.

On about the fourth time she looks up, I look up at the same time and make eye contact and smile. She quickly looks back down to her computer and pretends it's no big deal. I continue to look in her direction for a couple more seconds because I know she's now in socially-awkward penguin mode and will glance up involuntarily to see if the coast is clear. When she looks up I smile again and make my move. 

Me: "Hi, excuse me. This is going to sound dumb. Are you trustworthy?"

Her: "What do you mean?" She makes a confused face.

Me: "I mean, do your friends consider you someone they trust."

Her: "I guess?" She looks a little apprehensive but not skeezed out, because she already feels weird about getting caught looking up at me.

Me: "Well, I brought the wrong power cord for my laptop and need to go grab the right one. I live just around the corner (establishes that I'm a normal dude from the neighborhood) and it will take like two minutes. Can I trust you to watch my laptop and fend off any bad guys who come along?" (Ben Franklin effect plus implied compliment that she looks trustworthy).

Her: "Haha. Yeah, I think I could do that."

Me: "I'm taking a big chance here."

Her: "What, you keep your whole life on there or something?" (Minor teasing, a good sign.)

Me: "Yes, all of my dark secrets." I start to walk away and then say, "No peeking!"

I do indeed have another power cord at home and go retrieve it. When I come back, she's trying to look busy but notices me immediately when I enter and smiles.

Her: "I only had to beat up, like, two dudes."

Me: "I so totally owe you. I'm J----." I reach out to shake her hand. Initiate the kino in a non-threatening manner. 

Her: "I'm K-----. And for the record, I didn't peek."

Me: "Your coffee is gone. Can I buy you a hot, caffeinated beverage as token of my gratitude? Or will that overstimulate you?" (Subtly suggestive language, escalate the interaction by buying her something. I know classic PUA theory dictates I should tell her to buy me something and maintain my alpha-ness, but that's retarded). 

Her: "I think I can handle it. How about a small skim latte?"

Me: "Whoa, that's a little fancier than what you had before (it's clear she had black coffee). Is this your game? You seduce men so they'll buy you luxurious $3 lattes?" (Introduce the idea of sex, flip the "game" around on her in a teasing way.)

Her: "That's just the first step. I'm dangerous." (Now I know I'm fucking golden. We've gone from bantering to sparring, and she's smiling a lot).

I go and get her latte and ask the barista to do the foam in the shape of a heart. When I return, I sit down at her table without asking and hand her the latte.

Me: "You pretty much bankrupted me with this." She notices the heart and I say, "The barista must think we're cute together." (Plant the idea of us as a couple - Inception mothafucka, do you speak it?)

Her: "I'll bet she just has a thing for you." (She subtly recognizes my value.)

I take her hand and look at her all super-serious and say, "If she thinks she can win me away from you, she's fooling herself. Our love has stood the test of time for, like, a whole five minutes." (Escalate the kino, further plant the idea of us a couple.) 

She laughs pretty hard at the joke and says, "That bitch, she'll never take you from me." She's got the look in her eyes now. Oh, it's beautiful.

We talk for about two hours, and I keep up with the idea of us being a couple. I say things like, "So, we're getting pretty serious, but I'm not sure I'm ready to meet your parents," and, "Darling, I can still remember the moment we met as if it were yesterday." She eats it up.

I was having an awesome time, and was digging her more than most girls. I decided that I wanted to go for a #- and D-close instead of the F-close, which I firmly believe could have happened if I pressed my luck (after all, my apartment is just around the corner).

I finished by saying, "I'm the one always doing the planning in this relationship. I think it's your turn to pick the date." We exchanged numbers, I confirmed with the "I'm going to text you naughty things" maneuver (she laughed a LOT - thanks for that one, seddit), and right before I left I moved in totally nonchalant and planted a small kiss on her lips, as if I'd done it a hundred times before (we were pretty serious, after all). I smirked and said, "See you soon, my love." 

And then I walked out of there on a fucking cloud.

**UPDATE:** First, I'm so glad that some of y'all found my FR valuable. I got some really great orangereds and am pumped to see any followups from people who borrow the techniques that worked for me. 

Seddit, I'm still recovering from a weekend rife with intercourse, so I'll keep this update brief. It went so well, and took so little effort on my part, that I can't even call it a field report proper. 

She planned the date (as I told her to) and we went to a local bar for a playful, rather vanilla S&M-themed party. I think it was her way of seeing how "down" I am with that lifestyle without freaking me out. I don't have a ton of experience with that sort of thing, but I'm very open-minded, and there were go-go dancers in leather so that's a plus. We dropped the whole "we're a couple" bit as an unspoken, as it seemed a little weird to carry it on. But the "real" chemistry was still there. Even amid all the peripheral sex of the bar we were in, we continued some excellent conversations we'd started in the coffee shop. She's a cognitive science PhD student and we had fantastic, geeky conversations about brains, minds, and computers. Even if we find out we're not compatible in the long term, I can tell she's someone I really want to have on my side. 

After we got a little buzz going, I invited her back to my apartment, ostensibly to "make cookies." Let's just say that I never even got to pre-heat the oven. We didn't go to sleep until 11:30 the next morning, and she stayed until...what time is it now? About two hours ago. Anyway, this is not a forum for bragging...but I'm still a little giddy so consider this my one little piece of braggadocio.

One of the commenters said that the above technique is great if you're looking for an LTR. I couldn't agree more. I enjoy casual sex, but find that the experience is much more intense and fulfilling with someone who I have an intellectual and emotional connection with. I've slept with three girls from daytime approaches now, and all of them turned into at least ongoing flings instead of one-and-dones.

For everyone who said "this is too good to be true," as the person actually living it I'm inclined to agree. It's a bit surreal for me given how AFC I was a year ago. What you don't see with this FR is all of the times I struck the fuck out, all the crises of confidence, etc. There's a reason I didn't post an FR until this one - there weren't any that really seemed awesome enough to post.

As for whether it's exaggerated: No. This is exactly how it went down. I chalk it up to stumbling on someone with whom I have awesome chemistry -- after hundreds of approaches. 

Keep your game strong, my friends. I look forward to reading of your adventures!These are the biggest mistakes I see guys make in the field. Some of these may seem contradictory to you, and that’s ok – gaming women is a complex dance that involves a variety of tensions.

**1) Getting her number before forming an emotional connection.** A lot of guys think real life is like the movies, where success is just getting her the number. That’s completely wrong. Girls give out their numbers like hotcakes - sometimes just to get you to go away, sometimes because they like the attention. If you only speak to a woman for 5 minutes and ask for her number, she might give it you, but there is a huge chance that she will forget who you are and not text you back. The longer and deeper of an emotional connection you form with a woman the more likely she is to text you back. I would say that anything less than 30 minutes is generally a waste of time unless she falls in love with you on the spot, which is rare.

In an ideal interaction, she is so excited to meet you she is begging to give you her number by the end of the interaction. You won’t even need to ask.

**2)** **Buying a woman things.** Again, real life isn’t like the movies. You don’t need to buy a woman a drink to talk to her. In fact, buying a woman a drink is unattractive because it implies that you feel like you need to do something to validate yourself to her. Buying her a drink also puts pressure on her because it indicates that you expect something back. You should be conveying the opposite emotion – the woman should be doing things to validate herself to you. You should only buy a woman a drink if she buys you a drink first or has done something equivalently valuable for you. Only after you have been hanging out with her for a long and she has become emotionally invested in you is it ok for you to buy her a drink. And even then, if she is attracted to you she will argue with you and insist on paying. If a woman asks you to buy her a drink, she is either shit testing you or she is just trying to hustle you for a drink and doesn’t actually care about hanging out with you.

Ideally, the woman offers to buy you a drink.

**3)** **Letting the woman take the lead.** As the man, it is your responsibility to lead the interaction in all respects and make it fun and interesting: you must lead the conversation, determine the activities, and even determine the physical locations of your bodies. Women want men to lead. If you fail at this, you are not attractive. And if she insists on leading, she is probably not attracted to you.

**4)** **Not escalating emotionally.** Again, it is your responsibility as the man to make the interaction fun and exciting, which means you must constantly escalate the emotional subject matter of the conversation. If you spend 10 minutes talking to a woman about something boring and stupid she will get bored of the conversation and of you. You should constantly scan the environment, her, and the conversation to find something interesting and exciting to talk about. For example, if she is talking about her dog you can interrupt and say “if your dog could talk to you, what do you think he would say?” If she is talking about her boss is an asshole, you can interrupt and say “let’s go find and murder your boss right now.” It is your job to find emotionally exciting things.

Escalating emotionally is the key to game and also the hardest thing you need to get good at. It requires creativity, courage and confidence. You must feel free to change the subject to completely random, off the wall topics if it will make the interaction more fun. The easiest way to escalate emotionally is to find things that yourself think are fun and interesting.

**5) Being low energy.** A common trait in guys who are good with women is that they are high energy, animated, and enthusiastic. Deep down, our subconscious minds know that energy = fun. Being high energy is especially important when first approaching because you need to break that invisible social barrier that keeps people from talking to strangers. As a naturally introverted, low-energy person, it pains me to write this, because my natural state is chill and relaxed, but I know that a stranger is not going to talk to me unless I show some enthusiasm and excitement. You don’t have to be spastic and animated the whole night, but you need to show some flashes of energy.

Interactions become low energy usually because you have failed to escalate emotionally. If you and her are talking about something fun and interesting, you naturally become hyped up.

**6) Approaching timidly.** You should approach women head on, with purpose, and make yourself the center of her attention. Approaching a woman from the side, or her periphery, or in any way that doesn’t show full commitment will fail. This is the biggest mistake men make that I see – they don’t want to risk rejection, so they kind of “half approach” so that they can slink away if she is not interested. Fuck that. You need to commit to the approach and risk rejection. This is related to being high energy. If you approach in any low energy way, she will not be interested.

**7) Acting needy.** Asking, begging, being too pushy, putting pressure on her, overstaying your welcome – all of these are death. You should always assume attraction, but if she does something to make clear she is not interested in you, move on.

Ideally, the woman should feel like she is lucky to be around you, and you are ready to walk away at any moment if the interaction stops being fun for you.

**8)** **Not escalating sexually.** Women will very rarely escalate an interaction sexually unless they are super drunk, horny, or desperate, which is rare, so it is your responsibility to escalate sexually. If you don’t, she might assume that you really just want to be her friend. And women often hit a tipping point where they have decided they want to go home and fuck you – at that point, you need to take her home. If you dilly dally after she hits that tipping point, she will think you are a pussy.

Ideally, all you usually need to do is say one or two things that indicate that your ultimate end goal is sex. You don’t need to make everything a sex joke or pressure her.

**9)** **Acting too thirsty.** Although you should escalate sexually, you should not act thirsty, desperate, or like getting laid is a big deal to you. Like I said before – one or two sexual comments or jokes is usually all you need. Your attitude towards her should be “I might fuck you if you are lucky.” I have seen many instances where a woman says or does something sexual, and the man becomes a drooling idiot after that. Play it cool.

**10)** **Not challenging her.** If you laugh at all of your jokes, agree with everything she says, and generally make her feel like you will do anything in your power to make her happy, she will lose attraction to you. Women want to be challenged and raised to a higher level by the man they are with. To that end, you must maintain the integrity of your frame. If she says something that is stupid or that you disagree with, call her out on it, but in a good-hearted joking way. One time I made fun of a girl for 10 minutes because she tried to pull a door that said “push.” She was laughing just as hard.

The message you are trying to send is “I have high standards, and you must work to meet those standards, but so far I like you and you are doing well, so keep up the good work.”

**11)** **Being a douchebag irrationally.** While challenging her is good, you should not make the challenge too difficult. If she decided to go to medical school and become a Christian, you “challenging” her on that is not going to lead anywhere good because those are pretty important decisions she made and she is not going to change them because you criticized those decisions. Generally speaking, your challenges must be easy for her to overcome: you challenge an opinion of hers, or something small she did, etc… Challenging things that she considers “essential” to herself will not end well. If you some kind of massive disagreement or incompatibility with her, just ignore it and move on: arguing with her over politics, religion, or some other massive thing in a club with a woman will never got well.

Also, a lot of guys act irrationally douchey to women because they read on the internet that “women like assholes.” That’s wrong – women like confident, dominant men who don’t put with any bullshit – they don’t like guys that are mean to them for no reason. If you are mean to her for no reason you are just showing her that you are insecure.

**12)** **Ignoring her friends.** One thing I hate about the PUA community is this idea that your goal is to “isolate” her and “steal” her from her friends. Most girls do not want their friends to be “isolated” from them and a woman’s friends can often veto her going home with you. When a woman is with her friends, I suggest that you respectfully introduce yourself to her friends and check in with them occasionally throughout the night. But make no mistake – your attention should remain primarily on the target – you don’t want her thinking that you might like her friends more than her.

Ideally, you become part of the group rather than “random creepy guy that is trying to get with our friend.” If things are going really well, you can become the leader of the whole group. Oftentimes, when women get really into you, they start to completely ignore and forget about their friends. At these moments, I suggest that you occasionally check in with her friends, even if she doesn’t want to, just to remain in their good graces. Oftentimes, I am doing more to ensure that she remains a good friend than she is.

**13)** **Flexing on other guys.** Most guys feel like they need to look more “alpha” than other guys, so they act douchey or aggressive when other guys come into the picture. That’s a huge mistake. Women are wired to look for the alpha male, but acting douchey to other guys indicates to her that you are actually insecure and feel threatened by other guys. You should be super nice to every other guy you run into, even if he is trying to fuck your girl. If and when he wears out his welcome by becoming annoying or douchey (which 99% of the time they will be) then you can say to her “hey, let’s go somewhere else” and she will follow you. And if the woman actually stays to talk to the other guy, then guess what, she didn’t like you anyway and acting like a douche wasn’t going to help you.

**14)** **Trying to entertain her rather than yourself.** The most attractive thing a man can do is genuinely have fun, with her somehow contributing to that fun. If she feels like you are doing something you don’t want to do just to make her like you, she will lose attraction. At the same time, you should not be selfish and only amuse yourself with shit she doesn’t give a fuck about.

Ideally, you do something you genuinely enjoy AND she genuinely enjoys, with you taking the lead.

**15)** **Being negative.** Don’t ever, ever, ever, be negative with a woman you have just met. Ever. I don’t care what the facts are – If a nuclear bomb just destroyed the next city over, make a fun joke about it. Confidence is positivity, and if you cannot be positive women will not be attracted to you. Once you get to know each other and emotionally invest in each other, you can start to talk about your dislikes, fears, and problems, but at the beginning you must be positive. Also, you don’t know anything about her, so all the things you are criticizing may be her favorite things. One time I approached a woman and said this DJ sucks and she says “oh the DJ is my best friend. I came to see him.”

**16)** **Selfishly bringing your baggage into the conversation.** Did you have a rough day? Are you mad at Trump? Do you think feminism is stupid? Did you just watch a movie you want to talk about? Guess what – nobody gives a fuck. A woman you just met is not an emotional tampon for you to vent to about your stupid feelings. Women want to have fun, and if you are negatively affecting their fun with your negativity and personal baggage, they will move on.

**17)** **Getting butthurt.** Any woman worth a damn will immediately and relentlessly shit test a random guy who tries to talk to her. Oftentimes the hotter and more fun the girl, the more vicious the shit test. Most guys get butthurt and offended when women are mean to them and try to “win” the interaction by being a douchebag back to her. Bad move. The way to “win” a shit test is to laugh it off like a 2 year old is kicking you in the shin.

Of course, sometimes women are just angry, miserable assholes and in those cases you should just walk away. The test to determine whether you should walk way is the following: are you having fun battling her shit tests or are you just having a hostile conversation with a jerk?

**18)** **Accepting her bullshit.** If she is not focusing on you and treating you with respect, move on. If she is making you wait, being disrespectful to you, talking to other guys, or otherwise negatively affecting your fun time, don’t waste your time. Sometimes women want to just dance and get attention from guys, and it is not your responsibility to indulge that if she is not going to fuck you.

**19)** **Making excuses and assumptions.** The main thing that fucks guys up in the field is that they make excuses for not approaching, for bailing out of conversations, etc… They will use every excuse in the book: she is not hot enough for me, she is out of my league, she is probably not into guys like me, etc… All of these excuses rely on assumptions. Stop making assumptions about women you don’t know and just dive in! You will be surprised at what you find.

**20)** **Acting weird.** When you watch most guys talk to women, they become a completely different person than they are in real life. They put on a character that they think women will like, often based on what they see in TV shows or movies. Don’t do that. You should talk to a woman the same way you talk to your friend or your bratty little sister. The only difference is that 1) you drop a few jokes about how you want to fuck her, 2) you compliment her and make sure she feels included. Otherwise, act normal.There are two ways your life can go.

You can be scared of rejection and ridicule. You can pass on countless opportunities with hot girls and let them walk into the bedrooms of other dudes. You can let fear of failure prevent you from every trying. You can talk yourself out of getting the girls you want because it might be “creepy.”

Or

You can make the commitment to yourself to BECOME A NEW MAN. To let the past go and focus only on improving yourself at every moment. You can go after and score MANY hot women in your life. You can have the sex life and the love life that you’ve always wanted.

It all comes down to a CHOICE that you make for yourself.

Tony Robbins says it best: **Life is a choice.**

The choice to change is the single biggest difference between guys who succeed and guys who fail.

Whether you know it or not. Whether you like it or not. Whether you accept it or not. Getting hot girls interested in you, chasing you and ultimately fucking your brains out, IS A CHOICE.

Sure, you will fail along the way. You will get rejected. You will get laughed at. You will embarrass yourself.  You will be scared. You will be nervous.

But does any of that shit matter when you’re banging the hot babes which right now seem to be out of your reach?

If you get rejected by 9 hot girls and bang the 10th……does any of that shit matter?

If you’re ready to Make The Choice, the here are 8 Key Components of Attraction to focus on:

# Eye Contact:

You know that eye contact is critical. You know that it can make the difference between intense attraction and the girl losing interest. So why don’t you do something about it? Why are you still dropping your eyes away the moment they lock with a girls?

&#x200B;

**HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT:** Get caught looking at a girl in the eyes, on purpose. Meet eyes with her and don’t look away. Hold for 2 seconds. Let that sexual tension build. Let your pulse pound. Let your hands sweat. And then after 2 seconds, say something. Wave. Smile. Do something to initiate contact. Who cares what you say? Just say something.

# Body Language:

You know this is literally more important than anything you say. How you handle yourself is the biggest differentiator between "attractive" and "not attractive". Highly confident body language combined with average conversational skills will bed more women than nervous body language combined with the best conversational skills in the world. So why does your body language communicate that you’re nervous around her?

**HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT:** Walk around like you OWN THE PLACE. Pick your favorite masculine character (e.g. James Bond) and ask yourself at every moment: “How would Bond walk right now?” “How would Bond sit right now?” “How would bond look at this chick?” *Then just do that.* Mimic what you want to become and guess what….in not to long you will actually become it.

# Tone of Voice:

Are you saying things with the intent to “please her.” To “avoid controversy.” To “avoid upsetting her.” To “impress her?” All of that communicates the wrong tone of voice. Her subconscious can hear it, even if you don’t realize it.

**HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT:** Change your intent. Say things with the intent of “pleasing yourself.” Say things that make you smirk. Say things to impress yourself. Say whatever comes to mind with ABSOLUTELY NO FILTER. Be completely indifferent to whether she’s impressed or not. Doing that will actually MAKE HER IMPRESSED.

# Escalate Kino:

Are you still shaking hands? Are you still afraid to bump into her? Are you letting fear of touching her cause the attraction to fizzle away?

**HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT:** When you first meet a girl, go in for the Friendly Hug. Seriously. That is your new version of shaking hands. Make it your version. When you meet her, just raise that single arm and act like the Friendly Hug is how things are done. Hugging right from the beginning shows you’re comfortable and confident. It shows you’re not afraid of girls.

When you lean in to tell her something (like in loud venues) put your arm around her. It’s all about HOW you do it. Show no hesitation. Just do it. It’s your normal mode of operation.  If it’s not a loud setting and you’re not leaning in. Just touch her arm or shoulder when saying something from time to time. Particularly like on “omg…” moments.

# Have Friends That Are Girls:

Girls are more attracted to you when they see you with other girls. That is a plain and simple fact. They see a guy who is in-demand. They see a guy who isn’t needy for HER attention because he has the attention of other girls.

**HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT:** Get as many friends that are girls as you can. Fat. Ugly.  Skinny. Hot. Doesn’t matter. Girls always know other girls and are eager to introduce you to her friends. Being introduced to a girl, by a girl that she trusts, makes you a hot commodity. Surround yourself with women and you will be amazed how much attention from OTHER GIRLS you suddenly start getting.

# Conversation:

You know how easy it is to make Epic Conversation with a girl? It is REALLY EASY if you do one simple thing. GET OUT OF YOUR HEAD. Seriously, stop THINKING ABOUT WHAT TO SAY and JUST START TALKING.

**HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT:** Realize that your mind is your biggest enemy when it comes to conversation. Your mind will constantly try to figure out “the right thing to say” and the “best way to say things.” Your mind will distract you while SHE’S TALKING. You won’t be paying attention to her because you’re too busy thinking about what to say next.

So just IGNORE YOURSELF. Be completely present in the conversation. Listen to what she is saying. And then respond with whatever comes to mind. No hesitation. No filter. Complete confidence. Total assumption that whatever you are saying is “the most interesting thing she’s every heard.”

# Have Fun With Game:

If you’re not having fun picking up girls, then why bother? Game should not be a chore. Game should not be stressful.

**Here’s How To Fix It:** Let loose. Have fun with everything you’re doing. If you get rejected. Fun. If you get the number. Fun. If you get laid. Fun. It doesn’t matter. Approaching life with this carefree attitude will instantly make you more attractive. When you let loose, it gives her the opportunity to let loose. If you’re uptight and nervous. She will be uptight and nervous. You’ve heard that laughter is contagious right? Well so is letting loose and so is being uptight and nervous. Show her the fun side and she will mirror it. Girls are ATTRACTED to fun emotions. Having fun releases fun emotions. It’s like casting out the fishing hooks of FUN and reeling girls in.

# Have Options:

Girls always go for the guys that other girls want. The more options you give yourself, the more additional options will present themselves. All these problems: neediness, oneitis, too much texting, falling for a girl that simply smiles at you – these are all caused by the same thing: LACK OF OPTIONS.

**Here’s How To Fix It:** Make a rule for yourself. That rule is, every time you meet a girl, you HAVE TO immediately go meet two other girls. For example, you get a hot girls number. Well then right now, before 30 minutes is up, you go get two more numbers. Now you have 3 girls in the hopper. ALWAYS HAVE AT LEAST 3 GIRLS IN THE HOPPER. Always. The more girls you have available, the less you will text each one. The less you will subconsciously express neediness for each one. The less you will care what each one thinks. All of this makes you instantly more attractive. When you have 1 girl on the line it’s easy to get ghosted. When you have 3, it’s easy to get laid (possibly by all 3 of them).

# It's Your Decision

The decision to change your behavior truly comes down to a CHOICE. Do you want to change or not? Can you just get over yourself and go through some rejections and failures to reach the promise land?

No one can force you to change, only you have that power. **You can read shit about changing for the rest of your life and remain exactly the same.** Change comes only when you make the choice.

Make the choice to HAVE FUN with game. It really is a GAME. So treat it like a game and you will find it completely exhilarating.

\--

For tips on creating massive attraction in a girl, check out this video on [Why Girls Ghost](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iKxHwQ4nWhg) (And How To Create The Attraction That Makes Her Chase instead of Ghost).   And I just launched my YouTube so if you're feeling the content, consider subscribing.  Lots more videos coming out regularly.

New Videos To Up Your Game:

[Mad Social Circle Game To Get Chicks Fighting Over You (In College or Anywhere)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qoP1luCOiM)

[Destroy Approach Anxiety and Approach Any Girl](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3m_NJJDJVs)

[Pass Any Shit Test (Because it's all a Mental Game Anyway)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XATupxHRz_I) 

[How To Get Out Of The Friend Zone (The Only Way)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X4rt0Fv4R2w)Gentlemen, talking to a member of the opposite sex is the simplest thing to do yet the hardest thing to do simply. All my life I've seen guys in real life who are total badasses get flustered and tongue-tied when attempting to make small talk with the woman they liked and it was always mind blowing to me why that happens, but after a few years of experience I believe I found an interesting list of items that you should keep in mind when talking to a girl.


1. Hygiene, hygiene, hygiene. 
Gentlemen, you cannot approach a woman with any hope if you're smelling like a $1.5 ramen cup. Get a clean haircut, shave, shower, brush your teeth and out on some cologne. Keyword here being "some" if it smells like you were swimming in the stuff its gonna be very off putting. Just a couple of sprays to draw them in, but not to many that they'll smell you from a block away. 


2. Have some sort of fashion sense.
And by that i don't mean dressing like a pimp. You just need to look like you actually gave it a thought and not just wearing whatever is not too dirty *for reference, go back to #1*. Also, if you want to go all out and wear all designer stuff you do you. But I'm telling you a simple white tee, dirty jeans, and a pair of sexy Nike's will win her over every time.


3. DON'T be yourself. 
Controversial this one eh? I'm sure you've all heard the famous "be yourself" advice at some point or another during your lives, but gentlemen the matter of the fact is this, you are here because you want something more. You are not happy with who you are and you are committed to becoming a whole brand new you. So start acting like it. Make a list, write down all the aspects that you want your future you to have. Then do your goddamn best to do them every single day. Trust me, by time you'll get so good at them and they will become a part of your character. But growth takes time, so give it time and be patient. 


4. HIT. THE. GYM.
Being a numbers guy myself i always liked to relate any decision in my life to statistics so i can make the most efficient decision. With that being said, most studies regarding romantic partners show that almost 70% of women are attracted to men that make them feel safe. Now this may be interpreted to many things which we will discuss futher ahead but for this point i chose talking about your body and size. Gentlemen, I'm not gonna waste our time telling you about the benefits of the gym and having a balanced diet. We all have heard enough of that. What i will say is that i always see a lot of old dudes in the gym busting their asses vs a couple of young lads just messing around. Regret is stronger than gratitude. Take your chance before it's too late.


5. Have a hobby/something your passionate about. 
I can't stress this enough. Being passionate about something and talking about it with fire and desire is the single handedly the most attractive thing any person can do. Let me get you in on a secret, in my whole life I've never been rejected/turned down from an interview. Reason? I always wanted to be there. I always wanted to have that job and do that thing. Life's too short to be doing things that you dislike genuinely. Find something you love, and let it kill you. 


6. Have a reliable source of finance. 
Here's probably the one i hate the most but it is inevitable. Gentlemen, in order to provide for your partner and yourself you need to have money and a lot of it. If you're working a minimum wage job, that's okay. Learn how to save up and invest in various projects that will offer you more sources of income. Also here's a tip, always have some money saved up just for your partner. That way if you ever mess up you can always get them something thoughtful or even spoil her on a special occasion. Make your woman fall in love with you.


7. "If you want to achieve a longterm goal, forget about it."
This is probably my favourite quote i ever heard in TED talk. Gentlemen, if you want massive gains in the gym what do you do? You plan a diet, a workout routine, and stick to them and eventually you will get results. You don't look in the mirror everyday and think about how far off you are from achieving your goals. This applies the same, plan a routine, stick to it and fall in love with process and with time you will achieve your goals. 


To conclude, i would like to also point out that these keys can also be interpreted as self improvement rather than seducing because gentlemen the truth is if you don't find yourself amazing and attractive chances are most women won't either. If you start doing the little things that make you feel good it will become contagious and people will want to be around you even more. That means that you will handle rejections better, and you will deal with approval so much better. I also decided to exclude any of my personal experiences as i didn't want to sound like the assbutt show off and ought to keep it real simple on my point of view. Lastly, these keys are necessities and anyone using them will get results. And always remember, you are a badass.EDIT : I wasn't expecting so much engagement for my post. Thanks you all for your feedbacks !
Also added a new training tip

I often read about people asking for tips and advices for their seduction game in real life. Most of the time, the advices are the same : be confident, create a connection, make her laugh etc... 
However, as we all know, it is wayyyyyyy easier said than done. 

So, based on my own experience and opinion, if I can give you only one piece of advice, it would be summarized in two words : **EYE CONTACT**

**WHY ?**

In my opinion, eyes are more expressive than what we say, than how we behave. 
When around a bear in the wild, it is said that we should avoid looking at the bear in the eye because it could be perceived as a form of challenge. 

Thus, I believe that our mammal brain is hardwired to read in people's eyes. Through eye contact, we show to our enemies that we are not intimidated, nor afraid. To our beloved ones, we show that we care for them. To our targets, we show that we are interested but also confident. 

That's the reason why maintaining eye contact is an undeniable proof of our value, of our confidence. 

**HOW ?**

When around a girl you are interested in, try to make eye contact as much as possible. 
I'll explain it in two examples :

- You are dating a girl for the first time. From the moment you see her, look at her deep in the eyes. Don't look away, smile at her. She should react the same way. During the whole date, try to keep eye contact with her. If she is not intimidated by your eye contact, why should you ? 
Still, do not stare at her like a mad man. It's okay to look away from time to time. The key point is to make eye contact again later on. 


- You are in a casual environment with people you know around, like a party or even in class. Be aware of your environment and people around you. Try to notice if girls are looking in your direction. If they do, that means they are interested. 
From now on, try to look at her while she is looking at you. If an eye contact is made, do not be the first to look away. It is really likely that she will turn her look away, probably because she has been surprised that you looked at her. If possible, try to make a first contact with her. Still, do not forget to keep eye contact ! 
If not possible, continue this little game with her : look at her, wait for her to look at you, smile at her. 
Just with this little game, a connection has been created between both of you. You two are not 100% sure of the other's interest, but you know that something is going on.  

**TRAINING**

Our mouth can lie, but not our body nor our eyes. 
Thus, I understand that making eye contact while we are not really confident is difficult. 

Tip 1

To train my eye contact, every morning, I spend 5 minutes in front of the mirror. 
When I'm fully dressed and cleaned, I just look at my eyes in the mirror, for as long as possible. At first, you might be intimidated by your own eyes. 
Now, just think about it. Think about how ridiculous it is, to be intimidated by its own look. 
Then, as the days go on, you will be more and more comfortable with making eye contact with yourself and also with others. 

Tip 2

In your daily life, try to look people you interact with in the eyes as much as possible. For example, when buying groceries, when saying hello and goodbye to the cashier, look at him/her in the eyes. On the one hand, you'll gain in confidence, also, it is much more polite.





**Thanks for reading**

Here is my quick contribution to this subreddit. Hope it might be useful to you guys. To finish, I would like to state that this is only based on my own experience. Feel free to give your point of view in the comments. 
And if you have some questions, you can still PM me. 

Cheers.Supid shit:

* What people think of you
* Whether x girl likes you or not
* If you'll be rejected or not
* Whether society says you should have x or y
* If you live up to x or y standard

Fellas, nothing has changed over the course of thousands of years. History has always favored the men who go out into the world and build lives that they want. Men who don't ask for permission to succeed, they just fucking do it.

Stop worrying about rejection, if you find her attractive and you want to sleep with her, do what it's gonna take to make it happen. You are pursuing her to sleep with her, it's always a fuck yeah or a fuck no, you can't maybe sleep with someone. It's something that happens or it doesn't so why get all worried about whether it's going to happen or not?

Girls will say no, some will be nicer than others, some will react totally out of order but guess what. This is true of humans in every situation, you ask your flatmate to clean more and he gets upset. You tell an employee they can't just slack off, they give you back chat and excuses.

It's all just a clash of ideals and beliefs, the girls your successful with like who you are, the ones who reject you don't. You have no idea of knowing why (perhaps it's the x years of totally different life experiences?).

So, are you going to keep worrying and thinking about **stupid shit** or are you going to go out and get the success you want in life.1. *Neediness is largely a bad mental habit, treat it that way.* Neediness is actually a manifestation of anxiety. Even if you're not actually feeling anxious, your brain will follow the bad habits anyway. So if neediness is an issue for you, look at it as combating anxiety. Meditate, gain mindfulness, and face your fears.


2. *A bad decision is far better than no decision.* If a girl is into you, you'll have far more wiggle room then you think. So stop being afraid to make mistakes. A bad decision is also a learning experience, treat it that way. *Edit: another important thing is to stand by your decisions, even if they're the wrong one. That doesn't mean never apologize and never change your mind, just that it's better to own a bad decision honestly than to try too hard to undo one, because it's tryhard. No girl expects you to be perfect, and in fact they'll be impressed if you can shrug off mistakes.*


3. *If she pulls back, you pull back.* Nearly every girl can and will do a pullback on you at some point. Often it is a test, or happens for reasons that have nothing to do with you - she does or should have a life of her own after all. All you have to do is be patient, and often after a week or two she'll come to you. There is literally nothing to be gained by chasing her, and by the time you're experienced enough to know when to break this rule, you won't need me to tell you.


4. *The three sure-fire signs of interest are in order - initiation, reciprocation, and compliance.* The reason why is because they all signal investment. Those are your cues to escalate and take risks.


5. *Stop being afraid of eye contact, it's your friend.* This should be almost self-explanatory. Even if you're on the spectrum, you can tell a lot about how a girl is feeling by the way she looks at you. The trick is to feel, not think and hone your intuition by learning when and how to trust it. You're not a body language expert and you don't need that level of insight 95% of the time.


6. *Give her vulnerability when she's earned it.* This is how you root attraction and build an emotional connection. This is also how you keep your level of investment in line with hers. You're not playing hard to get, especially when that's actually what girls want. For instance, when a girl propositions you out of the blue, it's actually unsettling, because it makes no sense and doesn't feel earned. That's how girls feel when a guy gives them what she wants too soon.


7. *When in doubt, don't be afraid to pull back yourself.* The wrong time to pull back is when you have some momentum with the girl and she's sending the signs. If things are weird or awkward or seemingly stalled, sometimes pulling back and doing you is exactly the right move. Often times this happens because she doesn't know how she feels, or is distracted by something, or you overinvested a little and made her doubt you. As Robert Greene says - use absence to increase respect and honor.


8. *Always be on your purpose.* This is how you stay off your phone, stop overthinking, and react to girls texting you as a pleasant distraction, rather than something taking up far too many mental cycles. Men need to have a life outside of women, both for her, and for you. Your independence does for your love life what her looks does for hers. You need it.


9. *Women trust men who are who they say they are and do what they say they'll do.* One of the guardrails against neediness is having a strong identity. When you know what you like and want and aren't afraid to live by it, women understand you better. It's your vulnerable side that confuses them because they fear that's who you really are and your identity is nothing more but a thin social mask. When you show you have a strong identity that works in harmony with your shadow side, then she feels she can trust the way you present yourself and can wrap her head around the contradictions that are present in every person and many men try very very hard to hide - in itself, a needy behavior.


10. *Abundance mentality.* Doesn't matter who you are, dating will always be on some level a numbers game. Even if you're compatible with a lot of women, not every woman will be compatible with you. You cannot be afraid to walk away from a sub-optimal situation, and it's actually kind of liberating when you do. But the secret is to always be chatting up new girls, and letting girls go on the back burner, especially if that's where they want to be because they plan on circling back when they can. You'd be surprised how often this happens. But the secret is not being set on making it with any one particular girl at any one particular time.I meditate daily and found out about this trick in r/Meditation. 

This trick is a meditation technique but it's very simple and doesn't involve sitting with your legs crossed and doing that weird thing with your hands, I don't even know what that's called [😂](https://emojikeyboard.org/copy/Face_with_Tears_of_Joy_Emoji_%F0%9F%98%82?utm_source=extlink).

When you are talking to girls/about to approach a girl/about to have sex with a girl/about to eat a girl's ass, you get the point, basically you want to practice this 24/7 and as often as possible. 

Not only will this trick make you more confident and lower your anxiety, but doing this meditation as much as I possibly could on a daily basis has SIGNIFICANTLY lowered my depression and improved my overall mood. Meditation in general is very effective at improving your quality of life.

The trick is to look anywhere, softly. Gently focus on what you see in your peripheral vision. That's it!

Focusing on peripheral vision apparently engages the parasympathetic nervous system, calms you down, and stops internal monologue. 

It's literally impossible for the parasympathetic nervous system and fight or flight mode to be active at the same time. Whenever you're feeling any sort of negative emotion just spread out your vision, focus on your peripheral vision, and you'll notice you instantly won't feel those negative emotions anymore.

This so far is one of the most valuable things I've learned in my life because it allows me to be completely calm, centered, and balanced in any situation, even the most stressful situations.Today I did my first direct approach. I've done some shitty indirect approaches that never went anywhere before though. I'm 19, and I've been fearing the cold approach since I was 15. I FINALLY FUCKING DID IT. I've walked past thousands of girls I wanted to approach and regretted it. My biggest fear was embarrassing myself or something. My primal fear of approaching a girl had killed me for 4+years. I especially was scared of what other people think as they are walking past me, judging me.

Today I finally fucking did it after 2 hrs of walking around at a massive shopping center. I direct approached some chick who was with her friend.

My game was pretty weak. I didn't build attraction through a convo (in fact I barely had a convo in the first place), was quite nervous (usually I'm a confident person, but I couldn't comprehend I actually DIRECTLY approached a girl so I wasn't thinking straight), etc.

So yes, I did get rejected. But now I feel fucking proud. Happiest moment of my life maybe. Guess what, as the girl was rejecting me with her line, I saw some guy staring at me as he walked past me, judging me, one of my  original fears. And I didn't even give a FUCK. I felt amazing. The feeling of knowing you had the balls to approach is better than any thing. Rejection tasted fucking delicious. Tomorrow I'm going again, and I can't wait to get rejected some more. I am, however, gonna try to improve my game bc this first one was fucking wack.Instead of focusing energy specifically on interacting with attractive women, learn to be generally charismatic with everyone. Charisma stems from having a genuine interest in people and treating everyone the same, both men and women.

This is vitally important when you finally talk to an attractive woman, because your general energy and mannerisms will be the same, with an added element of sexual energy displayed through your body language, eyes, and slightly more playful demeanor.

As much as others want to say outward appearance doesn’t matter, it does. Greatly. If you have two guys with the same level of social skills, where one guy well-fitted clothes, stays fit, and maintains his grooming, while they other guy is schlemp, the guy who takes care of himself will almost always come out on top.

Finally, women are attracted to status in men. To deny this is delusional. Status doesn’t necessarily mean having money, but rather being established with his goals, or actively working towards those goals. Potential can be just as attractive as success, if a woman sees determination backed by action.

Finer logistics matter somewhat in attraction, but the main thing to remember is to not be needy and work to have an abundance mindset. If this mindset is adopted with the previously mentioned characteristics, you will already be ahead.I'm going to get right to it and share a simple insight that changed my entire approach to attracting and dating women.

Ultimately, it really comes down to **who you're** ***being*** **during your interactions with the women you are attracted to.**

While guys who don't get laid are in the gym pumping up their muscles, buying expensive clothes, and learning memorized lines.....the ones who are actually succeeding with women are simply stepping out into the world and taking their shots with these lovely ladies...**man to woman.**

Here's the deal, women will almost *always* be more concerned about your **behavior/personality** over your looks.

That's not to say that your looks/grooming/style don't matter, they're just not the **MOST** important factor when she's sizing you up as a man.

When you're around an attractive women with whom you would like to get naked with, your brain starts to do all sorts of funny things because it's predisposed to wanting to spread your seed and create offspring.

Unfortunately, this can impact your behavior/energy negatively and cause you to start **acting strange, needy, try-hard, and supplicating to the woman** since you've now put her on a pedestal in your mind.

* You start feigning false interest in things about her that you don't *really* care about (as opposed to expressing your opinions/feelings honestly).
* When she challenges/tests you (which she will), you cave-in because you "don't want to fuck this up".
* You start playing it safe and acting small because you're afraid of "upsetting her" and losing your shot.
* Even worse, you start **giving off a vibe of neediness/weakness** because you *need* this to work out so you can get laid (which she can sense **without hesitation**).

Long story short, **you stop acting like a man**...and this more or less seals your fate as being another poor chump who will **not** sleep with her.

So ask yourself....why are you acting this way?

How is it that this stranger (or a girl you already know) is causing you to **think and act** like a weakling?...

...**SHE'S JUST A GIRL.** Plain and simple.

There are *billions* of them out there and they are all human, **just like you**.

She doesn't look the same without make-up. She has to shit and wipe herself just like you do. She is prone to folly and making mistakes like any other person on this planet.

You're turning her into a fabricated prize for no good reason.

So, what's the solution here? **Stop taking her so seriously and just enjoy your damn self.**

When you're interacting with her (whether it's the initial approach or a subsequent interaction) **remind yourself that she's** **just a girl** and have your fun. Tease her, challenge her, and remember that you have nothing to prove and nothing to lose with this girl.

Basically, **flirt with her like a self-assured man whose just having a good time and isn't worried about any sort of outcome**.....because **that** is what is going to trigger her feelings of sexual attraction for you more than anything else.

This may sound simple and obvious in theory, but I **promise** you that until you've trained your instincts and really reflected on your behavior around women...you're most likely being overridden by your dumb monkey brain and doing things that are actively working against you.

Stop thinking like a beggar who *needs* this girl in order to get something from her... **and start thinking** **like a** **self-respecting man of firm value whose gracefully enjoying the ride of life**.

Most importantly, **flirt** with her like a confident, relaxed, outcome independent, and emotionally-stable human being  ....and do it from a loving place.

That's how you become a charming and attractive man who draws women to himself and genuinely turns them on...

...and guess what?

**That's exactly what she wants, dumbass.**

Cheers.There are a lot of gay guys that go to my gym and every once in awhile I'll have one start to hit on me. This has given me a good idea of what it feels like to be on the receiving end of a guy's approach. Now I have a better understanding of how it feels to be a woman being approached because I believe that guys are guys and whether they prefer women or men the way they flirt with either is the exact same.

I have found three ways that guys show their attraction to me when they approach.

1. The Looker - this type of guy just looks at you. I'm not going to assume what is going on in his head but I have a pretty fucking good idea that it involves me naked. the biggest looker I had was this dude who would for weeks go in the sauna at the same time as me, sit perpendicular to me to look down my towel then up to my eyes until I made eye contact with him then quickly look away. He obviously wanted me to notice that he was checking me out and then expected me to make the first move or something along those lines. He would do this compulsively and it was creepy, uncomfortable, and annoying. These guys are the worst and you just want to tell them to fuck off.
2. The Bro- The next type of gay dude is the one who just acts like a bro. you're not quite sure if he is gay or not but you assume that he is just a nice person that wants to have a nice conversation. These conversations end up going a little too well and they basically hit you up as if they are your best friend every time they see you. Then one day they will give you the 'fuck me' eyes or do something suttle that shows attraction. this really pisses me off because now they have put ME in an uncomfortable position in which I need to openly say "dude sorry to tell you, I'm not gay" in which case they could deny and make you look like an asshole, or you just don't talk to them again and have an awkward falling off. They are basically friend-zoning you and it sucks because they hide their intentions and put you in the role of being the asshole or continuing to play along with their facade.
3. The Straight Shooter - These guys come off as The Bro at first. They are a little too friendly and charismatic, but they quickly make it apparent what their intentions are. Usually, they will say something like "you're really attractive" maybe they will invite me on a date or something. These guys are the best because they take all the confusion off the table. They are easy to reject, "sorry man I'm not gay". and there is almost no awkwardness or bitterness that lingers after the encounter. Sometimes it even gives you a self-confidence boost.

The reason I think this is so valuable is because it put me in the girl's shoes so I know how they feel differently when approached in different ways. How the least direct way is the most objectifying where the most direct way is the best and actually has the best chance of accomplishing your goals. Hopefully, now you can see why the way you are flirting is putting you in a better or worse position to close on the girl.Read on and you’ll know if this is for you.

You’re here because you aren’t good with women. You want them but you can’t get them.

Let’s get to it. 

Stop watching porn. You may be addicted to porn without even knowing it. It’s not real. You can trick your body into thinking you’re banging those women but your mind ain’t stupid. Research this or don’t, deep down you know porn is fucking you up. Jerk off if you want but use your imagination for once.

Next thing is your looks. Watch gorillas, peacocks, lions, chimps and just about any animal, us, and you’ll know how important looks are. Looks for us mean body and style.

Take control of your body and stop the excuses. You are not a boy that eats whatever is given. Choose to eat things your body would be proud of. Cut out shit that’s bad for you like white bread, white pasta, soda, fries, candy, and so on. **Work out**. Do your own research because things don’t just get handed to you. Be interested in stuff other than pussy. What about personality, status, MONEY? You can name a hundred fat rich guys plowing models; you are not these men. That’s why you’re here and for you, looks fucking matter. A fit man shows women he is driven and confident, able to get what he wants. Get fit.

Style is next. It is superficial but you want a hot girl or an ugly chick? Take your clothes from high school right now, wear them, say goodbye because that’s the last time you’ll see them. Get clothes that fit the body you work so hard for. Get a nicer body if you don’t have money for nicer clothes. Clothes that fit look better than expensive ones that don’t. Look at magazines, actors, singers and find out what works. This is going to be hard and it takes practice to dress right but do it.
 
Stand up straight, shoulders back, stare straight ahead. Stop looking at the ground. Practice this until it comes natural. Move slower, don’t act like you are in a rush. Show that you are always in control as not even time bothers you. Take up space naturally and don’t hide yourself. In an uncomfortable situation, breathe and expand, and just take it all in. Don’t be a coward and look straight, not down. It’s hard at first but work on it like a muscle.

Carry yourself like a man.

Stop being emotional. Feel emotions but control how you act on them. Learn to control yourself in any situation. Be calm, be chill, think before you speak, but if you say something dumb own it and **be honest**. Don't be scared of anybody. Talk slower and deeper.  Don’t *show* jealousy. Stop judging people. Say good things about people rather than shit. Stop blaming women for your failures because it’s not their fault. When you work towards who you want to be, women will come. Stop blaming others for your problems and instead, shut the fuck up and fix it. 

Keep your word and do what you say. Meeting with someone? Be on time. Wait ‘til tomorrow? No do it now. Said you were going to the gym today? Go. When you do what you say you begin to trust yourself. **Trusting yourself is confidence**.

You have to stop hating women. Men and women are not the same. Don’t expect out of them what you expect out of a man. Women will be emotional, flakey, jealous, whatever; let them be. You are what she is not so don’t let it affect you. She wants to be with a man not another woman. Know that women do not hurt men on purpose, it is just their nature. The more you are around women, the more you will realize this. When you progress with women don’t act like a boy that sees pussy once a decade. Be cool, business as usual. If you do not stay a man she’s gone. Keep this in mind so that you do not dwell on your past failures. 

Don’t stop improving yourself just because you’ll never be perfect. Be better than the day before. Always be better than the day before and you will attract women.

Here’s some material:

Listen to Joe Rogan in this [clip](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rdNSkzT6UHE).

Listen to every episode of the [Black Phillip Show](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hAmCjqVkFg) with Patrice O’Neal. 

Listen to [episode 79](http://www.dvdasa.com/?p=869) of DVDASA with Erik Griffin. He breaks it down.

Watch [this](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fCYVCI9NGUU) National Geo episode on alpha males. Ignore the cheese and just watch their physical movements. *Understand* what’s going on.

Watch David Choe’s documentary [“Dirty Hands”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pjWvlupgl1Y), and listen to his DVDASA podcast to understand how he fucks the hottest women despite his looks. Honest, passionate, funny, and does not give a fuck. [Listen to this](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=58n7yS_0niw).

Read the Way of the Superior Male by David Deida – explains the difference between masculine and feminine. **Read this**.

Read War of Art by Steven Pressfield – explains resistance and how to get shit done.

Read Gates of Fire by Steven Pressfield – A different take on “300” that will inspire. You’ll also learn some history.

Watch a day in [this artist’s life](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DLeboHdMJF4). There’s no shortcut to get what you want, it takes work. Work every day for what you want. 

Finally, watch [this](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zb4rbXb7DdE) music video with this in mind; these women are telling you to make a move. These are women in your life and they WANT you to. They want a real man. Don’t hate women, just understand them. Make a move.
Delusional scarcity mindset:

You believe this is the only person you will ever connect with on deep level, or you will never find as anyone as attractive that will have you in their orbit. Any type of affection from this person—even if it’s solely platonic—is better than not having them in your life at all.

No self-prioritization:

The object of your affection is put on a pedestal. To them, you are a low priority, even if they aren’t being intentionally hurtful. You, on the other hand, spend the majority of your emotional energy on them. You choose to have them in your life, even if it is unhealthy and torturous for you.

You have an unrealistic, idealized version of this person. You fail to take full stock of their faults, and only emphasize their looks and positive qualities.

You’re afraid to hurt them by removing them from your life, even if it’s what is best for you. You place their temporary feelings over your personal development and overall happiness.

Dishonesty with intent:

This is entirely your fault. You are dishonest with your actions around them: you have never expressed your true feelings; or your romantic feelings have been rejected, and you falsely convey satisfaction with platonic friendship.

You believe the fairytale that undying devotion eventually turns into love or attraction. You sacrifice the chance to meet other incredible people, who prioritize your company or are a better fit, by waiting foolishly in the wings.

This is a reality check. The friendzone should not exist if someone prioritizes themself and views themself as a prize, is honest with intent, and realizes there is not just one special person.

Don’t waste any more time worshipping at the altar of another person, one who views you as secondary character in their life.**If you are easily triggered, I don't give a shit, you should still get this imprinted into your brain.**





Your self worth isn't connected to how many chics/guys you can pull. 

Your self esteem should never depend on how many people like your fucking worthless tinder profile, or how many girls/guys replied with a smile to your little ice breaker. 

It does not fucking matter. 

You are still worthy. 

You: "Is this one if those bs 'love yourself' posts?'" 

Me: Fuck off. If you don't love yourself, don't even bother. Loving yourself is hard af and takes time. Settle with respecting yourself.

You deserve respect. From yourself. 

        'Ooh how do I respect myself then?' Wrong question! WHY do you respect yourself?

Finally, make sure your write this down, in you blood if you have to. **Do not be envious of others.** 

Not because you don't know their journey, not because it bothers them (it should not), but because Envy is an infernal prince of Hell, a fucking S-tier demon that will swallow your soul and bleed you dry if you let it. So yeah, don't even bother comparing yourself to others.

TLDR; YOU ARE A BOSS. You just forgot it because you don't fucking pay attention.Think of all the truly impressive men you’ve encountered in your life. 

The ones who command attention of a room, who can navigate social situations with ease, who give off a vibe that they’re not to be fucked with without saying a word. 

In my experience, those type of men didn’t refer to themselves as ‘alphas’; they would likely laugh at the label. 

Conversely, the ones who are the most insecure, and get the least amount of respect from those around them, were concerned about projecting the image of an ‘alpha’. They crave validation.

Men with internal power live freely, regardless of the expectations of others. They are who they are, and aren’t concerned with how they’ve perceived.

They also aren’t afraid to be kind (not nice). They aren’t as self-focused, so they like to see others succeed. Often, those who subscribe to alpha male concept, have a false sense of bravado, and try to act domineering. They put others down to preserve an image of power. However, when they are confronted, they almost always fold.

If you thrive to be independent, self-assured, and centered emotionally, things will fall into place. 

Worrying about the perception of others and overcompensating by putting on a false front is the behavior of a truly weak man.Hey guys,

I had a tinder date yesterday and came across this little „trick“ to perfectly set the frame for the kiss. So we met at a bar, had some drinks, everything went well. After quiet some time my date comes across with a game she‘d like to play. 

I don‘t have a name for it, you might already know it. Basically, you try to cold read each other and make a statement about the other person. If your statement is correct, the other person drinks, if it‘s wrong you drink. You play it back and forth. I started off with basic things like „You had a family dog“ and steered the questions towards more personal and sexual ones towards the end. 

How I went for the kiss:
So after we‘ve been playing for some rounds and the mood was good (which it will be with this game, trust me it’s so fun) it was my turn again. While maintaining strong eye contact, my statement was: „you find me attractive“. She drank and said „well you are nice to look at“. Her turn. Me: „You want to kiss me right now!“. She drank. Then I went for it.

This „technique“ is great on so many levels:

- Of course it still takes balls to ask these questions in the first place, but a rejection would always be *soft*. You didn‘t commit much. 
- It is easy to create sexual tension (generally with this game)
- You don‘t have to wait for the right moment, like her positioning etc.
- You can wait as long as you want to ask these questions (although I would advise to ask these two or the likes in consecution). 
- **It enables you to test the waters, let HER make a commitment by taking a sip, and still be seen as direct and confident, because you don‘t phrase it as a question, but a statement**


I hope this can be of use, I will definitely incorporate it in my repertoire of „dating tools“. This has honestly been kinda eye-opening to me now! 

Have fun guys, cheers!

edit: Afterwards we went to her place, she cooked something and had sex. I slept two hours. This has also only been my second girl (first was 2 months ago)Yesterday, I turned 30 (sorry I didn't invite you to my covid lock-down birthday party).

Back when I was a young adult (i.e. a teenager), I realize that I was unsure of myself, feeling unattractive and didn't know how to be around girls. Even if I'm still a work in progress now, I know that I am not that boy anymore.

**It's clear to me what really changed with women**

* The real big difference is that I am now a **confident** person. *Confidence = "knowing that whatever happens, it will be alright"*
   * I know what to do in most situations. I can afford to take risks. Because I know that it's going to be alright. And if it's not alright, it's still alright because the present interaction is only one little step of a much bigger picture. Is my life ruined because I talked to that girl and she rejected me? Am I worthless because I couldn't keep her interested long enough? Is my world over because we broke up? None of this moves me away from my purpose and the life I've designed around it
   * I realize it's obvious that I couldn't have that mindset when I was a teenager, because I simply didn't know what would happen next. I would experience feelings like fear, anxiety... I wish somebody taught me earlier (although I'm sure many did and I just didn't understand). At the end of the day I am glad I have it now
* On top of that I've gone through years of **personal development**, improving all areas of my life that reminds me I am enough to be confident: fitness, fashion, career, finances, relationships, social skills, intellect, emotional intelligence but also mindset, attitudes, beliefs, sense of self... - I know my strengths, where I can improve, I won't be easily broken by other people's opinion, I learn from my failures and victories as well

Does that make any sense to you? Do you know what I mean?I noticed that I wasn't pronouncing my words properly when I talked. I'd sometimes chew up my words and speak too quickly, which would kill the smoothness of the conversation. So I started reading out loud news articles and anything that I could get my hands on with a pen in my mouth. I bite down on a pen across my teeth and then try and talk with the pen as an obstacle in my mouth. 

This forces my tongue to work harder and it makes be think a lot more about my pronunciation as a I talk. Practicing for a half hour a day has helped my talk so much better. Also, the talking warms your vocal cords, so when you go out and talk to women, you're voice is nice and projected because you've spent time already warming up.

Final tip. Try keeping your tongue at the base of your mouth behind your bottom teeth. This allows more air out and gives your voice an extra bit of boom. The number one reason men who learn about seduction don't get results is because their strategy involves learning without taking action. 
If you're not meeting new women and taking risks that might get you rejected, you're not making progress.Sup fellas, long time lurker. Covid had me in a bit of a rut, and I've only recently got my 2nd shot. Since the pandemic began, I've done the usual bullshit. Self improvement, tried my luck with dating apps, and I fell short of finding anything successful. I met up with an ex on Thursday because of a funeral. We broke up on good terms and were FWB for a while, but it was also the first time we talked in over a year. We spent a good chunk of time together after the funeral, but I didn't do anything beyond comfort her with a few hugs throughout the night.

However

I have been working on my communication. I got sick and tired of wondering about everything. Does she like me? Did she ever think about me? How good was I? So I decided, fuck it, I want to know. Out of everyone she's slept with, where do I rank? The answer inflated my ego beyond that of even Hitler. "You're what I compare everyone to"

Skip ahead to Saturday. I'm at the park with my son, and it's for his small birthday party. This young blonde woman and her son, about my kid's age, walk into the park and start playing together. So I decide, fuck it, we've got extra pizza and drinks. I'm on a high note with the smoke I've blown up my own ass, I'm inviting them to join the party. It even worked out that we had an extra goody bag.

We talked throughout the entire party, our sons acted like they'd been friends for years, and I got her number. In front of my son's mother. And an hour after the party, I asked if we could meet up for a coffee. She's 5 years older and she said yes. I fucking love you guys. Every single one of you. The best part? The park we met at is 4 minutes away from where we both live. Wish me luck fellas ❤So last night I was really hung up on this girl I wanted to ask out from work, I've liked her for a while and we flirt but she is very non-committal. I decided to go out for some drinks with a buddy instead of stressing and we end up at a bar with a pool table where we meet two girls who offered to play duo's, one of them was cute and we hit it off immediately, she couldn't keep her hands off me and now I actually have a date.

This is a moment straight out of a movie or something, I was literally stressing the fuck out about a girl and as soon as I dug myself out of that and just forgot about her, I bumped into someone who was way more receptive.I have a lot of friends that are struggling to attract women, and when I try to look for the reason why, I found that all those guys don't dress well, they are always with bad clothes, don't take care of their fashion style,worse than that their clothes are not clean. Even though, a lot of those guys are intelligent strong tall handsome face, but they still struggling. you can compare those guys with a car that has motor of Ferrari but it looks like a cheap non attractive car.
Since the majority of women  put a huge importance on their outer looks, they want also a men that do the same. 
From a psychological view, a man of style, is someone who is happy, go out to do shopping, stable financially, someone who loves beauty and when a woman is with him she would feels more beautiful, bc those men accept just beautiful things in their life.If you depend on a girl to solve all your problems, you're going to put too much pressure on her and lose her.

Maybe you can solve all your problems by yourself. But wouldn't it be easier to have some reliable male friends who support you instead?

Put in the effort to reconnect with old friends or make new friends, then maintain that friendship. You will have to take the initiative to meet guys and invite them out to catch up and build a friendship. But when you have some supportive guy friends it will make you more attractive to girls.

If you can put up with the awkwardness of approaching a random girl, you can handle any awkwardness that may come from trying to make male friends.So I was at the gas station store yesterday, stocking up on beer to have with the boys, and as I was heading to my car I noticed this beautiful blonde girl sitting in a car parked next to mine.

We locked eyes as I was walking in front of her car (couldn't see her mouth because she was wearing a mask) and I maintained steady eye contact and so did she.

I loaded the beer into my trunk and for a moment there I hesitated if I should approach. In the end I decided it would be better to approach even if I got rejected, because if I didn't I would keep wondering all the "what if" scenarios.

So I closed my trunk, removed my mask and went to her driver window and motioned for her to lower it. When she did, I smiled and said: "Hey, I think you're really pretty, I'd like to go out with you for some coffee."
She smiled and said: "Sorry friend, I have a boyfriend already." I smiled back and said: "Well, I had to try. See ya."

When I got back in my car, instead of feeling down, I felt great. I got rejected, but at least I tried. Well, on to the next one!

EDIT: Thanks for the Silver, kind stranger! Also, thanks to everyone for their words of encouragement and advice, you're the best.Last time I shared my story about this girl who I really liked but it seems I dont have a chance because mostly all our conversations Im just the one carrying the topic. So the next few days I decided to show less effort in talking to her. Before, she replies days before I messaged her. And what she did to me days before replying I did to her. And maybe she noticed that Ive been cold lately, putting less effort, and does not reply immediately. At those times when Im not talking to her I just build my self up. Hit the Gym, do running outside, reading books and watch movies. Also im working to keep my self more busy. I put myself to have something to do. I think it is really true ones you stop giving effort they will notice. I noticed it when she always post pics of her, putting stories so that it may to catch my attention and reply to her. Also when I put a story in instagram she immediately replied to mg story. I still like her but now I realized I have so much room to improve on myself and not focus on chasing girls. Also not to be needy. If they dont give you attention then fine. Just keep yourself busy and build yourself up. I guess what I’ve read here on this sub really helped me. Now , shes the one putting effort on talking to me. . Thats my story. Thanks for the good advice here. Much appreciatedI feel like sharing this story because I want to show that every once and a while if you force yourself to do something you are totally scared/uncomfortable with doing, something great can come out of it. 

This happened back in 2018 during my Junior year of college.

It was the weekend before Halloween night so I decided to drink a beer and play siege with my friend who goes to another school a few hours away from me. While we were playing I was talking about how there are probably a bunch of parties going on near me, my friend (Paul) asked me, "dude why don't you just go to one". At first, I'm my usual hesitant self and try to come up with reasons why I should go looking for one like "I can't go alone that's weird" or "how am I gonna find a party to just walk into?". But he knows and I know that I want to finally go to an actual party (I have been to one in the past but it got busted within 10 minutes) and this was the perfect opportunity to do so. So after 3 beers and 15 minutes of convincing/yelling at myself, I put on my Chewbacca pajama onesie and started walking a few blocks down from where I live to where most of the frats were located. 

After about 10 minutes of walking around and finding nothing, I see a group of people walking together towards the back of a house. After trailing behind them I see a party with an open basement that people are hanging out around, so after another 15 minutes of almost going back home and fighting myself to just walk in, I finally just walk straight in. After a few minutes, I meet some random girl that I strike up a conversation with, unfortunately, I'm not a very fun/smooth small talker with people so her friends and her ditch me to go look for a new party and I feel pretty defeated. But earlier that night I promised myself that I would go to a party and enjoy it. So I go looking for another person to talk to and this time I approach a guy wearing a generic rock and roll outfit. Since I enjoy rock/metal myself I strike up a conversation about that and we have some solid chitchat for a few minutes. Eventually, more of his friends come over and introduce me to them so now I feel like a have an established group of people I can stand around without feeling like an outcast at the party. 

A few moments later a group of girls starts talking to us (this is all on the dancefloor in the basement by the way) and we all start dancing and talking. One of the girls (Kate) I notice right away, is a cute blonde wearing an angel costume. Again after a few minutes of forcing myself to talk to her, I eventually do and we end up hanging out for the rest of the night. By the time the party dies down she and I talk for a little more after the party and I ask for her Snapchat, she says yes and we add each other. 

To make a long story short, a few weeks later we hookup and become good friends, it made me realize something. If I didn't force myself to ignore my fears and step way out of my comfort zone, I never would have met this girl nor would I have had a cool social experience of meeting new people. So what I hope some of you can take away from this is that:

\-Stepping out of your comfort zone is terrifying, especially in social circumstances and that's okay.

\-There are so many new people you can meet if you take a risk every so often and put yourself out there.

\-Don't be discouraged when you do step out of your comfort zone and it fails in some way, be proud that you made your heartbeat like you were on 50 pounds of cocaine. 

\-Your social skills will be shaky at first, but practice practice practice with new people as much as you can, reading articles and books can help but not nearly as much as just doing that dang thing. 

\-I believe in all of you, if I can do it, so can you. 

This is my first post on here so I hope you guys enjoyed reading it, also the names were changed for obvious reasons.“Do yourself a favor and take mixed signals as a no” 

I just saw this quote today wanted to echo how true this is. Many guys in this sub let their own desperation fuel them to put up with girls that flake and give off mixed signals. 

If she isn’t showing you any interest back or is stringing you along you should let her go. The best businessmen walk away from deals when they don’t get what they want and you should start doing the same. 

Women and relationship aren’t as complicated when breaking them down to simplest forms. Either she wants or she doesn’t. If her actions don’t match with her words then it’s not worth it. 

It all comes down to you respecting yourself and your time. There’s too many women in the world for you to wait for one woman to show you interest and respect back. Don’t let ANYONE waste your time or keep you around as a backup plan.

Edit: thanks for the platinum! And silver!1. Be social. Talk to everyone. Social proof alone has gotten many girls to fall in love with me in the past. 
2. Every approach is a learning experience. Don't justify yourself yourself if it goes wrong, learn from your mistakes instead. 
3. Don't judge anyone. 
4. Treat everyone with respect and affection, even if the person might not deserve it. 
5. There are plenty of women, and they are all the same, so do not get hung up on one. 
6. Make your legacy your goal, and look at anything that comes from that pursue as a a byproduct of your success.  
7. Failure keeps me grounded and keeps my striving to try my damnedest.
8. Looks aren't everything. As long as you take care of your body and dress with clothes that fits you, you'll be fine. 
9. What do you call that guys who only date 10s? Virgins. 
10. ANY GUY CAN HAVE ANY GIRL HE WANTS (and vice versa) 
11. Read: 'how to win friends and influence people', 'the game', and 'models'  - they are very helpful. 
12. Don't text. I used to be the kind of guy that would alway have the latest smartphone, and listen to music when I was out alone, but I did that because I was bored of life. All the relationships that I built over texting and calling have not lasted more than two months. We would talk or text nonstop all day on the phone, and would run out of things to say in person, and it'd be pretty awkward, and then we'd realize there was no attraction. Just the mutual feeling of not wanting to be alone. 
13. You are not the lucky one, people are privileged to be able to talk to you. 
14. keep yourself busy with your hobbies.
15. If you can't appreciate time alone, you will probably portray that when out with friends or girls, and they won't enjoy hanging out. 
16. people say I'm a confident person. I'm not. I just really don't care, and I do not look for any type of validation anymore. 
17. use Google calendar, or something of that sort to get the most out of your day. 
18. I didn't have success with women and people in general until I had my heart broken for the first time. So, getting my heart broken made me become a man. Don't be afraid of getting your heart broken.
19. Rejection only makes me more confident, so don't fear that also. No one is born a natural, you have to get rejected by a lot of women before you can brush it off easily and actually be successful. 
20. Don't use pick up lines. They're cheesy, and usually sound canned. 
21. Don't EVER do any desperate moves you see in the movies or hear in love songs. Girls want to be desired, but if you do anything from the movies, unless you are really good looking and have your shit together, it won't work. 
22. Girls want what they cant have. 
23. Study body language. Very critical. 
24. tease girls, kino and employ push-pull techniques to build attraction.  

**1. Not Understanding "No Means No".**

This one is first because it's real simple and there's no excuse. The important thing for guys to understand is not that ignoring people's boundaries is bad (though it totally is, and that is important). The important thing to understand is that a girl who is into you will not be repeatedly telling you no. At worst she'll be giving you the occasional and congruent "no" or be trying to slow things down a little. Choose people who chose you and don't waste your time with people who don't see your value.

This also applies to LMR or last-minute resistance. Girls aren't stupid and don't place themselves in sexual situations with new guys by accident. If she's throwing on the brakes, the move is to play it totally cool, let the tension subside and if she's into you, she'll give you a sign once she's collected herself. And if she doesn't, she's not into you. And if you're at her place, just dip and either she'll try to correct your false assumption or she's just not that into you.

**2. The "Fuck Yes, or No" Rule.**

When you're spending time with a girl, your attitude towards her should be "Fuck Yes" or "No". The reason why is because it is the guy's job to be the initiator, the accelerator, the source of momentum towards a sexual outcome. Girls have a tendency to be a little bit of a wet blanket for fear of making an ill-advised or impulsive sexual decision. So you need to bring the infectious enthusiasm. And if you can't do that, you are basically wasting her time as a sexual prospect. It's also a sign that she's the wrong girl.

The correct attitude is to be so "Fuck Yes" that you don't need to say a word about your feelings. 

**3. Being Too Easily Won Over.**

A girl wants the thrill of seducing and conquering a guy. For the more ego-driven types, it's better than sex for them. Let her prove herself to you. It's important for her investment level for her to do some of the heavy lifting and for her to feel your affection is earned rather than a manifestation of your neediness.

This why I emphasize that a "Fuck Yes" attitude needs to be unspoken. She needs to slowly feel your approval, rather than be beaten over the head with it because that leads to expectations, expectations are pressure, and pressure turns a girl off. Lead her, don't do it all for her. Seduction is a pairs game. 

**4. Not Understanding When To Lead And When To Follow.**

Seduction is a dance. It's move and countermove, call and response. The man's job is to be the initiator, not the dictator or the beast of burden.

Guys who are good with women have an intuitive feel for this tempo, this back and forth. Guys who need improvement either overwhelm her with action, or go passive, waiting for signals that never come.

A good rule of thumb is this. If she's not giving you signs or only weak signs, she's either waiting for something to respond to, or not interested (initating and polarizing will make that potential ambiguity clear). If she's giving signs, then she's trying to get a reaction out of you. And if she's taking the lead, then that's a serious sign of interest that you need to capitalize or risk her interest falling off a cliff.

**5. Letting Her Go Cold.**

Almost as fatal as smothering a girl with attention is failing to take action when the time is right. Unlike guys, girls don't spend most of their waking moments ready to get down. They need to be warmed up, and once they are there or even close to there, you need to capitalize on that opportunity. Because if you don't, she'll come to one of two conclusions - you're either not into her or you're a pussy.

Even if she does still maintain some interest in you, she'll play hard to get and make you pay for making her wait. Girls have a hard time understanding that guys aren't always DTF or that some things are more important than sex (like a career or not being an accessory to cheating). Especially before you've had sex.

**6. Not Knowing Your Own Value**

When girls say "just be confident", what they mean is "know your own value". Most girls have an "ideal man" archetype in their own heads, and they don't imagine themselves as equal to that "ideal man". Their ideal man knows his own value so well that the girl spends far more time imagining herself proving her worth to him, than the other way around.

And secret to knowing your value as a man is understanding that women want a man long before they want a rich man, a handsome man, or a high-status man. Even if you're none of those things, so long as you're willing and able to play the male role, you have a chance. And sometimes a chance is all you need, because you never know how into you she is.

**7.  Not Having Standards.**

A girl I once dated said to me "you really shouldn't forgive me". And she was right.

Girls know when they're being a pill or they've done wrong. And either they'll own up to it when called on it, or they won't. Which road she picks is largely outside of your control as it largely hinges on her character and her investment level. 

The point is, you're not doing yourself or her any favors by being too forgiving, trying too hard to make something happen, or letting her stick around when she has no place in your life.

Only you can stand up for you, and if you let her walk all over you, best case she'll drop you for being a pussy, and worst case, she'll take you for all you're worth.

Being a good poker is not only knowing when to go all-in, it's also knowing when to fold a losing hand.

**8. Being Too Sexual, Or Not Sexual Enough.**

This is a common sticking point for guys, because most guys are either a little repressed, or have no filter. The secret is understanding that girls are exact same way. The ones who are repressed love the strong-silent-type guys who they have trouble reading, while the ones with no filter like high-energy and unpredictable guys. While the other finds the other type either boring or too much.

Another important thing is to learn how to be sexual without intent. For instance, the less repressed girls love to talk about sex with guys, but if you start talking about what you want to do with her, rather than what you like in general, you'll spoil the mood with too much tension. And repressed girls love non-sexual, almost protective touch, but respond very badly to premature sexual touching. Get the idea?

**9. Not Understanding Sexual Tension.**

Sexual tension is that unspoken vibe, that will-we-won't-we ambiguity you get around someone you want to sleep with. And the more mutual it is, the stronger and more unspoken it is.

Provided you can handle it and be cool, it is your best friend. Sexual tension is what gets women horny and thinking about sleeping with you. But the first person to discuss it directly, or act upon it, gives up all leverage in the interaction, which is why it is key not to break it until the right time. Here's a tell - when she's nervous with no clear cause, she's feeling the sexual tension. Similarly, if you're nervous, you are too.

Learn to bask in it and accept it, without letting it overly influence you. The longer you can sit in that sexually charged state without getting uncomfortable, the better things will go for you.

**10. Spending Too Much Time Getting To Know Her/Not Being A Mystery.**

This is a less common mistake, but it can be just as self-defeating as anything else on this list. The reason why this is such a problem is because many women want to have sex without attachment, because then it's easier to pretend it didn't mean anything and doesn't matter. The more emotional rapport you've built with a girl before sex, the harder it is for her to maintain this perception.

This is how guys classically get in the friend zone. They come in as a friend, build a genuine relationship with her, and then sooner or later sexual tension asserts itself. The problem with this is that you've now become more valuable to her as a friend than as a sexual partner. This means that unless her intentions are serious and she's halfway in love with you, sleeping with her is just not worth it from her perspective. In fact she'll feel desperate, fucking her guy friends instead of finding someone new and disposable.

Now, it is possible to have a platonic connection with a girl and not wind up in the friend zone. But it takes some good game and one important rule: keep your distance, and be mysterious. It also helps if you establish yourself as someone highly sexual with a lot of women in your life, and easy-going when it comes to sex. Then it's easier for her to rationalize her semi-conscious desire to sleep with you and not trip over her ego.

**11. Obsessing About Getting Laid.**

There must be more to your life than getting laid. You must have some purpose outside of your own gratification.

And the same must be true of your overall interactions with women. Even if she worships you like a one-woman cult of personality, you can't be sleeping with her all the time.

Learn how to turn your sexuality on and off. Because either you control it, or it will control you. Nothing makes a woman lose respect and trust for a guy faster than not being able to do this. And the less she can manipulate you with sex, the more she will respect you.

Often we obsess about sex, when the real itch that needs scratching is a hole in our self-esteem, the same way we can falsely assume we're hungry when we're actually thirsty.

*Don't be thirsty. Don't be tryhard. Treat it as a game and take your ego out of the equation.*

Edit: typosThese are the 3 big things I've picked up on recently. I went through a shit break-up last year and it took a lot of time to get my game back. This subreddit helped me get through tough times so I am paying it forward.

1) Cocky comedy will take you far. Being playfully cocky will instantly separate you from 90% of social interactions she has with other males. Cocky comedy comes from the perspective that **she is the one who is after you.** When meeting a new woman, challenge her from the very beginning. Instead of pursuing her, put it in your head that she is the one pursuing you. Don't be afraid to bust her balls, but make sure it's in a teasing flirtatious way. One way I like to use cocky comedy is by using a made up "strike system".  I'll say something like this: "Oh, you don't like pineapple on pizza? That's gonna be a strike. This isn't going to work out." I take something small and blow it out of proportion as if it was a relationship deal breaker. The secret is a sly delivery, as you don't want to come off as arrogant or try to hurt her feelings. Cocky comedy is a way to show that you're not intimidated by her and that you like to have a good time. It's also a good shit test to play on women. 

2) Stop relying on logical characteristics to get women. This one took me a long time to figure out. I used to think "I'm an above average looking guy, I wear nice clothes, I'm not a fuck-up, so why aren't women throwing themselves at me?" The thing is, having "logical" qualities is great to possess, and you should absolutely work on becoming the best person you can be. **But the reality is that logic ain't gonna get you laid.** In order to attract women you must do so on an emotional level. Attraction is fueled by humor, charm, smart-ass comments, unpredictability, wit, i.e. the intangible characteristics. You MUST make a woman feel a special way if you want to attract her. The extra stuff (nice job and car) is just icing on the cake once you've already attracted her. 

3) Understand what confidence looks like. You always hear people say "just be confident around women," but what the fuck does confidence even LOOK like? I figured out that **confidence is just a sense of security in future events.** When talking to women, speak with certainty in the future. Replace your "if's" with "when's", and stop staying "I think" and "I guess." Communicate as though you already know you **will** go on a date with her, and that you **will** end up kissing her. You'll start to notice how this change in mentality will subsequently change the way you carry yourself. If deep down you're still insecure (which is okay) then fake it till you make it. 



EDIT: Glad to see the reception this got! I’m going to make a post in a few days outlining some cocky comedy techniques. Be on the lookout for it. I have never done this before and it's exhilarating I love the rush.

I used to make excuses for myself and think oh she's on her phone, or what will other people think if I do this and I get rejected. Well guess what, I am way more interesting than whatever stupid shit she is looking at or listening to on her phone and everyone else is just a mindless zombie absorbed into their phone. 

I have gotten 8 numbers so far. I called up a few of them and got a coffee date on Friday night. Another girl was really into me and we talked for 15 minutes before she went to class. I'm just going around and approach girls saying "I thought you were cute and wanted to say hi". I ask them about where they are heading and their classes and end by asking them if they would like to get coffee and their number. These girls are fairly attractive around the 6-8 range, but I have yet to approach a complete bombshell. 

The girl Im getting coffee with was wearing sweats and a hoodie when it was high 70's out and I made a comment "How are you not burning up in that?" We got to talking in the elevator and I got her number before she got off on her floor. 

All of my rejections so far have been from girls who have a boyfriend. One girl had a girlfriend and we were vibing and laughing but she still gave me her phone number to hang out.

I feel like I'm having a lot of success and I just wanted to report in here. You guys are amazing and you have to believe you are. Have confidence when you are approaching a woman. When you just approach a woman you are better than 90% of the guys out there.

Edit: why am I being downvoted?My nickname amongst my friends in high school was “cold feet.” Because I had some of the best looking women that were into me, but I was too scared to close or make a move. 

This moniker has followed me since. Time and time I’ve passed up women because of fear. Well, last night the tide turned. 

I matched with this girl Sunday and gave her my number have a few back and forth. Once she text me, we had a few more messages then I *instanly* hit her with a date and time. She agreed. 

I then did what this sub is 50/50 on. I told her I’d see her then and ended the conversation. No more contact until I saw her face to face. 

Boy, what a move in my favor. She opened up and said how nice it was for me to be that forward and to take control. And how texting can be overwhelming. 

After diner it was when everything went to fifth gear. Normally I’d be afraid to escalate but something changed inside of me. 

I escalated and next we were at her place, sealing the deal. 


My best tips are definitely to escalate. Momentum can’t be restored once you kill it so make the most of it. And two, I’m all for controlling the conversation and going radio silent until the date. It’s the first time I’ve done it and worked beautifully.One of my biggest tips for beginners to entrench yourself in social circle. It provides a low-pressure environment for you to practice social skills (whereas cold approach is very high-pressure; it's a do or die environment). 

However, if you can't even spend time with a social circle, or are only part of a few, then what do you do?

Learn how to be invited. 

A social circle isn't some defined social group. It's fuzzy and so is its hierarchy, at least at certain times. However, what makes it at least somewhat cohesive is that it's a group of people who regularly do things together.

They go bowling together.

They go drinking together.

They play Magic: The Gathering together.

They have the same grad-classes. 

They work at the same office. 

They share some type of activity in common. Thus, becoming part of that social circle is as simple as becoming *another person who also participates in those activities alongside them.*

You can easily do this by already being a part of that activity, and simply meeting them. That's the most organic way.

You start training boxing. You meet the group of guys who go to the 4:30 class. You regularly go. You meet them and consistently see them there. 

Now, you're a part of that social circle within that context (or as I'd say, within that **social grid**, the literal environment where that social circle does activities together). 

Using that same environment, I'll teach you the more proactive way that you get involved in a social circle or *deeper* into that social circle.

Let's say you know everyone at the boxing class, but you don't talk to them much. 

Well, you're going to have to at least say hello. This is like never approaching a girl and expecting to go on dates and have girlfriends.  Luckily, you're already in an environment where socializing is okay. Also, you're not immediately trying to fuck whoever you're talking to, especially if it's a guy (unless you're bi/gay, in that case, you might be a bit nervous since the pressure is on). 

That not being the case, you simply say, "Hey" or "How are you?" Introduce yourself. Ask basic questions. Where they're from, what they do. Make a comment on their boxing. Make a joke about how bad it smells in there.

The best way, however, is to get to know them by asking them questions. You don't have to get super deep, especially if you can't talk for too long periods of time, because you've got to do drills or focus on whatever activity it is you all share in common. 

However, once you do make that brief connection with them, you can considered them at least an acquaintance. How do you go from acquaintance to friend?

You spend time with them.

Here is the fundamental key behind being invited somewhere and the three ways you go about it.

- Key: Value. If you provide value, people will value you. That value could be that you are good at conversation. Or maybe you're really funny. It can also be context specific. Maybe you've been boxing for three years and they're new, so you provide boxing knowledge when they have none. This value is important to THEM so they value YOU. The fact that you're a good boxer and that they care about boxing could be enough for them to say, "Hey, me and my buddies are going out tonight. If you don't have any plans, you should join us." If you aren't being invited places like this, you need to provide more value. It's okay if you don't yet, but it is something you can induce by simply being a cool, fun, funny, interesting, knowledgeable or sexy, depending on what they want from you. 

How to actually mechanically induce this invitation? Two ways.

- Firstly, drop hints. After you've established at least the most  basic of conversation, like names and where you're from, then ask them what they're up to this weekend (weekends are good bets for getting invited places). If you've provided some value to them, they might invite you along. It's not guaranteed and sometimes they might simply think you're not interested (I know this because I then invite THEM to hangout in they say yes). You can let them know you're interested without inviting yourself along by saying, "Oh, that sounds awesome" and asking questions about it. 

For instance, if they say, "Oh we're heading to that new bar on Blookie Blakka street," you can say, "Oh I heard about that one, sounds like a fun place. When did they open?" 

Have a conversation about it. 

Now, for the other method.

- Invite THEM somewhere. It could be anything. You're going to the beach, a bar, the gym, etc. The more relevant it is to them (which you'll know by getting to know them) and the higher value it is (inviting them to a private party at a mansion, for instance, is better than a happy hour at some dive bar), the more likely they'll say yes. And even if they say no or that they're busy, it still has the intended effect - it provides value and lets them know that you are interested in them.

Often, that's all you need for them to be interested IN YOU. They'll realize you value them, so they'll be more tempted to invite you somewhere. Maybe not today but, if you see them regularly, another time.

At some point, if you do this right and with the right person, you'll spend time with  that person. Then, the trick is spending enough time with them that they bring you along activities with other people they know, thus increasing your network.

Hang out with those people regularly, and, BOOM, you're part of their clique. Remember, a social group is nothing more than a group of people who regularly do activities with each other and talk to each other. 

Do this ad infinitum, and you have a potentially infinitely large social group. 

All it takes is one person to completely change your social life. 

If you do this and you're still not getting invited places, you need to become more enjoyable to be around. I know it's tempting to get upset and that people don't want to get to know you, but it always comes down to either

- You're being weird, angry, judgmental, or you're leeching value from them by being annoying or needy

or 

- You're not showing interest by inviting them yourself, so they, also being nervous, don't want to invite you because they're afraid you'll say no (surprise, other people are nervous, too; it's not just you).

It's ALWAYS one of these causes. 

So, get friendly. Get into situations where you can meet people naturally (clubs, Meet Up groups, bars, sports teams, game 
 teams, etc - do things that interest YOU then add other people in to the mix), provide value, and show interest. 

Hector Ever find yourself in the position where you're getting any of the following responses from women when you try to escalate?

- "I'm not that sort of girl"
- "It's too soon, I don't even know you"
- "I don't do that sort of thing until the 4th date"

Why do you think this happens?

**Clue:** It's not because she's not attracted enough to you. It's not because she isn't interested in you. And it's not because she's a prude who doesn't want sex either.

As we all know on here, women love sex. Probably more than we do (god I'd love to be a woman for a day and find out what having a clitoris is like, but I digress)...

What these girls are telling you is that they don't feel SAFE enough with you to just let go.

Remember, girls face more risks from having sex than we do:

- pregnancy
- judgement from friends
- judgement from herself (she doesn't see herself as that kind of girl)
- judgement from you (you might see her as a slut, and go off high fiving the bros and bragging about this slut you banged last night)

So as I've mentioned in other posts, it's important you frame yourself as the 'fun adventurer' type of guy as opposed to the 'provider male'.

She needs to feel that she can let go with you, and let her full sexual desires bubble to the surface and you won't judge her. 

This is the key - non judgement. 

You are the untamable wanderer. The guy she knows she can have lots of fun with, but who won't necessarily stick around forever.

You're the guy she has awesome sex with while she carries on seeking Mr Right. After all, why should she be bored with no sex just because she hasn't met 'the one' yet? And yes, I do discuss this kind of thing with girls.

You're the guy who not only is ok with her being highly sexual and sharing all her filthy inner fantasies with you, you actually WANT and encourage her to do that. No matter how intense that shit gets, you're cool with it. Even if it's not something that flicks the light on for you, you don't judge it. It's just a preference, you like strawberry ice cream, I prefer chocolate. Neither one of us is wrong.

Because when you start doing this, you WILL hear some intense crazy shit. Some of this will shock you. Some of the this stuff comes out of the mouths of the sweetest looking girls.

So when she tells you about her super intense rape fantasy involving 5 big alpha males, it's crucially important that you don't suddenly go all weird and judgemental. It's just a fantasy. If you don't find that appealing, you just say 'well that doesn't really flick the light on for me, but it's cool if you like it.'

When she tells you these things and you're cool about it, she suddenly starts seeing you as the guy she can let go with. Be totally sexually free with. You'll be out with her in a bar or restaurant and she'll want to suck you off in the bathroom, just because she's horny.

But she would never have expressed that desire if you hadn't already made it safe for her to do so. She can let it all out with you, and nobody will ever know. 

What would it be like if you realised that every girl out there has all this untapped sexual desire? All of this intense, rampant horny sexuality that she is craving to be able to run free and play with? What would the possibilities be like for you?

Think of yourself as being a 'free pass' for her to pour out her sexual desire onto. Every other guy comes with baggage. He'll either tell everyone what a slut she is, or not be able to handle her full sexuality, or get jealous if she tells him fantasises involving other men, or he'll fall in love with her after 2 dates and now she's responsible for not breaking his heart.

It's harder than you'd think for a girl to get genuinely good no-strings sex with a man, without complications.

So how do we set this up?

Well I talk a lot with the girl about my opinions on sex. And how women should never be slut-shamed for being sexual - as it's the way we are made as humans. If she agrees with that, I just go deeper. For example:

"You're with me now. You never have to give me the 'I'm not that sort of girl' speech that you give to every other guy. I know that deep down, let's be honest, you're a very sexual person. And that's probably not something you share with every guy, I bet? But with me, I want you to know that you're safe to do that. In fact I want to hear it all. I don't get why guys judge girls for being sexual - I mean that's how we are made as humans, right? So when you're with me, we just do whatever we feel like, without having to worry about following the rule book, and the rest of the world will never have a fucking clue about it. How does that sound?"

The notion of 'throwing away the rule book' is very powerful. I recommend you play around with this. It's like giving her the permission to be naughty with you. You're like the secret super sweet sticky toffee pudding she gorges down at home when she's telling all her friends she's eating salad.

Talking about things in this way gives the message 'I don't slut shame. I don't judge. You can do anything with me and you're safe'.

And the threesomes? Well that just comes up as normal discussion (usually on a first date as well). I just ask, like I'm asking her about the weather 'so are you into girls too? It would be a plus if you were.'

If she says anything other than 'absolutely not, that's disgusting'...then you'll basically in, and you have something to work with.

The great thing is, when you set your relationship up in this way from the beginning, this is how it is, even if things get serious. Whereas if you set yourself up as the provider male that she has to pretend to be the sweet innocent girl with, you can never turn it around.

Many women are looking for the guy who they can let it all out with. It's a lot of fun when you become that guy.

**EDIT:** I wouldn't normally try to sell my services on here (because I'm genuinely here to give value), but since this topic is really engaging folk, if you like what I've put here, I've gone into mega detail about how to do this on a first date in particular, in something I call 'The Sexual Gentleman'. You can find out more here: http://wotg.wayofthegentleman.net/the-sexual-gentleman
First of all, I am posting this just to complain (I know mods here hate pure complainers), I legitimately want to add value and provoke discussion. 

1)	Not everything is a shit test – Sometimes women just hate you.  I even saw a thread here where the OP posted “Girl told me she wasn’t interested.  Shit test?” People forget that there is no such thing as a “shit test” in the real world.  “Shit test” is just a term PUAs made up to help you deal with certain situations.  In the real world, if a girl calls you a douchebag, well, then, she probably thinks you’re a douchebag.  Now, it is true that in certain situations if a girl says something disrespectful or disqualifying to you, you can increase her attraction to you by turning it around or ignoring it.  And yes, there are certain situations where girls will “test” you.  But… if she calls you a douchebag, no matter how you react, she called you a douchebag.  Even if you do fuck her, your relationship is based on assholery and emotional warfare and she will eventually disrespect you in the future when your “shit test” guard is down.  The way I see it, if a girl “shit tests” you more than 3 times she probably just doesn’t like you and/or she is a just a jerk.  Stay away!  I feel sorry for some of you chumps who keep chasing girls that are mean to you or disinterested because you think everything is a “shit test.”  I’ve been in that situation before.  I am a very quick, witty guy that is good at dealing with insults and zings, but at some point I realized that the girls I was dealing with were just bitches. 

2)	The answer to every situation is not a witty/funny line.  Every single time a person posts “girl just said X to me, how do I respond?” 90% of the answers here are “say this stupid witty line.”  No no no!  Witty lines are only appropriate in certain situations: the conversation is lighthearted, she is joking (or she knows she is being silly), you are joking, etc…  Sometimes a woman is trying to have a genuine conversation with you, or ask you a serious question, or genuinely trying to insult you.  In those situations, you have to respond seriously or else you look like a clueless moron.  If a girl calls you a piece of shit, and you “agree and amplify” you are being a sleazy weirdo and a weak dork.  And furthermore, there is no more hated person on earth than the guy who is always trying to be funny.  I can’t tell you how many girls have told me that there is nothing they hate more than the douchebag who thinks he’s funny.  Comedy only works when its unexpected, it fits the situation, and the other person is emotionally invested in it.  I even saw a thread where an OP posted “girls get angry at me when I answer them with funny lines” and half the responses were more funny lines. 

Part of this “make everything a joke” mentality is based on a deep-seeded misogyny that looks at women like they are frivolous children that are only entertained by jokes and games and can’t hold a serious conversation.  There are a lot of women who get very offended by men who won’t take them seriously.  This also contributes to the stereotype that PUAs are misogynistic creeps who prey on stupid girls with low self-esteem.  Mature, educated women in their late 20s and 30s are going to have some serious questions and if you respond to them with a joke then they will next you. 

3)	Just because this one thing worked for you one time doesn’t mean it will work for everybody.  I think this is the biggest problem here – in fact, it’s the biggest problem in the PUA community in general – people try something out on a girl, it works, and they feel like they’ve found the Holy Grail.  Entire books have been written and systems have been sold based on the idea that one thing worked for one guy and now he thinks he knows everything.  The reality is that women are human beings and they are all different and there are no magic lines that work on all of them (or even a majority of them).  Something that will drive one girl crazy for you will sometimes make another girl hate you. The point of the PUA community is to figure some general propositions about how men and women interact and try to expand on that.  But just because you told a girl on Facebook that you wanted to eat a chocolate sundae out of her asshole and it worked doesn’t mean it will work for everybody. 

4)	Your “gimmick” doesn’t work if you can’t get her to date you.  There are a lot of “gimmicks” to “trick” a girl into talking to you or giving her your number.  These gimmicks are mostly stupid because they are relying on the element of surprise or trickery to get a girl to do something she wouldn’t otherwise do.  An example of a gimmick like this is the one where you walk up to a random girl, hand her your phone and just tell her to put your number in.  Yes, this gimmick somtimes works because girls are usually so surprised/intimidated/confused that they just do it.  But will that girl call you back?  Hell no (if you haven’t established attraction).  5 minutes later, she will realize what happened and she will remember you as the creepy weirdo at the club who got her number using a trick.  Girls aren’t stupid.  Shit, you could get Kate Upton to talk to you if you ran up to her and yelled “oh my god, my father is having a heart attack in the other room, I need your help.”  Shit, she might even give you her number.  But that doesn’t mean she will date you.  Your goal is to establish a real, genuine connection with her, not to get her to talk to you using a worthless trick. 

5)	DON’T TRY TO FUCK YOUR FRIENDS.  Just fucking don’t.  Go find somebody else.  That’s the whole point of abundance mentality, isn’t it?  If your friends wanted to fuck you, they would tell you (or let you know somehow).  There is nothing more horrifying for a girl than a guy who she thought was her friend telling her he is in love with her.  Imagine your best friend – the guy you’ve known for second grade and who’s been with you through thick and thin.  Now imagine him telling you that the only reason he was your friend this whole time was because he wanted to fuck you.  Now imagine how you would feel. 

6)	“How do I tell a girl I like her” – YOU FUCKING DON’T.  Your words mean nothing to women and telling a girl you like her is only going to make shit weird.  The only time I can think that it would ever appropriate to tell a girl you like her is if you’ve been hanging out with her romantically for a while and she is wondering where it’s going.  Otherwise, actions speak louder than words.  Any girl that looks even remotely pretty in our society is constantly getting approached and being fed a bunch of fake compliments and bullshit, so she learns to just stop listening to men’s compliments/professions of love.  That’s just a sad fact of our society – most men can’t control their emotions and are constantly spewing all kinds of verbal diarrhea at women. I have a friend who works in Hooters and she gets 3-4 marriage proposals a day – they mean nothing to her.  Meanwhile, she thinks I’m a really nice guy because I gave her a ride once when her car ran out of gas.  

Furthermore, you probably don’t “like” her.  You most likely just want to fuck you and are suffering from a weird infatuation because you don’t understand your emotions.  Every girl above the age of 16 has been in a relationship with a guy who told her he liked her and then 3 weeks later changed his mind and/or became a psycho maniac.  

7)	“It won’t hurt to call her one more time.”  Yes it will.  Even if you’ve given up on her and want to throw one last Hail Mary, you are lowering your value in your own eyes.  You are what you do and every time you get rejected, your brain undergoes a chemical reaction where it thinks its more of a piece of shit than before.  Feelings of social anxiety, inferiority and attachment are emotions that we can’t completely control, and pursuing women that are rejecting us just make those emotions worse.   And “she’s really hot” isn’t an excuse.  

8)	There is more to self improvement than lifting and dressing well.  There is nothing wrong with lifting and dressing well, but there is much more to life.  You should also become intelligent, articulate, creative, and find a passion in life that has nothing to do with women.  If you think self improvement is just lifting and buying new clothes, then you’ve already made your life all about women and getting laid, which is the first step to unhappiness.  

9)	Fix your life first.  I see a lot of guys post here with serious problems (anxiety, depression, low self-esteem) in their life that need to be fixed with therapy or something before they should even think about getting laid.  If your life has a hole in it, trying to fill it with the attention of women is the last thing you should do.  

10)	“Girl said X.  How do I respond?”  Jesus Fucking Christ – figure it out yourself!  You can’t rely on other people to tell you what to say in every single sitatuion.  The point of PUA is to learn general principles you can apply in all situations, not to learn a bunch of canned lines that may or may not work with your particular girl.  What happens when you’re on a date?  Are you going to go to the bathroom and post on r/askseddit a question about how to respond to her last “shit test”?   Also, you can’t obsess about every word a girl says – in every conversation both sides are going to make mistakes and say stupid things, you will literally go crazy if you overthink every word you say.  And finally, most of the answers you’re getting are from weirdos on the internet who have never actually tried these lines or will try these lines in real life. 

11)	“I have low self esteem/ I have approach anxiety / I don’t know how to talk to girls, etc..” – You just gotta practice.  There is nothing anybody here can tell you about how to conquer your anxiety or talk to girls.  You just have to practice.  In fact, I would characterize “confidence” as a skill like weightlifting that you have to practice to get good at.  JUST DO IT.  

12) Stop relying on TV and movies for guidance!!  Not only are those things not real, they often actively promote ideas/beliefs/tactics that are the opposite of what you should actually do.  In fact, I think one of the biggest reasons the PUA community even exists is that our society teaches men how to deal with women in the complete wrong way, and that includes TV and movies.  The writers of TV and movies oftentimes know nothing about PUA, so they just depict men and women as they think they are or how they wish they would act.  Just as you wouldn't pick up seduction techniques from a porno, neither should you try to learn anything from a James Bond movie or a Youtube video.  

13) "What's the deal with college/coffee shop/cruise ship/library/airport game?" Women are women are women - they are all the same.  There is no difference between game in a coffee shop or in a college class or at a White House dinner.  Just act appropriate for the situation and for the person you are talking to. 
[Here is the link to the study guide.](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Lk_pclTAYVLZaV8kSXPF7CacLYKzUrqxcKktk_BmTxE/edit?usp=sharing)

I made these "cliffnotes" so that I can review the main concepts of the book without re-reading the whole thing. I think it is a very helpful book for beginners, but with any self help book, the ideas tend to fade from your brain a few weeks after reading. This study guide can help with a quick review to keep those ideas in your head. 


This was created mostly for people who have already read Models. If you haven't read it in full, I would highly recommend doing so. It has a ton of great examples that are pretty helpful for understanding a lot of these concepts. [Here is an Amazon link](https://www.amazon.com/Models-Attract-Women-Through-Honesty/dp/1463750358). 

Let me know if there is any changes I could make to the document. I tried to just include the key bits of info, and I skipped a few chapters/concepts that I thought were pretty unnecessary to review.

All credit to Mark Manson of course.

Edit: [Here is an alternative formatting](https://www.dropbox.com/s/h6hpgtrmrv6rkcc/models.pdf?dl=0) that u/trifle_truffle was cool enough to put together.
So after having received rejection after rejection from approaching a bunch of average looking girls and slowly having my limiting beliefs of me not being good enough/not attractive enough creep back on me, I approach this literal 9/10 stunningly beautiful woman. This girl just lights up completely and enthusiastically agrees to go grab a coffee with me tomorrow. Once again I'm realizing that, when you day game, there does not seem to be a correlation between how hot the girl is and how hard it is to get a date with her.So I’m a 26 year old virgin. So not good with girls. However, I’ve worked my ass off to become more confident and just going for it with girls. And I can feel it paying off.

I just had a girl who I’ve been talking with go AWOL after I asked her out to coffee. And you know what, fuck it. I feel like she did me a favor and now I can move on. It’s such a freeing feeling to not worry about every little thing with women. 

She doesn’t text back? Who gives a shit. Next. I feel like if a woman is interested in you, you will know and she will make an effort. If she isn’t, then she isn’t worth your time 

I’m not even sure why I am writing this post. But I hope other people like me will see this and realize that it is in their best interest to just go for it and stop overthinking. 90% of the posts here are about stupid/small shit that should not be taking up so much mental energy. Literally nothing happens if she rejects you. Nothing. Just be respectful about that shit and move on.r/dating_advice actually told me an interesting story. Most of the men there have absolutely no issue with being the more invested one. 

A guy who said "You should never invest more than a woman im a relationship" got downvoted a lot. That tells you a lot.

Now, onto the concept:

The issue is that a plethora of men face is the dreaded pedestalizing. You take a woman and upgrade her from human being to Greek goddess status, hence lowering yourself in her eyes.

Women are also human beings. If you idolized your best mate, he'd smack you and tell you to stop being an idiot, same thing is here. Why would she react diffrerently? 

If she likes her relationship being a GOD/SERVANT relationship, then that woman is a narcissist and you should GTFO there. 

How many times did it happen for a guy to fall madly in love, text 24/7, buy gifts, pay dates, be the perfrct gent, etc, just for the woman to hop off on a nearby digging stick just for the shitz and giggles? 

Treat her like a queen, she will treat you like a fan.

What did she do to DESERVE your neverending attention? Did she give you the gift of life, kids? Did she bail you out of jail? Did she save your life? Did she decide to become the mother of your children? No? Then what?

If you say it's just to progress the relstionship further, then you are full of shit, because you are pretending to be someone you are not to get a bit of that crotch, you are no better then.

Guys, your attention is your ammo, your currency in a relationship, don't give it all away to her, ever! Always keep some in reserve!

Now, for the concrete advice:

Treat EVERY woman as if she is replacable, because they are. There is 10 diffrent women, who are younger, sexier, prettier, smarter on every single corner of every street in the world. If you attracted a girl like the one you got now, you will be able to do it again. So instead of simping towards her, let her simp for you.

Make her work for your attention. Have her do random chores framed as a nice service (she comin over? Tell her to buy that wine a little bit further from her route  not too far away, not too close), have her pay for an entire date. We get attracted to the people do services for (wierd, but psychology is psychology). 

If yoh can't get a woman to do that for you, to inconvinience herself a bit to please you, change your woman, because TRUST ME, there is a guy she would hichike across Sahara do get her guts dug out by. The least she can do is go a bit further from her rout to please you. If she doesn't want to? Move on untill you find the one that will.

So repeat after me: she is always replacable!!!

Thanks for listening and good luck!**I made this into an animated video, if you'd like to watch it, here's a link:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo)

&#x200B;

If you enjoyed this please consider subscribing with this link. I create a lot of summaries: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub\_confirmation=1

**If you're prefer to just read, here's the video script...**

I'm going to teach you the top five lessons from the book “Models” by Mark Manson.

The tagline of the book is “how to attract women through honesty” while it definitely teaches this it doesn’t mean if you have a girlfriend the lessons aren’t useful. The lessons will also teach you how to be more charismatic and confident around anyone you meet not just women. The lesson will work for anyone trying to attract anyone no matter what sexuality or gender.

**Lesson one don't be needy**

You need to be happy with who you are.

If you are needy you do things to impress others.

Mark Manson says “all performance is neediness”

To stop being needy do things because you enjoy doing them and for no other reason

Be comfortable with who you are and don’t look to anyone else for approval.

You don’t need the approval of others just the approval of yourself. One needy behaviour is sending too many text messages.

Mark Manson says that texts should be used to arrange dates and that’s about it, they should be used to arrange real life interactions.

Also, a non needy man will stick to what he believes in even if it doesn’t match what the others around him believe.

Don’t be disrespectful to the people around you but don’t just go along with the crowd.

Be invested in yourself and what you believe in.

This isn’t to say be horrible to others - you 100% should care about other people just stick to what you believe in respectfully.

Allow others to have their own opinion on things and allow yourself to have your own as well.

Don’t worry about rejection - Mark Manson says “rejection exists for a reason — it’s a means to keep people apart who are not good for each other”

**Lesson two: Show your vulnerable side**

Most people try their hardest not to look stupid. Men think to attract a woman you’ve got to be as macho as possible and make no mistakes.

The thing is women don't actually mind if you make mistakes or look stupid, what actually matters is how you react to looking stupid.

You see “Humans are attracted to each other’s rough edges.”

If you make a mistake or say something wrong and just laugh it off it shows that you have enough self esteem that small things like this don’t bother you.

Nobody is perfect, everyone makes mistakes. By you being vulnerable others around you will relax because they know they don’t have to be perfect either.

So talk about things that you’re truly passionate about not just small talk even if you talk about mistakes you’ve made in don’t worry about trying to cover up your rough edges.

If you try to have deeper, more meaningful conversations more often you will form stronger relationships much faster.

If you’re talking to someone and say something stupid just laugh it off.

**Lesson 3: have an attractive lifestyle**

Actions speak louder than words.

If you concentrate all your energy on the best lines to say to someone in the hope of impressing her but then you actually lead an unattractive lifestyle then you might be able to attract the them initially but before long you lifestyle will put them off and you’ll become unattractive to them.

A big misconception is that the majority of your attraction comes from your natural looks.

Physical appearance is one area of attraction but your lifestyle as a whole is more important.

What lifestyle would someone else most like to be part of?

If you have a relationship with someone who is really attractive, they drive a nice car and have a good job but they also work 50 hours a week you might be attracted to them initially but eventually because they work all the time you won’t get to see them so their lifestyle will put you off.

So how do you make your lifestyle more attractive?

In my opinion the most attractive lives for the majority of people involve 2 things.

Freedom and time. To me the most attractive lifestyle is doing what you love, when you love with who you love.

How do you do that?

One simple aim, get your passive income higher than your expenses.

If you are not sure exactly what this means I would recommend listening to rich dad poor dad by robert t kiyosaki.

When you passive income is higher than your expenses you won’t have to work and that way you will have a lot of time to work on what you actually love.

**Lesson 4: Make assumptions rather than asking questions.**

Have you ever been in a situation where someone is talking to you but it feels more like an interview?

All they are doing is asking questions and it's not fun to be part of.

To avoid this is you want to talk in terms of statements.

Make assumptions about the other person.

Rather than asking what do you do for a living?

Say “You seem like a great person, I bet your job is interesting.”

Instead of how do you guys know each other?

Say “You guys look like you’ve been friends for a long time.

Instead of What hobbies do you have?

Say “You look like someone who is really into sport”

This is called cold reading and it’s just making educated guesses about another person.

Mark Manson says you should cold read with women as much as possible.

Most people would be worried about doing this because what if you get it wrong.

The reason it works so well is because it doesn’t matter if you get it wrong.

When you cold read 1 of 3 things will happen:

&#x200B;

1. You’ll get it wrong and they will correct you - this means that they will just answer the question that you based your cold read on.
2. You get it wrong and the other person is intrigued and wants to know why you thought that.
3. You get it right - You might get lucky and guess completely right and this will build an instant rapport with the other person.

Whatever happens it’s a much more interesting way to get the other person talking and alot more effective than asking endless questions.

By speaking in statements you don’t overpower the other person with questions. It allows them to continue the conversation if they want to and not feel trapped. Also the other person will ask questions about the statements you make.

It’s ok to ask questions sometimes just not all the time.  

**Lesson five stop using filler words**

This means saying words and phrases such as “like”, “erm”, “you know” and “I guess”

By taking out filler words you’ll be much more interesting to listen to because you can say more in less time.

It’s about quality, not quantity.

Here’s an example from the book. Listen to these two different ways of saying the same thing, one with filler words and one without.

“So, I guess what I'm saying is like that I never really felt at home when I lived out there in you know in California the people all just felt kind of like superficial to me and I am didn't really like it  I guess.”

Now take out the filler words.

“I never felt at home in California the people felt superficial to me I didn't really like it.”

Filler words and phrases make speaking to you boring and slow.

Also when you say “I guess” or “you know” it come across as though you don’t fully stand by what you’re saying so you have to weaken what you said with a filler phrase after it.

So how do you get better at not saying filler words and phrases.

First of all be aware that you’re doing it, try to consciously make an effort to not say filler words.

Another thing you can do is record yourself trying to explain something and see what filler words you say the most. Keep re-recording yourself until you can explain the whole thing without filler words.

And finally, be ok with silence, if you are more relaxed in silence then you won’t feel the pressure to always be saying something. This means you are much less likely to say filler phrases. Silences give your brain time to process the conversations and to think of much more interesting responses to what people say.

A pause before replying is recommended by a lot of people because it shows you care enough that you actually want to give a good response and not just say the first thing that comes to mind.

**So, to summarise:**

&#x200B;

1. Don't be needy
2. Show your vulnerable side
3. Have an attractive lifestyle
4. Make assumptions rather than asking questions.
5. Stop using filler words

If you enjoyed this please consider subscribing with this link. I create a lot of summaries: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub\_confirmation=1

Thanks for reading, have a great day.If a woman is ATTRACTED to you, half the game is already over.

A fundamental characteristic of human nature is that people want what they can’t have. And that makes them want it even more. 

Chase a woman and she will lose attraction to you, but make her chase you and you will build attraction in her.

Simple advice, but will do you wonders.Caught myself doing this with a girl on Tinder who texted me like crazy (borderline creepy) for one day, agreeing to a date, talked about me meeting her dad, then ignored me the next. Thinking these points help me bounce back fast so I thought I'd share them.

1. I remember my older friend gave me this advise when I got flaked once: " It's not a date until she actually shows up."
2. No matter how hot she is, I promise you there is someone hotter around the corner
3. There are a host of reasons why girls suddenly lose interest. A better looking dude got to her, she was desperate when she talked to you, she's going through something personal. (edit: does not mean you aren't good enough as you are now. Just not in her perspective.)
4. The more time you spend getting hung up on how something did not work out, the more time you waste potentially finding someone better
5. Never plan days around girls. Always fit them into an already eventful schedule.
6. If you suspect she is playing games, don't stand for it. Have some self-respect. You are not a designated attention and validation provider.
7. If you are certain she has completely lost interest. Then remove her from your contacts or social media. If she is interested but not sure about you, leave her on your social media, but stop engaging for now. Live your life and let her witness your awesome life. If she wants to participate she will reach out.
8. Be congruent. The MM taught me this. Don't act abundant and busy one second then all desperate when the opportunity arrives. It shows you are putting on an act. Maintain your frame. Example: I once planned a date with a girl who took a whole day to reply. I did not budge one bit in double texting her. On the day of the date she suddenly says she wants to reschedule to a later time which she knows does not work for me. I tell her: That won't work, sorry, maybe another day then. This was a risk, but it completely worked. She replied: Actually your time is fine. We went out.

I know it's easy to get sucked up with one girl, especially if she is hot, but behaving in a needy way will never do you any favors. The best shot you got in any scenario is just carry on living your life as is. Hope this helps some of you.Context: I've spent years intellecualizing myself as a victim (how to repel people 101). When I started to check r/seduction,  the quantity of sexy tips overwhelmed me a bit. Here is a distillation of foundational advice from this subreddit that helped me the most, along with things I learned by making many embarrassing mistakes.

- Reading signals and "playing the game" are great skills and all, but the thing that has consistently gotten me laid is honesty. Be honest with both yourself and others about your intentions: when you're interested in a person, when you do or don't like something. Be direct. 

- Pursue your own hobbies first and look for people you can have a conversation with. Wait until the end of the date before you ask if they want to fool around. The person deserves to know that you prioritize their company over getting your dick wet. Most people will be flattered that you find them attractive, even if they aren't interested in that way.

- If they accept, don't change your behavior. One yes does not equal unconditional consent. You can still come on too strong after you establish mutual attraction, even though boundaries have shifted.

- Rejection is inevitable and good. If anything,  it's an opportunity to strengthen the friendship by demonstrating  that you have a cool head when you don't get what you want.

-  Dating functions not just to test chemistry, but also to screen for the ability to respect personal boundaries and exercise discretion. Most people aren't prudes. They like to get freaky,  they're just skilled at compartmentalizing. 

- Most importantly: take care of yourself, especially in terms of hygene. People can tell how well you do that..
This is a mistake i still make to this day. Dont try to find women through Instagram or snapchat, 80% its not gonna work unless you’re famous, rich, or have a impressive amount of followers. Because lets be honest here, women are a different thing when it comes to social media. They dont care about you, they get all the attention they need from thirsty simps online, and even then they probably have an actual confident guy beating their guts in real life.

Its sad but its true, its almost impossible to stand out from the other guys when it comes to online. It has nothing to do with you being ugly or boring, but texting in general isnt sexy at all. If you were to meet the same girl in person and had game, you’d have a good chance with her. But not on her instagram dms.

Trust me guys, i have a good amount of followers, and a 7/10 guy. Im good with girls in person, BUT i wont even lie. I have attempted to slide in over hundreads of women’s dm’s on snapchat and instagram combined. but let’s say about 200 girls. About 100 never even read my text. 50 read but never responded. 30 responded but never responded again after that.  15 went somewhere but didnt work out. A good 5 of them either liked me back or i was able to get into a relationship with them. 

So right there only 5 out of 200 females i was successful with over the span of a year. Dont waste your time guys, talk to girls in real life.Here are 5 steps to follow every time you go out. If you follow this formula, with no exceptions, you will have a successful night. Every time. 

1) APPROACH ALL

As soon as you step out of your house. Talk to every person you see. Even if it's small talk with your elderly neighbor. This will train your brain to get into a flow state and start being social no matter what. It'll force you to stop judging people and you will merge with your environment.

2) MINIMIZE TIME BETWEEN SOCIAL INTERACTIONS

As soon as you're done talking to a group/person you immediately engage with the next set. This will force you to get out of thinking and just DOING. Take so much action that it shuts off the thinking mind. This will also stop you from "value scanning" by standing there thinking of who to approach next, which will get you in your head. 

3) NEVER JUDGE YOURSELF

100% positive self talk. No matter what. If you get rejected, you say "who the fuck would have the guts to do that" and pat yourself on the back. Attraction is a process and it's going to have it's ups and downs, but it is all in service of your growth. Keep the bigger picture in mind. You are awesome.

4) FIND THE HUMOR IN EVERYTHING

Everything is funny. Like a kid with innocent eyes who looks at the world with joy and laughter. If you feel negative emotions creep up, breathe, and laugh it off. It is also helpful to forcefully laugh and smile as your physiology will affect your psychology. Work from the outside in. 

5) DONT WORRY ABOUT IT

Don't take anything too seriously. We are all specks on a giant floating rock in space. Life is short. Have all the experiences, good and bad, learn from it and move on.

&#x200B;

It's that simple. If you have any questions, I'm more than happy to answer them.Here's my best advice for dating - the number one advice to be successful with women that you'll ever hear from anyone, which simply always works. 


I've been on several thousand dates (Yes, thousand) while traveling all around the world, slept with more women than I could ever count because I lost track somewhere after 500, and been doing pickup for a little over a decade - so it's not just a theory and I know what I'm doing. The number one way, the most effective and best technique for finding a romantic partner and starting a sexual relationship with them... no matter where you are - in a club, bar, on the street, at a party, whatever - the best way to meet someone and have the interaction go great nearly every time, is to say:


"Hi!"- ...and then just talk to her like she's a **normal person**.


It's this crazy technique where you just **talk to women like people**, and not as if they're some alien from another planet. *Extremely effective, but criminally underutilized.*


And it's remarkable what doing this simple thing will help you accomplish. You don't go up to women and say "Oh hey I saw you from across the bar and thought you looked cute, and would kick myself if I hadn't come up to you and said hi! Oh by the way, who lies more, men or women?" - which is so fucking canned that most women, especially the hot ones, hear this hundreds of times each day they go out, from guys who are too afraid to just walk up and say hi and ACTUALLY RELY ON THEMSELVES and their personalities, and talk about stuff that they want to talk about, instead thinking that they have to say something "cool" or "witty" to "hook" the girl and impress her.


All you do is say "Hey!" - and then just talk to her like she's a normal human being, who eats, sleeps, shits, burps, farts, and breathes to survive - just like you do... (I know, fucking insane concept!)


"So what do you like to do? Tell me more about that. Tell me even more about that. Oh, that's awesome! Here's what I like to do! Here's also what I like to do! Let's go do that stuff together sometime because we'll have so much fun! It's a date! Weee!" And show some fucking ENTHUSIASM, don't be a robot speaking in boring monotone. You know what a huge part of Charisma is? TONALITY - the way you speak. Proper tonality sucks people in, and they hang on your every word. *With proper tonality, everything you say is the hook*


And if that's too hard, imagine that she's your buddy. Or even yet, your FUCK BUDDY. How would you talk to her if you've already fucked and the pressure for that was completely off? Focus on that then, and talk like that.


Unfortunately, even this fool-proof approach and advice, which gets me laid more than anything else, and the sole reason for why I pull nearly every single time I go out, has its limits, and some girls will simply not talk to you. **That's because no matter who you are, no matter what you do, and no matter what you have going on in your life - some people are just not going to like you!**. Accept that as a part of life, and move on - stop wasting your time.


But barring those cases which are out of your control - it will work. Every. Single. Time. --- Provided that you have your inner game in order and don't come off as a needy, whimpering, blubbering mess when you approach. And provided you're NOT A TRY-HARD.


So, go get your inner game in order by removing the fucked up thoughts circulating in your head, fix your body language, develop great TONALITY, eye contact, and go say "Hi"... and then... TALK TO HER LIKE SHE'S A NORMAL FUCKING PERSON. Because she is.


And if you think she's out of your league, then I hate to break it to you - but you have very low self-esteem, and you're objectifying women. *Stop doing that, and, again, get your inner game in order.* “So and so is out of my league” is just a covert way of saying “I have poor self-esteem.” The whole idea of ‘leagues’ is rooted in a profound denial of your own self-worth.

And, by objectifying, I mean that you’re putting a beautiful woman on a pedestal, where she becomes this unattainable goddess, someone who you worship and appreciate only for her looks, and not for her personality. That’s because if you see a hot girl and think that she’s out of your league – you are basing this ENTIRELY on your first impressions of how she looks – and you completely disregard her personality and who she is as a human being, *thus completely dehumanizing her* and ruining any fucking chance you had with her right from the start. 

It's called empathy. Without it, you'll never connect with her, and so she'll never trust you. You can't emphasize with an object, and that's what she is to you if you put her on a pedestal.


(this was a bit of a rant but some guys are fucking clueless) Oh yeah, here's [my blog](https://www.saulisdating.com/blog) if you want to read similar content. I recommend the one about how to truly be happy if you want a total inner game mind-fuck.


**EDIT** Here's [Part Two] (https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/70pyzr/the_best_advice_for_dating_you_will_ever_hear/) **EDIT**


We've all tried to improve ourselves with women. At some point, you realize that what you're doing just isn't working. You're too tame, too friendly, too passive, and too nice. Too many opportunities are slipping through your fingers because you aren't making the move. So you learn new strategies that are edgier, bolder, and more sexual. You start to take risks with attractive women. You start to get better results. Women respond to your new boldness. Things are looking up.

But then it happens. You meet a girl you really like. And things seem different now. Even though she's not getting sexual with you, for some reason you decide it's okay to be a lot nicer and take things a lot slower sexually with her. Your brain comes up with brilliant reasons why it should be okay for you to do this:

* I want a wholesome, quality girl rather than a trashy girl. A quality girl will make a guy take it slow before she hooks up with him. 

* I want true love and a relationship instead of just sex. True love means that even though she isn't into me yet, I keep making an effort until I win her over.

* I didn't make it clear to her that I'm interested in her as a person rather than just interested in her sexually. I'll take her out on some respectable (sexless) dates to show her that I really like her.


* She's waiting for me to act more boyfriend-like before she gets sexual with me. I'll play the good guy for a while and she may get sexual with me later.

* She only dates guys she's friends with first. I'll just chill. I'll become friends with her and make the move later.

* She comes from a different culture where girls are more modest. I'll give her what she's used to, which is taking it slow sexually.

* She's shy and doesn't trust people easily. I'll win her trust and later she'll open up to me sexually.


The underlying idea is this:

* *I've found a great girl. I'm going to try to invest emotionally with her and let her invest emotionally with me. I'll leave the sex for later, until she's emotionally invested in me. Then I'll get her for sure.*

There are two big problems with this strategy. 

**First, you become too emotional to get sexual.** The longer you hang out with her `as a friend,' the more emotionally invested you become. You start to have more and more feelings for her beyond friendship. As you spend weeks/months/years getting closer to this girl without getting sexual, your emotional investment makes you careful and inhibited around her because you don't want to lose what you have with her. So it becomes almost impossible to make the move to get sexual later. 

**Second, she starts to lose attraction for you.** The more emotionally invested you get in her without her commensurate sexual investment, the more she loses attraction for you. She reads your unwillingness to get sexual as a lack of self-confidence on your part. She sees this as you not having enough confidence in your own sexual attractiveness to bring the relationship to a sexual place. Your deliberate, careful, sex-free demeanor bores her. 

Instead of letting this girl off the hook in terms of sexual investment, it is critical that you get her sexually invested in the relationship sooner rather than later. 

Sexual investment doesn't just mean sex. It could mean sexual banter. It could mean physical contact. But whatever it is, it leads to sex. It's a small sexual investment on her part which calls for a small emotional investment on your part. 

If she is unwilling to get sexual with you early on, then you should not be willing to invest emotionally in this girl. Sure, you could be friends with her if that's honestly what you want. But honestly, is that really what you want? It isn't. Don't try to be friends with her if you are interested in her sexually. That will just lead to problems for you. 

Typically, if you inject sex early on and she isn't into it, she'll filter herself out. Often she'll drop the conversation or stop talking with you. She may act offended or `creeped out.' That's fine. That's what you want. You want to find out if there's any attraction for you early on instead of wasting hours/days/weeks/months on this girl only to find she isn't into you.

When you meet a girl you really like, don't change your game for her. Don't slow down. She doesn't get a free pass just because you like her. No matter how nice and wholesome she seems, she will be willing to invest something sexually if she likes you. And if she isn't willing, it's not worth the investment on your part, no matter how great she seems.

Shameless self-plug: If you aren't meeting women you really like, it's time to learn how. My new program, [She's Six Steps Away](http://shessixstepsaway.com), teaches you everything you need to know to get past your fear of approaching women.

Eric Disco

[ApproachAnxiety.com](http://approachanxiety.com)I wanted to make a post for guys like myself. Now when you read the title you know immediately that this isn't for the well put together guy who wants tips on how to slightly tweak their game to get 9's instead of the 8's that they can F-Close at the moment, sorry guys there is a small chance this might help but there is plenty of content that will help you out there if it doesn't. Also when I say "guys like myself" I mean guys who know the basics and even some intermediate content but are hitting a brick wall mentally with this kind of stuff, so this won't be a "How To Wash, Groom and Shave That Neckbeard Guide" nor will it be "How To Beat AA and Kino Effectively In One Move Vol 5".

Now that we have the Poseurs, the guys who are doing it right and the guys who need to take a shower and crawl out of the basement (but will join us at a later date) out of the way it's time to concentrate on a demographic that I am part of that which encompasses the depressed, the sociopaths, the socially anxious, the autists etc. I think you get the picture. I can only share my experiences and what I have learned from them as a depressed, socially anxious, autistic freak and hopefully some of it resonates with you out there and at least sparks a debate.

So I guess I should start by talking about discipline. I think all we know that shy, anxious and depressive mindsets are not attractive to the majority of women (of course there will be some but they are rare and they have to like your particular brand of fucked upness which makes the chances minuscule) so what action do we take as fucked up guys? We attempt to get rid of all these mindsets aided by an arsenal of advice from the internet and this advice falls under two categories temporary and permanent. Temporary advice will tell you to "fake it till you make it" and preach that everything will fall in place eventually, which seems to be pretty good news to most people and yes it is but for Mr Fuck Up over here its not washing. Sorry guys we (and I include myself in this) were dealt a shit hand genetically and in turn are going to have to work mighty hard to pull ourselves out of this one.

If you resonate with what i'm describing thus far then right now you have to stop looking for quick fixes and get disciplined. And when I say disciplined I mean disciplined. For example here is my routine when i'm in disciplined mode:

* If I have to get up at 7.30am for class, I will be in my bed for 11.15pm the previous night, this gives me time to fall asleep and a solid 8 hours sleep per night. I can't stress how important a decent sleep pattern is for a good mental state.

* When I have time during the day, I go for a run which usually takes me about 50 minutes to complete. I try and do this three times a week. This eases my depressive mindsets greatly.

* I shower daily, take care of my teeth, fix my hair and make sure I look and smell presentable. Even if this is just for going to the shops. If I haven't done one of the things, it's not a crisis but I like to have it as a routine to keep me in line and make sure i'm ready for whoever I bump into when out.

* I abstain from masturbation. I know this one is controversial and that /r/NoFap has been criticized for being too cult like which I fully take on board however placebo or not, not fapping eases all of my negative mind habits and most importantly makes me actively want to chase women. As some of you depressed guys will know, trying to gain a libido when depressed can be fucking difficult at the best of times.

I could go on and describe everything that I do but that isn't the point, the point is to illustrate that fucked up guys NEED to have a strict regimented routine to succeed. I'm not saying do exactly what I do but at least find things that will keep you disciplined that you follow through with.

So now we have a well disciplined guy who decides to go out and unleash himself upon the helpless women of the world, fraught with confidence he gets closer and closer to making his approaches and then he is immediately his old self again and flees. So why did this seemingly unstoppable force change direction and cower away? Because he remembers that he isn't who he is portraying due to the fact that he is out of his comfort zone. That is the second thing I want to mention, comfort zones.

Compared to getting out of your comfort zone as a messed up individual gaining discipline is child's play. I am just as bad at this as most of you because I am one of you. For me getting a job is outside of my comfort zone, making a speech to an audience is outside of my comfort zone and speaking to gorgeous women is a long long way outside of my comfort zone. I'm not going to stand here and preach to you about how I did it and how you should follow suit, I'm still stuck at this part of what I perceive as the steps I have to take to become successful at this whole life thing. However I know in my mind from the very few times that I have stepped outside of my comfort zone that it is so beneficial to you as a person, in all aspects not just seduction.

The way I see it is you have to take baby steps if you are flawed, so once you have gained even the slightest bit of confidence and energy from being disciplined...do something with it! It's all fine and well to gain confidence and energy but if its not being used then its pointless, all you'd really be is a contented hermit as opposed to a depressed hermit. So do something that phases you, even if its as small as going to the shops if you were too nervous to before, then the next week on your walk to the shops look people dead in the eye as you walk past them and smile. Eventually going to the shops and looking people in the eye will be nothing to you and you have to just keep going. I will add that the steps will get bigger as you go along but your tolerance to making larger steps will increase.

In relation to seduction, my major comfort barrier that I have to break is speaking to girls whilst sober, so what i've been doing when out is decreasing the amount I drink each time, to now that i'm at the point where i'm only having 1 or 2 drinks on a night out. Eventually I'm going to go sober which will be hard but something I have to do.

Now I have lots more to say on this matter, such as stripping the indentity but I think i'll save you that as this is quite a large post. However if the demand is there i'd be happy to make future posts on the same matter.

tl;dr: If you have are mentally fucked up you should start by getting a sense of discipline in your life and then following up by venturing outside of your comfort zone if you want to break through, as this is the only option if you are struggling with mental problems.
  
Edit: Just to let you know, part II of this is now available [here](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1mr86d/a_fucked_up_guys_guide_part_ii/) and Part III is [here](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1nua9z/a_fucked_up_guys_guide_part_iii/).
 

 [Update:  Links incoming.  Keep in mind these are good places to start, but there are tons of equally good resources out there.]  

It just hit me that Seddit's wealth of information is not compiled in one single place.  I figured a "curriculum" like this would be a nice overview for newcomers to the site.  Personally, I'll use this list to check which aspects of my game are improving and which need work.

I have left out items where substantial disagreement still exists, such as not masturbating.  Of course I'm open to suggestions for additions and removals.

If you think this is useful, please upvote it.  If you believe it to be unnecessary, downvote it.  Without further ado:

**Lifestyle: Do you...**

* [Exercise regularly (minimum 30 minutes per day, 3 days per week)](http://www.reddit.com/r/fitness)

* Go out as much as you'd care to

* Have a passion or hobby that interests you and intrigues others

* [Constantly initiate conversations with new people](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/ckut1/talk_to_everyone/)

* Keep in touch with as many of your existing acquaintances as possible

* Eat healthy

* [Get an ideal amount of sleep](http://www.reddit.com/r/sleep)

* [Stay well-dressed and groomed (or well-disheveled, if that's your style)](http://www.reddit.com/r/malefashionadvice)


**Toolbox: Know how to...**

* [Kino](http://www.vindicarlo.com/DiCarlo%20Escalation%20Ladder%20-%20vindicarlo.com.pdf) (escalating physical touch)

* Escalate sexual conversation

* [Dance](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/gd47t/7_club_tips/)

* [Use eye contact effectively](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2010/11/21/bill-clinton-reality-distortion-field/)

* Use tone of voice effectively (tonality and rapport)

* Convey an impressive physical presence

* Use expressive body language

* [Defeat flaking](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/dwaz0/ladies_this_pisses_men_off/)

* [Navigate qualifying/congruence/shit tests](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/iq6nx/common_shit_tests_and_how_to_defuse_them/)


**In-game state of mind: Are you...**

* [Outcome independent](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/lmak3/not_giving_a_fuck_the_story_of_a_young_mans/)

* Unafraid to approach anybody

* Having a good time - and letting it show

* Building social proof with others

* Keeping abundance mentality

* Managing logistics (venue change and isolation)

* Avoiding interview questions, steering conversation toward attraction or emotional connection

* Listening


**Personal progress: Do you...**

* Understand who you are and who you want to be

* Learn from every set and preferably, keep a log of them

* Regularly read or contribute seduction material

* Know which aspects of seduction you agree with and which aspects you object to

* Have a rational perspective and a positive attitude

* Know what you want out of seductionHey guys, so this past Saturday I finally decided to try something different at the club, and my new method ended up with the girl approaching and grabbing me.

I was with my 2 friends and we decided to have a night out. I was seeing a girl for 5 months that ended up screwing with my emotions pretty good so I really needed the night out. This time I said screw it though, I want to be the one approached by a girl at the club. So, I completely changed up my method at the club, and to my surprise it actually worked.

So, there were me and my 2 friends chilling by the bar getting a couple drinks. We move closer to the dance floor and I see this girl looking over at me. We locked eyes a couple times and I had a feeling she was interested. Usually at this point I would just go and start dancing with her with this kind of eye contact. But no, I stayed back and continued to have a good time with my buddies.

10 minutes later I noticed her friend group got a little closer to mine. So, I went for the light physical contact and placed my hand on her arm and told her that I really liked her tattoo sleeve. She responded well to this and I could tell she was into it. Still, I left and didn’t pursue.

NOW, I’m getting looks like crazy. I’m talking every 15 seconds she’s turning her head over her shoulder looking at me. I could tell it was bothering her that I didn’t take it any further moves after the physical contact and the little compliment I gave her. After another 15 minutes I guess she said enough is enough, came over to me put her hand in between the buttons of my dress shirt and pulled me in to start dancing.

The next thing is what got me even more. Generally I’m the one that has to ask the girl “do you want to go some place a little more quiet?” I decided no, I’m not going to ask this time, I want to remain intriguing to her. Well, within an hour she’s asking me if I’d like to go somewhere else to “talk”. This girl basically did everything that night! She took me back to her hotel and you guys know the rest haha.

Afterwards she told me that she’s never had to pursue a guy at the club, but that the combination of me not being an absolute creep and the fact that I looked like I was having a good time made me out to be extremely attractive to her. She also said it was killing her that I didn’t make the move sooner so she said she had to make it happen herself.

My advice for situations like this, is just look like you’re having a good time with your friends at the club. I always use this analogy that I came up with, in that a club is like a lion’s den, where you have all these dudes swooning over the girl. A girl just wants to feel safe and non threatened when in a club setting, so if you look like you have a good time and don’t look caught up in the pursuit of trying to get a girl, you’ll do infinitely times better at your pickup game in the club.Hey everyone Dennis here. I recently asked out a girl who works at a gym I got a tour of and she said yes. I just got off of the date and I have to say it went great. We did 3 activities, the date lasted 4 hours, and ended up with us making out in her car. First quick drink at a speakeasy, then mini golf where I did the whole let me help your stance cliche, finally we went to a Christmas light show where we both talked shit on everything that was happening around us which was fun. Went back to where we parked and made out in her car for a little bit. While on the date I also nailed down the second date where I'm gonna make my move. Remember everyone, be confident and make bold moves.Here are my notes after reading the book in one sitting.

**Seduction** *is the act of making a woman equally invested in you*.

Before sex, men are more invested. This is because women have a biological drive to be picky due to risks: pregnancy, sexual assault, etc. Men have relatively little to lose by sleeping with a partner. Women want sex as much as men, but there are also sociological factors that also come into play.

There are two ways to make a woman invested in you: Performance (superficial, pick up artist stuff), the second is by being less invested in her (instead become invested in yourself).

Manson believes that the best way to attract women is by becoming a "**low neediness man**" (which is an indicator of high status). Such a man is in touch with his feelings, has high self-esteem, strong sense of identity, is vulnerable, has self-respect, knows what he values. This is a fundamental aspect of being attractive to women and cannot be faked. 

You want to put women you meet into three categories: **Receptive**, **Neutral**, and **Non-receptive**. Receptive women should be approached and escalated. Neutral women are testing the waters, and you want to "polarize" them into either receptive or non-receptive shortly after meeting them. If you wait too long they will move into non-receptive (*the friend zone*). Don't invest anymore time into women who have shown they are non-receptive. Your ultimate goal when meeting women is to Polarize them: make them say "Fuck Yeah" or "Fuck No".

The next part of the book is about what he calls the 3 Fundamentals: Honest Living,  Honest Action, and Honest Communication.

# Honest Living

Honest Living is about your lifestyle. Finding what you believe in and creating character. Don’t just go with the flow, don’t just agree, invest in your own interests / passions / desires. Be polarizing and un-inhibited. Make your opinions known, express them. Know why something is interesting to you. Women are attracted to your identity.

Things you can improve:

* Body Language: Make Eye contact, improve your Posture, watch your Vocal Tone when speaking (head vs chest voice), Speed (slow down) nervous needy men speak fast,  Speak Loudly and clearly.
* Fitness: Exercise and improve your Diet (cut out Sodas, Fast Foods, Desserts, Candy)
* Fashion: Find fitting clothing, use matching colors, it should match your personality.
* Demographics: You will experience greater success by pursuing women in areas of your life that you excel at or enjoy. Know what type of women you want to attract. 

There are two types of men who will fail with women:

* Social Anxiety - overthink what others will say, fear of making a move
* Social Disconnected - wrong actions at the wrong time.

Beliefs. Change your mindset to believe that women want sex just as much as men do. Women need to be comfortable expressing their sexuality around you.

# Honest Action

Honest Action is about overcoming any excuses you might have that prevent you from becoming successful with women.

Anxiety is a sign of neediness, it shows you have a high level of investment in her opinion of you. Keep in mind that rejecting people is awkward, uncomfortable, and not fun for women. Women are generally rooting for you, they want you to succeed. Face your Fears, embrace them. Use incremental and consistent exposure. Focus on: Approaching, Escalating, and using Bold Actions.

Avoid Excuses. The most common are: *Blame Game* \- Don't blame the woman when you fail. *Apathy / Avoidance* \- Don't avoid something just because its painful. *Intellectualizing* \- You can read all you want but actually practicing is worth more.

Fapping and Porn. Cut out all Porn, it decreases motivation to pursue women. Jerk off once a week, Pick one Day to Jerk off, but you can only Jerk off to women you have met in person and haven't slept with yet.

# Honest Communication

Learning to express yourself freely and and effectively. How to communicate your true intentions and emotions to others. Men communicate through Facts, Women communicate largely through feelings and emotions. Most men are oblivious to the emotions and intentions that underlie everything women say.

Realize that Women have more to lose than you: They can get pregnant, assaulted, called sluts. Sex is the ultimate act of vulnerability for a woman.

*Tension* \- create sexual tension with women. *Flirting* is a sexual expression that makes her feel *secure*. Use *Teasing* which creates tension through uncertainty, what did he really mean. Use *Boldness* which create tension by stating clear intentions, you are attracted to her

# a. Emotional Self Awareness and Vulnerability

Women like vulnerable men, Romance Novels (porn for women) all follow the same pattern: A Hard and Rugged bad boy is troubled but strong. He is fearless but able to open up and share his vulnerable side. They create Emotional Connections with women.

Women only feel "slutty" when sleeping with a man who doesn’t care about her, or who hasn’t connected with her.

Be Vulnerable, and go a level deeper when communicating, Express your Feelings, not facts. Explain why you like something. Use universal emotions such as: ambition, shame, loneliness, achievements, regret, hardship, love, heartbreak.

Flirting: Communicate clearly and effectively. First Impressions matter, they communicate your Intentions, level of anxiety, how you present, how you communicate, and your confidence.

# b. Conversations skills

Improve your conversational skills through the following:

* Effective language, use fewer words, quality over quantity
* Use statements instead of questions, Statements assume rapport, practice cold reading (making an assumption about her based on her appearance). Avoid blanking during conversations. Statements will make her ask you questions. Use Jumping off points, branch off anything interesting she might share.
* Use Storytelling, stories always follow a pattern: a Setup, the Conflict and a Resolution.
* Try to Relate and Connect with women: Open Up. Share your passions / interests, dreams, ambitions, goals. Share your Best / worst experience. Share your childhood experiences, family stories
* Humor can be expressed in difference ways: Misdirection, Exaggeration, Teasing / Sarcasm, Wordplay, Role Playing.

# The Dating Process

The Dating Process consist of getting her Phone Number, Talking / Texting , going on Dates, having Sex, and then figuring out the Relationship you want (ONS, FWB, GF).

Don’t obsess over getting phone numbers, be upfront, do not waste time on Flakes, Use texts primary to organize the date.

General tips on planning Dates. Don’t do Lunch dates, they scream friend zone. Plan an Evening or nighttime date (6 pm - 9 pm). No Movie Dates. Avoid Dinner Dates. Select dates that are active, conducive to touching and flirting. Good choices are bowling, drinks, dancing, and walking.

Sex. Women are turned on by being wanted, they want to be desired. In General the more you pursue her the more she becomes aroused. Getting physical is key to seduction and dating. Touch her early, touch her often, and make it a necessary habit. You need to make a move: initial touching, first kiss, and then sexual touching. Be Bold, you want your actions to Polarize women. Use a natural progression

Signals. A man's job is to take action, a woman's job is to give signals. There are Pre-approach signals such as eye contact, smiling, closeness. There are Conversation Signals which include smiling, laughing, hair playing, closeness, gazing. And finally there are Escalation Signals, she ditches her friends, she touches you.

Kissing. Its always better to try and fail than to wonder. Use your hands, roam her body. Escalate towards sex, touch her breasts. If she lets you its a pretty clear sign she's willing to go further. Women need to be turned on before sex. Last minute objections are common due to social pressures, she wants to shift the blame to you. She doesn't want to feel guilty. Basically continue until she makes you stop

Sex. Focus on Foreplay, Teasing, Be dominant, She wants to surrender to you. Talk Dirty, Be Physical. Reassure her if she's insecure about her body.

# Thoughts

Overall I was impressed by the book. I assumed it would be filled with cheesy pick up material but it actually focuses on improving yourself first, becoming a high value (low neediness) man and then gives insight into what techniques work with women.Hey humans

A lot of seduction advice usually centres around specific techniques you can use to seem more high-value. 
But let’s be honest… it doesn’t really cover all the bases. 
No matter how many funny lines or stories are in your back pocket, you’ll eventually fuck it up and lose their interest...without a strong undercurrent of self-love.
Womens have innate confidence detection systems that are sharper than anything us guys have. These systems are always running in the background whenever you speak to them.
If you’re pretending to be someone else, it’ll cost valuable mental energy that you’ll eventually run out of. As that happens, chinks will form in your external shell of bullshit bravado; and you can bet that women will notice. 

This happened to me all the freaking time when I was younger, because I was using canned material as a mask for my damaged self-esteem. At that moment, I realised I had to heal myself from the inside out instead of the outside in. 
I’d argue there’s plenty of you guys here that need to do the same…

Here are some tips you can use to build the inner self-confidence that shines through when you square up to true hottie. 

None of the exercises here are easy and none of them are overnight fixes but they’ve worked wonders for me.  
You ready?
Here come the pain!

**Talk to people all the time**

If you want to be good at ANYTHING, you need to do it a lot. That’s how you learn to walk, talk, write, whistle and jerk off. Being sociable is no different! 

Most people are confident in situations they’ve mastered and nervous in ones that are new and scary. 
So it makes sense that you can max out your charisma by talking to a shit-ton of people until you get really good at it. 

Stop walking around with blinders on and isolating yourself from the people around you in public, say hey and talk to them. Strike up conversations with old women at bus stops, gay male cashiers in supermarkets, pretty girls in line at the college cafeteria and pretty much everyone else in between. 

Put yourself in so many new and scary situations and on such a regular basis that your brain eventually goes Hold on! This shit ain’t so tough actually! In fact I actually kinda like it
That realisation will definitely happen if you push yourself. When it does you’ll be way more confident and charismatic in social situations. Your fear will drop and rather than being nervously stuck inside your own head and filled with self judgement, you’ll be more in the moment and able to express yourself with power.
On that note, don’t be afraid to have conversations about the things you’re interested in too. Enthusiasm is contagious and you’ll be surprised how many people will be sucked into a discussion about stamp collecting if the person who starts it is deeply passionate about it.

**Try this as an exercise: talk to people whenever you can.**

**Forgive yourself and everyone who hurt you**

I actually wrote a whole post about forgiveness, because it’s so important.
I’ll summarise it quickly for you guys. 
Think of your brain as being a super-speedy modem and imagine that being both happy and miserable both take up valuable bandwidth on that modem. 

The more beefs you have with other people or even yourself, the more bandwidth you’re eating up inside your brain. 

That’ll stop you from being able to radiate the good vibes people love to be around.
They say that hating someone is like drinking poison and expecting them to die. When you dislike other people or yourself, it’s like a weight you carry around your neck that you don’t even realise is there. Once you notice it, you can’t believe you ever put up with it for so long.
We all have people who’ve hurt us and who we think don’t deserve forgiveness, and maybe we’re right, but forgiving them helps us more than it helps them. 

We all have things about ourselves we don’t like and secretly punish ourselves for. Maybe we fucked over a friend years back and feel guilty about it, and maybe we feel like shit for not living up to some standard of beauty that society pushed onto us. 

No matter what our reasons for disliking ourselves are, the fact is that we still need to forgive ourselves to be properly happy and help reclaim the innate charisma we were born with.
Try this as an exercise: Spend 15 minutes a day forgiving yourself and everyone who ever hurt you for the next month and see how you feel by the end of it. The results might surprise you.
Be grateful for everything you have
Every successful person says that gratitude brings even better things to you. Meanwhile, ungrateful people repel good opportunities. 

I don’t know if this is true, but I do know grateful people feel happier about their lives and radiate a positive energy that attracts other people.
Since I have been practising daily gratitude, I found it way easier to approach girls because I cared way less about whether or not they rejected me. Funnily enough, this made them reject me less! 

So be grateful for what you have. 

You’ve all been born into an era with limitless access to knowledge. You most likely have a family, a warm bed, health, functioning eyeballs, 4G access and more. 
You’ve got way more going for you then you realise but it doesn’t have to be like that. You can realise what you’ve got to be grateful for. 

**Try this as an exercise: spend 10 minutes reflecting on what you’re grateful for each and every day.**

**Talk nicely to yourself**

We all have two minds - the conscious and subconscious. 

The conscious mind is the one that’s reading my words in your skull right now. The subconscious mind is the one that kept you breathing in the background while you’re reading this post. 

We may feel like we’re consciously in control of our actions, but actually over 90% of our actions come from subconscious programming we received as kids. We continue to install this on a daily basis as adults. 

Now, when you consciously positive thoughts about yourself (even if you don’t currently believe them), that’s like installing the newest iOS 21.1 onto your mental iPad. The new IOS won’t appear overnight, and you will face internal resistance as the established belief system fights to maintain its dominance, but you’ll eventually get there. At some point your sub- conscious will accept the new programming.

In any event, my basic point is be very mindful of how you talk to yourself because your subconscious is always listening to your thoughts. If you call yourself a loser every day, that’s exactly what you’ll believe. 
How do you think girls will react when you’ve got that belief running in your mental operating system? How do you think they’ll react when you truly believe you’re a champion. 

Try this as an exercise: 10 minutes of positive reinforcement every day.

**Write a daily journal of your feelings**

Babies are able to cry and scream their eyes out, then go right back to normal afterwards? It’s because they actually allow themselves to feel their emotions instead of bottling them up. That’s the exact opposite what adults tend to do. 

Repressed emotions weigh us down just like beefs with other people and negative self-judgement so they need to be released for your sake.

Try this as an exercise: write a daily 5-10 minute journal of your feelings. Don’t deliberate over what you’re going to write. Just freaking write without thinking about what’s going to come outand let nature take its course. Type Watch as your sub-conscious pulls up crap you’ve been repressing. You’ll be surprised at how much better you feel afterwards.

Ciao for now, humans.

Excelsior!
 

I used to truly hate myself and these exercises really helped me turn my life around. 

**If you want to talk about how I can help you get the same results and transform your dating life then [book a free consultation](https://calendly.com/ciarancallam) with me right now.**I was waiting for the bus alone on a Saturday night  after a shit night at a shitty bar where some buddies forced me to go. And this girl is standing on her phone alone looking like she's waiting for the same bus. 
I felt like I had to do something.. ask her for the time, if her night has been good, just talk to her you fucking idiot! 
As soon as this scenario went through my head I just walked up to her and asked if this was the right bus to wherever I was headed. She was friendly enough to let me know that it was the right one and the conversation went going for a couple on minutes. 
At this point I'm just keeping this conversation going until the bus is coming, then this guy shows up.. 
He asked us for a lighter, then looked shocked, hugged her and called her by her name.
At this point I'm getting that they're acquainted and they start talking, while I'm standing they're lost trying to look like I'm knowing what I'm doing. 
I tried to jump into the conversation but didn't get a response and my head is telling me to 
"JUST ABORT THE MISSION, YOU LOOK AKWARD, HE CLEARLY KNOWS HER AND YOU DONT" 
I stood there and just listened, I went against what I believed in and stood there, after a few minutes the bus came, she told him goodbye and we both went on the bus. 
"Can't stand him" Is the first thing she said when we both touched on our cards for the bus and I busted out laughing. We were the only people on the bus and I decided to sit next to her, because why the fuck not.
Conversation went on, got her Facebook and went off at my stop. As soon as I got off and saw the bus going away I jumped as high in the air as I could and high-fived myself because I fucking did it. I didn't think I could, I told myself I couldn't but I did. sorry for the unnecessary long text and my horrible grammar but thank you seedit. 

EDIT: Jesus, did not expect such a overwhelming response but thanks people. And for those who's asking, yes I sent her the message and told her to let me know whenever her next gig is (she plays the trumpet) and she responded.A lot of the posts on askseddit are asking basically the same thing: so I see this girl around a lot that I like, and we talk sometimes, and I don't know what to do, etc... 

The answer is this: Ask her out on a date!  Just do it you fucking pussy.  Ask her out right away too – don’t wait until you “know” her or until she’s “attracted.”  She can get to know you on the date.  And make sure you make it clear that you’re asking her out on a “date” so she doesn’t think it might be something else.  

For some reason guys in our society have this fear of asking girls out on dates.  They think its better to start hanging out with her, getting the girl "attracted" to them, and then making a move.  That's completely wrong.  Sometimes girls are looking for a friend, sometimes they are looking for a guy to fuck.  If you hold yourself out as a friend, and then you one day change into somebody that wants to fuck them you are a liar, a creep, and a shitty friend, because now the girl knows that all the nice shit you did for her wasn't really nice, it was just for her pussy.  

Here are the main reasons guys are afraid to ask girls out on dates: 

1)	I don’t want to look creepy, obsessive, overbearing, etc… 

I think the main reason guys don’t ask girls out on dates right away is cuz they don’t want to look creepy/etc… But asking a girl out on a date isn’t creepy at all – the reason most guys sound creepy and overbearing when they come on to girls is because they are letting their dick do the talking so their body language/tone/demeanor gives it away that they just want to fuck and won’t take no for an answer, and that scares the shit out of girls.  They also don’t know when to walk away when she says no.  But if you confidently ask a girl out on a date with no fucks given, and then just walk away if she says no, there is no reason for them to think you are creepy/obsessive/etc… 

Imagine you asked out the worst girl in the world – a true, complete bitch that just loved to stomp on men’s hearts.  If you asked her on a date and she said no, what mean things could she say about you later to her friends?  “He asked me on a date and I said no.”  That’s it – and that doesn’t sound bad at all and she would even look like a bitch for trying to make fun of you for it.  Usually when girls make fun of guys that came onto them, its because the guy said something stupid, or acted creepy, or tried to fuck them, etc… 

2)	I don’t want to look interested. 

Asking a girl out on a date doesn’t mean that you’re interested – it means that you MIGHT be interested, which is exactly the vibe you want to give off.  If you ask a girl out on a date very nonchalantly in a regular tone of voice like you were talking to a regular person the girl is going to want to assume that you like her, but part of her brain also has to admit that you are really just a confident guy that ask girls out on dates.  Girls go out on dates with guys all the time they are not “ interested” in – to girls a date is just an interview for  possible further interest.  Girls reject guys all the time that act too “interested” but that’s only because the guy gave it away that he was “emotionally” interested in her (and therefore liable to act creepy and pathetic) – but if you can play it cool and just act normal she won’t feel like she has that power over you.  

3)	They are afraid of rejection 

Sorry, but you’ll have to deal with it.  Life is about rejection.  Its better to get rejected early on than to invest a bunch of time into her and then get rejected. 

Guys want to become “friends” because its harder to reject a “friend” – but its also a lot easier to treat a “friend” like shit than a lover.  If a guy is just your “friend” you don’t have to hang out with him every time he calls, or even answer his calls, or worry about not fucking other people. 

4)	That’s not how it works in the movies. 

First of all, everything you learn about dating and relationships from movies and TV is wrong.  It’s totally horseshit and if you actually did that in real life you’d get friendzoned at best and arrested at worst. 

In the movies, the guy meets the beautiful girl at the beginning and they hate each other at first (and the girl is usually dating somebody else), but then through a series of misadventures they get to know each other and then they start to “fall” for one another.  Then when they are fully in love the guy confesses his love to the girl and she admits that she loves him too!  Then they live happily ever after.  

Ehhhh – wrong!  If you did that shit in real life the girl would yell “what the fuck? I thought you were my friend” and leave you alone feeling like an idiot.  In real life girls want you to ask them out the first day, not after months of misadventures. 

5)	The girl isn’t going to say yes unless we know each other somewhat. 

This is true; attraction for girls is somewhat different than attraction for guys – they need to know that you are an intelligent person with a stable personality, shared interests, etc… But honestly that “get to know” period is very short… minutes.  Prove to her you can put together a sentence, that you’re not a rapist, and then ask her out on a date. She also has to know from the moment you meet her that you are interested in her romantically.  Girls can tell if they're gonna fuck/date a guy from the 5 minutes they meet him.  

6)	It’ll make things “weird” between us 

It is true that most times when guys ask girls out on dates shit gets weird between them.  The reason is that most guys wait till they are already “friends” to ask the girl out so when your “friend” asks you on a date its fucking weird and now you can’t be friends anymore.  Another reason shit gets weird is that the man waits till he is in “love” with her (i.e., has oneitis) so if she says no the guy starts to act angry and sad and can’t act normal around her anymore.  But if you ask a girl on a date and then just walk off when she says no, there is nothing “weird” about it. 
An interaction isn’t awkward unless you let it be awkward.  After you get rejected, just be nice to her and treat her like a normal person.  She didn’t want to date you.  Fine, that’s her choice.  No reason to get mad or sad.  Be nice to her and all the weirdness disappears.  In fact, if you act nice and normal to a girl who rejected you she is going to start thinking about you because of how rare it is.  It’s going to boggle her mind because on one hand you’re acting uninterested but on the other hand you asked her out, which is usually a sign of interest.  She may not have been interested in you before, but now she is. 

7)	She doesn’t “date” 

I’ve seen so many bullshit excuses for not asking girls out on a date.  If a girl says she doesn’t “date” she really means “I don’t date you.”  If you express interest in hanging and she doesn’t “date” she’ll offer up something else, or else she’s not interested in you. 

One guy here even said that people in college don’t “date.”  Fuck that.  If people around you aren’t dating be the guy with the balls to ask people out on dates.  You will stand out and people will respect you.  Even if people don’t go out on dates at least you are expressing your interest which is more that can be said for most people.  

What if a girl says she doesn’t “date”?  Well I would walk away in disgust.  Fuck that.  It’s 2013 – how else is she going to meet a guy

8)	“But I see people all the time that started fucking after just ‘hanging out’”

Yes it is true that you can become a girl’s “friend” or “just hang out” and then start fucking her.  Completely possible.  But the only reason for that is that most guys are chumps and don’t know shit about game so the girl is forced to fuck one of these chumps.  The one guy who has the balls to ask her on a date is on another level.  Also, why do you want to roll the dice and hope that you’re one of these guys? 

There are a lot of hot girls that are constantly getting approached and asked out by guys.  They also know that all their guy friends are interested in them.  Also, they aren’t interested in any of these guys because they all check their alphaness at the door when talking to her.  So, to minimize the hassle of dating, these girls just start fucking the closest guy they see to them, sometimes at random.  Do you want to be that guy?  Do you want to roll the dice and hope that all of your friendshipping is going to lead somewhere?  

9)	I need to get to know “her” and I don’t want to hurt her if I don’t like her. 

I actually saw a guy on askseddit post this yesterday.  Give me a fucking break.  If you want to get to know a girl, what better way than going on a DATE???  You have her all alone and can ask her whatever questions you want.  Also, don’t worry about hurting her – that’s part of dating.  People get rejected all the time.  

BTW, if you’re wondering what the answer is to the other 50% of the questions on r/askseddit, its “she’s not interested in you, move on.”  LOL

From my blog: http://www.playersjourney.wordpress.com

Also follow me on twitter: twitter.com/@playersjourney
Forgive the title. This is going to be a bit of a longer / more engaging post than it would suggest. Some background: I took a two day sales and communications course for work that is more comprehensive than the scope of this post, but there was one takeaway that firmly implanted in my brain: the power of "because."

In 1978, Ellen Langer (Harvard behavioral scientist) asked some study participants to cut the line at a busy Xerox machine using one of three justifications:

* "Excuse me, I have 5 pages. May I use the Xerox machine?"
* "Excuse me, I have 5 pages. May I use the Xerox machine because I have to make photocopies?"
* "Excuse me, I have 5 pages. May I use the Xerox machine because I'm in a rush?"

What do you think the compliance rates were for each condition? My guess was "very low" for condition A, "low" for condition B, and "high" for condition C. The answer is:

* 60%
* 93%
* 94%

There was **virtually no difference** between the two "because" cases--in one case a placebic / bullshit justification and the other a real justification. The reason this works is because the human brain desires narrative and causality. If something happens, we want to know why. We despise senselessness and crave reason.

So how does this translate into the real world? Use "because" any time you need compliance. For openers:

"I had to come over and say hi because ________"

**It does not matter what comes after because.**

* I had to come over and say hi because *you're cute*
* I had to come over and say hi because *you look like fun*
* I had to come over and say hi because *it's nice outside*
* I had to come over and say hi because *I saw you*
* I had to come over and say hi because *I wanted to*

The above are all 100% real "lines" I used yesterday to get five numbers: two French girls, a Brazilian ballerina, a psych grad student and a musical theater actress.

How about when you get the girl's number?

* Give me your number because *you seem cool*
* Give me your number because *it will be fun*
* Give me your number because *we need to hang out*
* Give me your number because *then I'll have it for later*

**It does not matter what comes after because**

Try it! Try saying the most mundane thing in the world, it won't matter. Just a reminder to not kill yourself over what to say. Fill in the blank with anything, even no justification at all.I posted a quick little bit on how to build confidence on a post I made yesterday and got a lot of PMs saying to actually post it.  This guide will be strictly on social confidence and approaching.  I won't touch too much on improving your self image, hobbies, or any of that.  Feel free to add in and discuss, guys!

Confidence.  No matter what aspect of life you're dealing with, it is key in the road to success.  Love, job, sex, friends, self-improvement, all depends on one's confidence.  The best part is they feed off of each other.  The more confident you become, the better you do with girls, the better you do with girls, the more confident you become.  The main thing you need to watch out for is arrogance.  Be CONFIDENT in yourself, but do not become CONCEITED.  Arrogance will negate any advancements you make in becoming confident.

So, let's start with a guide, yeah?

**1.  Starting from the bottom:**

You're sick of not doing things because you're afraid of rejection.  All of your life you spend wondering "what-if" or "I should have...", now's the time to stop and DO what you want.  You're too afraid of rejection?  That is fine.  Baby steps are necessary in building your confidence.  You're going to need to force yourself out of your comfort zone for this one.  Let's start.

Whenever you're walking places, make eye contact with strangers walking passed you.  When they meet your eyes, smile or nod at them but DO NOT break eye contact until they pass you.  I don't mean stare them down from 50 yards away, that's a quick way to come off as intimidating.  Let's say you see a cute girl walking by.  Make eye contact with her, when she meets your gaze, SMILE at her.  9/10 times she will smile back.  Not so bad right?  What of the other 1/10 you ask??  Who cares.  She'll likely just stare you down and keep walking.  Not bad, right?  You just felt a bit of rejection, but you don't even care because the 9 other cute girls smiled back at you.  Walking passed a guy?  Nod at him.  Guys are a lot less likely to respond, but most will at least nod back.  You'll notice over time that you can do this no problem, that's when you need to step it up a notch.

**2.  I can nod, wink, and smile like the best, what now?:**

Now you start saying things to them.  You can smile at that HB10 for days and not feel even the slightest bit nervous.  How about talking to her?  Now you feel a little tense, right?  Try it.  She's walking by you.  You make eye contact.  Smile.  She smiles back.  She's so hot, you want to talk to her.  Just do it.  Say hello.  9/10 she'll say hello back to you.  Feel better?  Not so bad, huh??  Do this to everyone.  Nice old lady?  Hello.  Resting bitch-face girl?  Hello.  Just keep doing this until you can say hello to anyone you see.

So, still not bad, huh?  You've gotten used to that, so let's step it up a bit more.  HB8 is walking passed you.  You can smile and say hello no problem.  You see her rocking a white top with high-tops and jeans.  She looks so fucking good to you.  COMPLIMENT HER.  She's walking by, smile.  She smiles back.  "I love your style".  Watch her light up.  You'll make her whole day, guarantee it.  Think about when people compliment you.  Makes you feel good, right?  Same goes for her.  There's a trick to this though, boys.  NEVER compliment a girl on something she cannot control.  She has beautiful brown eyes?  She knows that, EVERY guy has told her.  Her long legs look hot in the summer sun?  She knows, she's heard it.  She has no control over it.  Her fashion sense though?  She wants that validated.  She wants to know she looks good in it.  TELL HER THAT.  "I love your style", "you really rock that outfit",  "that dress looks really pretty on you".  Girls love this.  It's enough to show interest, but not enough to make a stranger weary of you.  

**3.  I can compliment that HB8's dress, no problem.  Now what?:**

Now I'm sure you've noticed you're more confident around people.  Guarantee it.  Now it's time to make small talk with people.  EVERYONE.  Old man, hot girl, nerdy guy, fat girl, talk to them all.  You're sitting outside studying for your law test.  A girl-next-door type is sitting a few feet away from you.  Chat a bit with her.  Nothing too long, just a quick 2-3 chat.  About school, life, interests, whatever.  Small talk with random people is a great way to broaden your horizons and gain the confidence you need for cold approaches and long conversations.  You're at the mall.  You're with your friends who want to go buy new kicks.  You don't feel like it so you sit outside in those nice leather chairs.  There's an old man next to you.  You can tell he's sick of his wife shopping and wants to go home.  Talk to him.  Old people honestly are masters of small talk.  They can hold a conversation about ANYTHING.  Become like that; able to talk to anyone.  Never, ever stop making small talk with people.  Even when you're 100% confident in yourself, always talk to people.  We're social by nature, it'll always make you feel great.

**4.  So, I can talk to anyone.  Now what?:**

Apply it.  Here's where we start getting to bigger game, start connecting the dots of 1-3.  You can make eye contact, give an opener, and begin small talk.  Bang, you now have the basis for a pickup!  You're at Starbucks, waiting on some shitty iced mocha-latta-fratta-whateverthefuck and you see a really sweet and sexy looking HB7 by the counter.  Go over and sit near her.  She'll likely look up to see who's sitting next to her.  Make eye contact with her, smile, and say hello.  She'll smile back and say hi.  You just got parts 1 and 2 down.  Now for part 3.  You see she's reading a book about lions.  You fucking love lions.  Lions are your favorite animal because you are a fucking lion.  Use that to initiate a point of mutual interest.  Talk to her about lions.  After a minute or 2, get her name, and introduce yourself.  Wait for them to call her for her drink.  She'll likely get up and say "it was nice talking with you."  This would be where part 3 would stop, but this is part 4.  Tell her to hold on, tell her how you felt talking to her (don't be creepy, just say something like "I really enjoyed meeting you" or the sort) and say something along the lines of "we should get coffee together" or "let me get your number and we can meet here again sometime."

She says no.  "Wait JefemanG, but you just..." Stop now.  Realize a lesson you need to learn now.

**Rejection is not failure.  Rejection is just a way that did not lead to success.**  

Learn this now.  Every time you "fail", you're not really failing.  You're learning.  You just learned a new method that does not work.  Approach has a HUGE learning curve.  Every guy needs to learn what works for them.  Some guys can be blunt and mysterious, that's my approach method.  Other guys may need to be more excited and playful, that's their type.  Other guys may need to tease right off the bat.  Every guy is different.  You need to learn YOU.

**5.  Okay, I've learned my approach type.  Now what?:**

Approach girls!  You're pretty confident now, right?  You're becoming more and more confident as you learn more about girls and yourself.  I'm sure you're seeing much more success.  Apply it all.

You're walking to class.  You see the Latina of your dreams.  Long legs, fair skin, beautiful hair, your 9.9/10.  You want to talk to her SO bad.  You want to know her, to... do things to her, whatever it is you feel, you WANT to talk to her.

**Just do it**

Approach her.  Eye contact, smile, walk over to her, and launch your approach.  Be confident, smile a lot, stand up straight, maintain eye contact, and swallow your nerves.  This is it; the ultimate test of your confidence.  She's all you've dreamed of.  This will test your mettle.

**Put yourself outside of your comfort zone constantly.  This will build up your confidence exponentially quicker than little conquests you're okay with.**

"Hello, my name is Sedditor."  "Hi, I'm Jen."  I like the hand shake from here because it breaks the initial, non-sexual touch barrier, and it reaffirms she liked meeting you.  To each their own.  "It's great to meet you Jen."  "Haha, you too Sedditor."  Smile at her.  Say it.  "Listen Jen, I need to head to class, but I'd love to get coffee with you sometime.  Let's exchange numbers and we'll set something up."  Maintain eye contact.  She's had 2 minutes to decide if she wants to go out with you.  You just dumped the scenario on her.  Do not ask her, offer her the scenario.  You've show you're a go-getter and what you want.  Now it's up to her to be receptive or not.  She blushes.  "Yeah Sedditor, I'd love to."  You exchange numbers, chat another 10 seconds then say "see you soon."  Damn boys, you just pulled your HB9.9 and you feel good af.  Just know that...

**A phone number does not guarantee anything.  From here, it's up to you.**

But it sure as fuck made you feel good huh?  Now you're even more confident.  Go have fun with her this weekend.  Get some coffee, go to a park, do something.  If she flakes, so be it.  Move on to the next girl who's worth it.

**6.  Okay, I've gone out of my comfort zone, what do?:**

Keep doing it.  You can only go up from here.  Keep repeating these steps and look back at how much you're improving over time.  You'll be amazed and happy with yourself.

That's it boys.  Keep practicing these over and over again.  The more you venture out of your comfort zone, the more confident you become.  Be sure to improve yourself, too.  Workout, get hobbies, become independent.  All of these are desirable AND help your confidence.  Watch yourself grow.

I have a bud who went from a kissless virgin to having 2 FWBs at once following this.  He's much happier now than he's ever been.  

So, what do you guys think?  Any questions or advice you'd throw in?  I tried to keep it short and sweet for all of you.

**TL;DR;  Confidence building is a marathon, not a sprint.  Treat it as such and DO NOT let anything get you down.  You should only be empowered by rejection and self-improvement.  Get yourself out of your comfort zone.  Go out and get shit down and watch your confidence grow!**When I was 20 years old I hadn't even kissed a girl.  I was (and still am, in a way) terrified of women.   After finally losing my virginity during the summer of 2006 things slowly started to get better.  I was in a couple of long-term relationships over the following years where I only slept with 3 women.  I've now been single for 4 years and have slept with around 50 women.  50 might not seem like a lot to some guys on here, but if someone had told me when I was 20 that I would sleep with more than 5 women I would have laughed in their face.  

As I said, I'm by no means handsome.  I've actually never had a girl tell me that I'm hot or handsome.  The best praise I've received is being told I was cute, which we all know isn't a compliment.  I'm 5'11, scrawny (145 pounds), have no major hobbies or interests.  I've had people ask me if I'm still a virgin because I come off as being so shy. 

To start, I just want to say to virgins out there that once you finally get laid it will feel as if you've finally been unchained.  I was convinced at one point that I was going to die a virgin.

Here are some things that have worked well for ***me***.  Keep in mind that I don't really follow a lot of the key "rules" here on seddit (not that I think they don't work, I just do things a little differently).

* When I meet a girl I like I try to change contact information with her as quickly as possible.  If you let her go home without getting her number, you're gonna have a bad time.

* I joke around **a lot** with girls that I'm interested in.  It's usually to the point where they tell me I joke **too** much and they don't know when I'm being serious or not.  I like to use a lot of sarcasm and make fun of myself and the girl I'm going after.  I honestly think this is the main reason I get laid.
* I'm a huge loner and hate being in large groups.  So when I meet a girl for the first time I'm almost always by myself.  Subsequent dates will always be 1 on 1.  There are a few restaurants where I'm a regular so I sit at the counter and am friends with all of the staff.  This is where I meet most of my hook-ups.
* I always ask them loads of questions about their personal life but I **never** bring up sex.  When they ask me questions about myself I try to keep the answers as short as possible.
* I very **rarely** use kino when I first meet them.  The most kino I'll do is a handshake.  I'll only start to use kino when I have them back at my apartment, or if we're both drunk.
* When I meet them again for our first "date" I **always meet at night and keep it short and fun**.  Usually I'll take them to play pool or billiards, share a few beers, then tell them I have to head back home.  They almost always seem surprised that I'm going back so early.
* For the next meet up I make it a goal to bring her back to my place (at night) to watch a movie.  I haven't cooked dinner for a girl during a date in over 3 years!
* During the movie is when I go heavy on the kino, usually I'll start with my hand on her leg and progress from there (rubbing her inner thigh, wrists, hands). 
* **If a girl flakes on me twice, I'm done with her**.  I move on and cut my losses.  If a girl takes several days to respond to a message and just shows no interest, I move on.
* Having a good guy friend to go out with who is really laid back and easygoing is a godsend.  I said before that I almost always go solo, but the times that I'm able to go out with my friend my odds of meeting someone increase quite a bit.   Bonus points if your friend can make people laugh
* **I treat all the girls that I meet with respect, even after I've slept with them**.  I would say that I still keep in touch in some way with 30 or more of the girls I've slept with.  They are still friends and there are no hard feelings between us.


I don't know if this will help any of you, but I hope in some way it does.  Sometimes I read posts on here about guys who immediately initiate kino within moments of meeting women and it blows my mind.  I would never be able to do that, simply because I'm way too reserved/shy when I first meet a girl.   I go about things my own way and have had fairly good success. 

So that brings an end to my rambling.   To the virgins out there- keep your heads up and don't give up hope!

If you have any questions I'll do my best to answerI started this journey 7 years ago at 19 or 20 yo when my first girlfriend cheated on me really hard. This is the first time I experienced love and unfortunately it was one of my life’s greatest tragedies, or so I thought about it like that for many years to come. 

I blamed everything that went wrong to her. EVERYTHING! I said and did a lot of horrible stuff to her in the aftermath that to this day I regret. But well, I guess that’s what you call immaturity or being young and stupid. I became sort of an incel in a way hating women to some degree for that. That of course didn’t do well for the whole looking for another partner game. 

After some years going through college and trying to overcome this experience (because like I say, it hit me really hard), I started to do one of the most incredible things a human being can do, to question. To wonder. To think. I started questioning myself and my actions at that time. And this is where the whole picture started to appear. 

While there were some valid points about her being wrong on her behavior, I started to find mine too. And they were bigger than hers. The one that I was able to retrieve first was how much I depended myself on her. I gave up everything just to be with her. It’s so cringy when I think about it. I even gave up a trip with friends to see the Niagara Falls for the first time in my life!!! What a dumbass I was. She of course worried when I told her that, but at that time my infatuation was so fucking deep that I couldn’t see that. Oh yeah, I also learned that love and infatuation are two different things. 

The list of stuff like that I did is endless, but you get the main idea on what caused that relationship to end really quickly. And that was it. After so many years, thinking what caused it, it was me after all. 

When I reached this point of thinking, I just graduated university, moved to a whole different country, and started life again. 

I tried looking for a partner again and no luck at all again. I wonder again, what’s happening? What’s wrong with me? Why am I not getting results? This is where I found this sub. I started reading until I stumbled upon a comment mentioning the book No More Mr Nice Guy. Bought it. And oh boy, that book told the story of my life. I was letter to letter what the book says about Nice Guys. Pleasing people around and wanting to get approval (specially from social media)

Gotta say here that I used and checked social media SO FUCKING MUCH. I had almost 1000 followers and while it was cool, it had some bad effects on me. You know. Like caring from who I get likes and how many I got. Oh god, another cringey moment again.... I think that killed so many possible relationships with really nice girls because all I was was taking pictures with everyone showing how cool I was and based everything on how they responded to my posts. It was that bad. 

Well reading that book made me take one of the biggest factors how I improved as a person. I deleted the account. Almost thousand followers, tons of posts about about a ‘wonderful’ life I was having. Funny enough, I was also going through the bankruptcy of my first company and still showed what great life I was having. 

At the beginning, I sorted of regret it. Got questioned by many friends who followed me about that action telling me how did I dare to do something like that. But after some months, I started to notice a change. I felt peace inside. And with that peace, is how I was able to concentrate better on my life and landed me on the best job in one of the biggest corporations in this country. 

However, it wasn’t done yet. While I eliminated the biggest contribution of social anxiety and NiceGuyness, to some extent I still had that behavior in actual face to face interactions. Always trying to get the girl like me or caring too much of how I was perceived. Well that didn’t do much for me. 

This is where I found the book The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck and it changed again the way I saw life. Specially that story where he talks about death really hit me. That’s where I understood my life here is really limited and shouldn’t give too many fucks just like the author says. 

I think this is where I started the whole cold approach thing while being my true self. I started baby steps by going to bars by myself. And to my surprise, more than finding girls, I found a lot of incredible people and stories that I took with me. I really began to understand the whole abundance mentality. God I wish I knew this years ago. Every day you could go to a different place and have so many opportunities to find friends, fun moments, and also finding that special one. 

While that experience helped me a lot and got several numbers of really attractive girls. I still couldn’t find that person. I learned all of this and yet, there seems to be something missing. What was it? I wondered again 

Gotta point out here that my end goal was almost never sex. I had a lot of insecurities in regards to that with my previous girlfriend and I was damn sure that to overcome that, I needed someone who I really felt good with and help me grow. 

This is where I truly started thinking about “what kind of girl do you want?” I wrote down all of the aspects that that person should have or at least some of them. And to my surprise after all that experience cold approaching, and it eventually led back to the original social groups I abandoned after I began the adventure of going into a bunch of unknown social circles. 

Probably the last thing I learned from a very successful guy was, “never go to a place with the intention of getting a girlfriend or have sex, go only with the intention of having fun” 

This is really what changed my strategy going back to that social circle (plus all the previous points I learned). And after having literally just fun, I found this really cute and smart girl who I had a blast talking with. With that confidence and knowledge, I went into the best dates I’ve ever had and in just a few dates we became couple a few weeks ago. 

Like some say here, the real ‘game’ begins here. And while I don’t know a lot about relationships due to my limited experience and still have insecurities like any other human being, I’ll just take the best out of it learning everyday. 

There’s so many stories and other points I wanted to share, but it would make this too long. So hopefully my story helps you in some way. If I did it, you could do it too. 

Thanks everyone for making this the place that changed my life! And also my ex for kicking my dumb ass at that time. You helped me grow too. 

Peace!At least once in your life, like me, you saw a girl who had a personality not at all compatible with yours but still you went for her. I’m guilty, especially before I got experience dealing with women. 

I remember being at a big club, talking to a girl who was the opposite of me but still hot. I kept talking to her because I had already approached her and I ain’t a pussy to just drop it. As soon as I approached I saw she had little interest in me and as we talked and I passed her tests I gained her interest, but when **I** asked my questions, like, “what do you have planned for your future?” She replied with things like “I don’t know hahahaha.” That was an instant turn off and I should’ve left it there, just how she would’ve left had I failed her shittests- there’s a reason why these are called qualifiers.

Night moves forward, It’s been a few hours since I talked to her, she sees me and says “here you are /u/DefinitelyHorny4U!! Thought I’d never see you again!” She’s not ugly so fuck it right? We eat at a place close to the club, then go back to my place, where we fuck and I tell her to leave 5 minutes after we’re done.

As soon as she left I realized how unfulfilling that was. We weren’t compatible at all, I was driven 100% by horniness and that’s not what I should’ve done, I was out of control of my own body. Strong post nut clarity. It made me remember of the girls I’d been attracted to back in High-school and middle school that I wouldn’t stand had I thought about interacting with them instead of seeing them as an escape from my loneliness/horniness. Now as an adult who ‘knows’ women, I can see how important it is to be compatible with the girls you’re talking to, at the end of the day it isn’t about sex as much as it is about having fun.

Genghis Khan’s genes are found in 0.5% of all men alive. That’s 400,000,000 people. He fucked so many girls and yea that’s cool about him, but he definitely had strong post-nut clarity later, he just chose not to do anything about it. Don’t be Genghis Khan.

#Part of being a high-value man is not wasting your time, and not letting your actions be controlled by feelings, which is what happens to many of us. Being willing to reject hot bitches makes you a more high value man than fucking all of the hot bitches, while also making you feel better.


Since then I’ve left the post-nut clarity to my weekly session of midget porn, not sex. You should always take a step back and evaluate if you like a girl for horniness/loneliness/lack of options, or if you legitimately like her, not just you’ll feel more fulfilled, the sex is much better as well.I remember a similar post about someone's fear of becoming a typical "nice guy"; I wanted to share my own experience.

Being single for a long time really builds up frustrations and I can see how nice guy traits can develop (not all, most are just assholes). I saw myself agreeing with some posts on how girls reject nice guys etc. Thankfully I noticed this before it became a slippery slope down the path to the bottom. 

I'm not going to tell you how you can magically jump from the forests of single land to dating but what I can tell you is that in the time when you're single focus on YOURSELF instead of being frustrated by your luck, 'cause at the end of the day its all about luck; the chances of meeting someone compatible  can be increased but in the scope of things its really down to luck. In the mean time, develop yourself into the best person you can be so that when the chance arrives and the odds are in your favour you can make the bet cofidently. Get a hobby, learn new skills, make new friends, being single gives you much more time to do things that will benefit you and your future partner in the long run.Here is a list of things which, a few years ago, got me amazing results not just with girls and relationships, but also with finances, career, health and inner peace.

- Get off reddit.

Or rather, avoid consuming more than you take action.
Do not read or watch a single article or video about dating and seduction without applying it afterwards. Because the purpose of all this stuff is not to entertain you, but to help you improve your life.

Also, create content rather than consuming it.
This ensures you stay productive and get shit done.

- Meditate.

Do Wim Hof breathing techniques, listen to guided meditations or hypnosis on youtube and do the meditation techniques which work best for you.

- Get a job.

Do whatever it takes to make some cash. It really isn't so hard.
Because scrolling through memes all day and getting likes on social media wont pay your bills (unless you joined partner programs on youtube and stuff).

- Take it slow.

Do one thing at a time and find the ideal balance.
You can't get everything done within a day, a week or even a year.
Make plans.

- Invest in yourself.

Rather than spending all your money on liabilities such as videogames, new phones or designer clothes, use it to pay for a gym subscription, for high quality food, mentorships or to buy books to educate yourself a little about things that interest you.
Keep in mind that knowledge and real life experience never decreases in value. They are assets which last a lifetime.

If you need some additional guidance, send me a DMLink to video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE

I've made over 80 summaries of the best self improvement books, here’s a full playlist of them: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&list=PLaNTB6oQAa0AYuul0tqUscg1ZLj_arZga

I release a new video every other day, if you’re interested in subscribing here’s a link: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub_confirmation=1

If you’d prefer to read the script instead of watching the video, here it is:

In this video I’m going to teach you the best lessons from the book the subtle art of not giving a fuck by Mark Manson. I’ll show you how to become more confident, how to have more purpose in your life plus you’ll learn the quickest route to happiness. 

But before we get into all that I want you to imagine something.

Imagine you’re 90 years old and on your deathbed, your grandson walks in, he’s 21 and asks for your advice about what he should do with his life, what he should care about and what doesn’t really matter in the end. What would you tell him?

You might say things like: 

“Go for your dreams you only get one life.”

“Don’t worry as much”

“Enjoy the small things”

If you take some time to think and decide what you would say this gives you a real insight into what you actually care about. Take your own advice.

In this video we will go through 5 lessons to help you feel more confident. This example leads onto the first lesson from the book.

1. We all die anyway.

Most people do not like thinking about their own death but I think it is a useful thing to do. 

Another great book is The 7 habits of highly effective people and one of the habits is to begin with the end in mind. Think about your own death and it really puts things into perspective. 

One day all the things that you worry about will no longer exist, nobody alive will care so why are you letting it bother you now? Why are you letting it hold you back?

If you have a hard decision to make just ask yourself how you’d feel on your deathbed about each of the choices, would you regret not going for the more exciting choice? 

Mark Twain said: “a man who lives fully is prepared to die at anytime.”

So use the thought of your own death to drive you forward. Don't put things off and to stay at a job you hate or in a relationship that is bad for you. 

2. It’s not about not giving a fuck, it’s about choosing what to give a fuck about.

The author says maturity is giving a fuck about things that are fuckworthy.

Most people are afraid of rejection, for our survival we naturally want to fit in. 

So in any situation we try to avoid all pain of rejection or someone saying we are wrong, the thing is you will never avoid all pain of rejection. 

What you should do is decide what pain you actually want to go through choose what you want to suffer for.

Before starting this youtube channel I thought about the fact that people might mock me 

but for me the pain of someone laughing at me is miniscule compared to the pain of regret I would have felt if I never went for it.

I would have always been thinking what if. 

I am so passionate about helping others that being mocked for doing what I do doesn’t bother me at all.

so, Give a fuck about things that are fuckworthy.

3. Failure and criticisms are good.

Imagine a sales firm.

Their aim is to make a many sales a possible. 

If you said to all the staff that rather than aiming to get as many sales as possible they should instead aim to get the most rejections. This is a concept called go for no where you aim for noes rather than yeses.

What happens is the person who gets the most number of noes is nearly always the person who also gets the most amount of sales. 

This is because they are no longer limited by their fear of rejection.

Thomas J. Watson who served as chairman and CEO of IBM said “If you want to increase your success rate, double your failure rate”

Stop trying to avoid criticisms and failures. You will always have people who want to be negative about what you’re doing. That’s actually great, it means you’re putting yourself out there.

Remember people usually only criticize people who they feel are above them, they think by doing so they will be able will bring you down to their level.

I think of the people who I look up to and ask myself if they would criticize or mock me for doing what I am doing and obviously they wouldn’t. They are more than likely say what I’m doing is great and encourage me to keep going.

An opinion is the cheapest thing anyone can give you, the value comes in deciding who’s opinion you’re going to listen to.

so, go for no’s and be grateful for each one, they are helping you towards the result you want and show you’re putting yourself out there.

4. Happiness and confidence comes from caring about something greater than yourself. 

Here’s a great lyric by the rapper Mack-le-more which is based on a Banksy quote 

“I heard you die twice, once when they bury you in the grave and the second time is the last time that somebody mentions your name. So when I leave here on this earth, did I take more than I gave, did I look out for the people or did I do it all for fame?” 

What is he on about then? 

He’s saying that you will only be remembered if you do something great with your life. By doing something great for humanity you will be immortal because people will talk about you well after your death. 

So a quick question, are you living your purpose? It’s a difficult question to answer but a great one to think about. 

As we said before we all die anyway, the only people who actually get remember are the people who did something that was bigger than themselves. 

It’s pretty overwhelming to think about your life purpose but a great place to start is to begin on a small scale helping people.

Just do something for someone else.

It can be something simple like baking a cake or taking them out somewhere or even just paying them a genuine compliment

Search a website called one kindness .org. They explain the power of doing just one act of kindness per day - it’s an interesting read.

On a bigger scale you can use your life to build something huge to help others and make a change. 

Bill Gates said “Most people overestimate what they can do in one year and underestimate what they can do in ten years.” 

Start thinking bigger, think outside yourself. 

One of my life aims is to completely change the education system so it will teach people more about happiness.

I’m not sure exactly how I will do this yet but that is why it’s such a fun aim to have. Aim huge. 

If you’re not sure where to begin search round my channel or other self improvement channels and begin working towards something you’re truly proud of. 

If you’re working towards something for other people you almost don’t have time to worry. 

When you do this you will become much happier because true happiness comes from helping others.

A great side effect of this is that you will feel much more confident, when you have a true purpose you’re working towards you won’t be stopped by small things anymore. A great quote from the book man’s search for meaning says “Those who have a 'why' to live, can bear with almost any 'how'.” 

So if your why  is to change the world you aren’t going to stopped by someone mocking you because changing the world is simply way more important.

so, work towards something bigger than yourself and you will be much happier and feel more confident.

Lesson 5. You choose who is in your life.

When I was a school I really did care about fitting in and trying to impress pretty much everyone. I always looked outside myself for approval and confirmation that I was good enough. 

What a load of bullshit. It’s funny to me that almost all the people who I was so bothered about impressing are actually no longer part of my life, I don’t ever see or talk to them.

It’s easy to forget how much control you actually have over your life. 

You have full control over people who play a role in your life. 

So be who you want to be and the people who truly like you will stick around and anyone else you can just choose not to see them. 

There’s nothing wrong with people not liking you, stop getting caught up on what everyone thinks about you. The more important thing to think about is what the people you actually like think about you and what you think about yourself.

Here’s a good question.

“From your perspective what is the difference between someone who you no longer see anymore and someone who is dead?” 

Odd question but bear with me.

Each has no input on your life and you have 0 interactions. 

IT’s a pretty odd way of looking at it but you basically have the power to kill off characters you do not like in your life. 

so, rethink the way you see your world, be confident and be yourself because the only people that will be in your life long term are the people who like you anyway.

So to summarize: 

1. We all die anyway so go for it.

2. Give a fuck about things that are fuckworthy.

3. Failure and criticisms are good things, aim for them.

4. work towards something bigger than yourself and you will be much happier and feel more confident.

5. You choose who is in your life, be yourself, the people who don’t like you wont be part of your life anyway.   

Link to video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE

I've made over 80 summaries of the best self improvement books, here’s a full playlist of them: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&list=PLaNTB6oQAa0AYuul0tqUscg1ZLj_arZga

I release a new video every other day, if you’re interested in subscribing here’s a link: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub_confirmation=1Me and my friend were eating at a place and a beautiful girl walks in with her parents. I told my mate and he was like hmmm yeah. I was thinking of going for it, but I decided not to.

We ate and were sitting in the car about to leave. I told him I would regret it if I didn't approach, and he basically dared me.

So, I go back inside and introduce myself to her parents first out of respect and the girl after. I asked her for her name and managed to make her smile. I could tell she was blushing.

Instead of making it awkward for her in front of her parents, I wrote my number on a paper and gave it to her. The father asked me a few questions, and after i left.

DAMN BROS. I did it! It wasn't as bad as I imagined it would be. I don't really care if she doesn't get in touch, just the fact that I did it made me proud.

Thanks for all the support!

---------------





EDIT: People are asking what I said to her father. Here's a brief chat..

Me: "Hello sir, haven't I seen you in Manchester (UK) before?"

Him: "No, I don't think so" - just a bullshit question I asked to break the ice. I've never seen them before lol

Me: "Oh, you look very familiar and I thought I knew you. Well, sorry to interrupt but I just wanted to briefly introduce myself. Is this your daughter"

*looks at her*

Me: "What's your name?"

*Replies and blushes*

Me: "You from here?"  Blablabla

Me: "Cool, it was great meeting you guys. Here's my number. If you're interested, gimme a text. Thank you very much sir for your time. Have a great evening!"###After hours of research, I had found what I thought to be the perfect pickup line. I walked up to a beautiful girl and said, “Hey, I thought you were cute, and I had to say hi.” 

###She smiled, said thank you, and we talked for a couple minutes until she paused and said, “It was nice to meet you,” and walked away. I never saw her again.

I’ve read dozens of books teaching men how to attract women with lines, tactics, and tricks. But after 10 years in the game, thousands of approaches, and yes, a good number of “lays” – I’ve found that attracting women isn’t something you can force. In fact, the harder you try to get a woman to like you, the less attractive you will be to her.

When that girl from the above example rejected me, I could have blamed it on the line I used. But truthfully, no matter what I said, the result would have been the same. This is because attraction isn’t something you do, it’s something you are.

Of all the times I attracted a woman, not once did I attract her because of some technique I used. Every single time, I attracted her because of who I was.

There’s a saying, “The self is always shining through.” Basically, no matter how hard you try to “make a girl like you” using some tactic, it won’t work because using a technique to attract a woman is in itself a form of overcompensation.

We only use techniques because on some level we don’t believe we’re good enough by default, so we try to make up for our inadequacy with a line or a trick(1).

I can’t teach you how attract a specific girl using techniques, but I CAN teach you how to be an attractive man who naturally draws women in.

There’s no quick-fix. Becoming the most attractive version of yourself requires that you invest both time and effort in yourself. But the end result is easily worth it. Over-time - by following the 4 tips in this article - you will become exponentially more appealing to the opposite sex.

&nbsp;

##How To Be An Attractive Man Key 1:
##Develop your Self-Confidence

&nbsp;

It’s no secret that self-confidence is attractive, but what is it, really?

If asked, most people would say, “Self-confidence is belief in yourself.” And that’s true, but there’s a key component missing in that definition.

Self-confidence isn’t just belief in yourself, it’s the belief that everything will turn out okay when you attempt something.

Self-confidence doesn’t mean you expect every girl to like you, it simply means that you’re okay with the consequences of taking a risk, even if the girl doesn’t like you.

When we lack self-confidence with women, we think that rejection is the worst thing that could happen to us. That fear causes us to filter ourselves in conversation, to adopt defensive body language, and even to speak with a weaker vocal tonality.

Our inner lack of confidence causes us to behave less attractively. The more confident you become, the more attractive you will be - because you’ll stop getting in your own way.

How do you actually do that? Well, how do we become confident in anything? Take driving for example. We become confident drivers by giving our brains proof that when we take the wheel, disaster will not ensue.

Every time we drive - and we live to tell the tale - we become a little more confident in ourselves as a driver. The same applies to dating. Every time you take a social risk, and come out the other side unharmed, you will become a little bit more confident.

For example, the more women you approach, the lower the stakes will feel when you walk up to a girl, because you’ll become comfortable with the possibility of getting rejected.

What this means will vary from person to person. For many guys just starting their journey, the first step to developing self-confidence will just be getting out of the house, for others it will be something bolder.

As you develop your self-confidence, you will become more attractive to women. Fortunately, if you utilize tip 4, the process of confidence building will largely take place automatically.

The most important take-aways from this are that you can’t fake confidence, and that it will take time to develop – BUT your level of confidence is completely under your control and improving it will make you more attractive.

Further resources on how to become more confident:

- This video goes into detail about how to enter a social 'god mode' when you go out:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MZCVXRlcm8
- https://medium.com/@aghayden/charisma-is-the-most-appealing-quality-an-individual-can-have-6997168b8571 This article titled how to be more charismatic applies just as well to self-confidence and gives you an in-depth how to guide on letting go of your social insecurities.

&nbsp;

##How To Be An Attractive Man Key 2:
##Develop Standards

&nbsp;

The more women you’re willing to reject, the more attractive to women you will become. This is counter-intuitive, but it’s true.

If there is one thing that turns women off more than anything, it’s neediness. A guy acts needy when he is so desperate to be with a girl that no matter what she does or says, he would still sleep with her.

Neediness is suffocating. It shows that you take getting with a girl way too seriously and that you see yourself as incapable of getting another girl of her caliber if you wanted to.

Most of the guys I’ve met who have trouble attracting women (and there are many) have a problem with neediness. They see girls as a means to an end. They will happily sleep with any girl because that makes them feel like they “won”.

Men with this mindset don’t meet women to connect with another human being, but to get a sense of accomplishment from sleeping with a girl.

These guys don’t have standards for themselves. They see a hot girl as a prize to be won, so they are desperate to get her. Her personality is irrelevant. Her values are irrelevant.

When you see women as mere sex-objects, it’s impossible to have a real human interaction with them. And, naturally, a man who sees a woman as a human being is much more likely to attract her than a man who sees her as the fleshy equivalent of a gold coin.

The best way to eliminate this neediness that derives from seeing attractive women as prizes is to develop standards. Instead of being the guy who will do anything to get with the hot girl, you want to be the guy who’s interested in the hot girl but hasn’t decided if he wants to sleep with her yet.

Just like confidence, this can’t be faked. Pretending that you have standards by disqualifying a girl or negging her won’t make her see you as a high-status guy. You have to develop actual standards.

A good place to start is to make a clear list of what you won’t accept in a woman you’re considering dating (in whatever capacity). For reference, here’s a few of the things I won’t accept in a woman:

-If a girl has any kind of drug addiction, I’m out.

-If she’s unhealthily narcissistic, I’m out

-If she has a negative mindset, I’m out.

-If she is uninteresting, I’m out.

When I’m interacting with a woman, I’m screening her for the above traits. She might be a perfect ten in appearance, but if she’s narcissistic and uninteresting, I’m not going to sleep with her. To do so would be selling myself short.

The only reason I would sleep with that girl is because it would give me a sense of ego-gratification. I’d be doing it, so I could tell my friends about, not because to do so would actually be enjoyable.

In my experience, at least, sex is better when you actually like the person. Physical attraction is important, too, sure. But I’ve been with extremely beautiful women in the past who I didn’t have any chemistry with - and it was crappy.

Writing a list of the things you won’t tolerate in a potential sexual partner and rejecting women who don’t meet those standards is a powerful strategy for becoming more attractive to women. (Btw, it’s also useful to write a list of the things you do want in a partner.)

When you’re interacting with a beautiful woman and you’re willing to reject her depending on what she does and says, the entire dynamic changes. Instead of acting like a guy who would do anything to get laid, you will act like a guy who has an abundance of options.

Your non-neediness will make you infinitely more attractive than all the desperate guys pining after her. But this starts with taking a moment to write out what you want (and don’t want) in a girl you’re considering having a sexual relationship with.

&nbsp;

##How To Be An Attractive Man Key 3:
##Improve your Appearance

&nbsp;

Looks matter. The better looking you are, the higher percentage of women will make it easy for you to pick them up. At the same time, no matter how unattractive you are, some percentage of women will be attracted to you if are confident, non-needy, etc. (and that percentage is probably higher than you think).

There are two important misconceptions about looks that must be cleared up:

-Waiting to get in shape before meeting women is a silly idea.
-Your looks matter, but they don’t exist in a vacuum.

A lot of guys realize that looks matter, so they decide that once they’ve got their looks “handled” they’ll start approaching women. This is problematic because it can easily turn into a form of procrastination. Your appearance is something that you can constantly improve, but you’ll never reach a particular point where you’ve “made it”. Furthermore, improving your looks won’t make game easy. I’ve seen numerous good-looking guys fail at game. These guys expect their looks to do all the work for them, but truth is you still have to be very confident and assertive to succeed with women.

The vast majority of guys don’t have the confidence necessary to take a woman home, and that’s something you can only develop through practice. Thinking you look good helps, but it’s not magically going to make you comfortable with social risk taking –(if only it were that simple).

Improve your appearance while also improving your social skills. It’s not one or the other, it’s both. Focusing on your looks while neglecting to actually interact with women is a recipe for failure.

Social skills, confidence, and physical attractiveness are all important when it comes to dating, don’t sell yourself short by improving one and neglecting the others. To do so would be as silly as learning how to shoot in basketball, but not how to dribble or pass.

That said, you can make a staggering improvement in your appearance in the course of a single day. Get a high-end salon haircut. Buy some clothes that fit well and don’t make you look like you live in your mother’s basement. Simply dressing better and having a sense of style will make you more substantially more attractive. It’s not going to make up for a lack of confidence and experience, but it’s a good start. And really, 95% of guys in the seduction community have plenty of room to improve their style.

I’m no expert on fashion, but here are a couple resources you can look at to get started with:

http://masculine-style.com/rugged-refined-and-rakish/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FiAubtXLnFs

Obviously, when it comes to improving your looks, style is only half the battle. There’s no reason not to be in good shape. If you’re not already working out regularly, the easiest way to start is to go to the gym with a friend of yours who’s already in good shape.

Having a gym buddy will help keep you accountable to working out even when you don’t feel motivated. Plus, if your friend is in good shape, they’ll be able to help provide you with guidance.

If you don’t have a friend who can help you, there’s an unlimited number of fitness guides you can download. Find someone you resonate with and trust and follow their plan. If you have trouble being consistent, get a trainer to hold you accountable and provide guidance.

&nbsp;

##How To Be An Attractive Man Key 4:
##Treat Dating Like A Skill

&nbsp;

Whatever you want to accomplish in life, there are certain elements that are outside of your control. - If you want to be a doctor, a low IQ is a disadvantage that’s outside your control. - If you want to get rich, having a poor family is disadvantage that’s outside your control. - If you want to date beautiful women, factors like your height, race, etc. can be disadvantages that are outside your control.

Dating coaches who say factors like your race and height don’t matter are lying. Sure, they matter, but they’re out of your control: worrying about them is only going to hurt you.

When you tell yourself, “Girls don’t like Asians,” you’re going to see your interactions with women through that lens. If you walk up to a girl, and she rejects you, you’re going to say, “It’s because I’m Asian. If I were white that wouldn’t have happened.”

This narrative becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. When you’re interacting with a woman, and you expect her not to like you, you’ll act different than if you expect her to like you. Your insecurities will show up in your behavior, and when she rejects you, you’ll think, “It’s because I’m Asian.” Then you’ll become even more insecure, women will like you even less, and so on.

You can’t change your race, but you can change many of the other factors that create sexual attraction. The guy who wants to get rich but has a poor family can work twice as hard as his competition, and within a few years he can get to a point where he’s making a six-figure income.

Similarly, a short Asian guy with a below average face can succeed with women IF he works twice as hard as his competition and focuses on the factors that are under his control. His level of self-confidence is under his control, his style and fitness are under his control, and his ability to take social risks is under his control.

Look, with the above example, I said that the guy with a poor family could make six-figures, I didn’t say he can become a billionaire. Being a billionaire probably requires a certain amount of luck, the right family, being born in right time and place, the right genetics, etc.

But anyone can make six-figures with enough time and effort. The same is true in dating. If you’re naturally a four on a looks scale, I can’t promise that you’ll be able to date Victoria’s Secret models, but you can still bat way out of your league and hook up with attractive girls.

By treating dating as a skillset, you can date higher quality women than you would otherwise. If you fixate on whether you can get “perfect tens” you’re just going to cause yourself frustration.

We have these fantasies, whether it’s to be a billionaire or to sleep with “10s”. These fantasies stifle us because they’re so far outside of our reality. Worry about pulling “10s” when you can already pull “9s” easily. Treat dating like a skillset by taking it one step at a time. Don’t spend much time learning how to build attraction when you still have crippling approach anxiety.

-I know a guy who’s great at getting women attracted to him, but he always chokes by leaving the interaction before anything sexual can happen. He would massively improve his results if he focused on leading interactions forward by inviting the girl to the dance floor, to another area, etc.

-I know another guy who is great at opening girls, but he’s so quiet they don’t pay attention to him. He would gain so much by working on his volume.

 -I know a third guy who is great at dating girls who aren’t particularly attractive. But he won’t even approach girls who he thinks are pretty. He’s unnecessarily limiting himself to only date women that are far worse looking than he is!

I could give countless examples like the above. No, these guys can’t change their race, but they can learn to lead interactions forward, to speak louder, or to approach more attractive women.

In dating, there countless factors that are under your control. Worrying about the things outside your control is silly when there are so many things you can proactively improve on.

Don’t think about your race, think about your confidence. Don’t think about your height, think about your inability to approach attractive women.

Treat dating as a skill, and you can improve your results dramatically. Treat it like something entirely based on your genetics, and you’ll just drown yourself in self-pity.

&nbsp;

###Skill Only Comes with Practice

&nbsp;

The other key to treating dating like a skill, is to practice. If you spent 5 hours a week reading about how to pass a basketball, but never went out and played the game, people would think you’re an idiot.

Yet it’s common for guys to spend dozens- if not hundreds - of hours learning about how to attract women, without going out into the world and practicing. Intellectual learning is only useful if you’re spending most of your time in the real world getting real feedback.

Imagining what a good basketball shot looks like is completely different from taking the actual shot. Similarly, imagining what a good approach looks like is completely different from doing the approach. Information is only helpful to provide some guidance, it can’t do the work for you. Only real practice can.

It’s a lot easier to read about picking up women than it is to actually do it. I know this as well as anyone. When I first learned about the seduction community, I spent over a year wat

ching videos without doing a single approach. 

Was it helpful? 

No. 

If anything, my social skills got worse because I became so overanalytical. Learning how to attract women without practicing is just as absurd as trying to learn any other skill without practicing.

Treating dating like a skillset is difficult. It takes patience, time, and effort to do so. Here are some resources that can help you if you get stuck:

&nbsp;

##Conclusion: How To Be An Attractive Man

&nbsp;

There you have it, how to be an attractive man. Any of the four tips can change your life individually, but master all four and you won’t believe the successes you’ll have.

Reading is how to do this is the easy part, becoming more attractive to women is a long-term process. Remember, anyone who tells you it’s going to be easy - that you can use some “hack” to succeed with women – is more interested in making money than in helping you improve.

Changing your life is hard, but what’s the alternative? Approaching women can be painful, but not nearly as painful as it would be to settle for a woman you’re not happy with because “she was the best you could get” (which is what the majority of men end up doing).

Fortunately, most of the factors that make a man attractive to women are under your control. If you’re willing to treat dating like a skill, you can master it.

**If you found this article useful, check out my YouTube channel for more content like this: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4kTcVi-b_9qQnMCRG9WggA**

References:

1. This isn’t to say you should NEVER use a technique. They can be useful to get a feel for a principle of social dynamics that you don’t naturally utilize. For example, if you’re a nice guy, it could be useful to practice using some push-pull to get a feel for what being polarizing means and to get comfortable with being less agreeable. The technique isn’t going to attract women on its own, but it might help you get over your insecurities/limiting beliefs.This lesson has not only improved my relationships with other women, but has also taught me to act with conviction in all that I do. I learned this lesson through one experience in particular that I wanted to share with the community.

It was a week before my 18th birthday and I remember wanting nothing more than to spend the day with 'L'. She was a wonderful girl that I had been seeing for the past two months. We had amazing chemistry and things had really heated up after we went to prom together.

Looking to keep the momentum, I was eager to spend my 18th with her and ask her to be my girlfriend shortly afterwards. We were talking about my birthday via text and this is what followed:

* Her: What are you doing for your birthday?

* Me: As long as you're there, it really doesn't matter :) What do you want to do?

* Her: I don't really know...I'm not sure if I'm free on your actual birthday either, sorry

* Me: That's totally fine, I can just do something with my family and set aside a date that works better for you. 
What days are you free next week?

* Her: Not too sure yet, but I'll get back to you once I get my dance schedule

* Me: Ok, sounds good! Let me know!

Later in the week, we agreed to meet up the day after my birthday. That day, she flakes on me, claiming that she read her schedule wrong and had dance class the whole afternoon. I was obviously distraught. Awkwardness ensued and we never spoke a word to each other again.

I spent the rest of that summer frustrated, trying to make sense of how she had left so suddenly. I thought of the following reasons:

1. Maybe she's seeing another guy.

2. She's been really involved in dance lately and that's her priority right now.

3. She probably just isn't into celebrating birthdays. She was never enthusiastic when I tried to plan with her.

4. There must be an issue in her family/friends/personal life that made her cancel on me last minute.

5. Maybe it's that time of month?

**Never did I consider that the reason she didn't spend my 18th birthday with me was the fact that I had effectively cut off my balls during the 'planning process', leaving her disgusted that she was involved with a sorry excuse for a man.**

My problem with L was that I constantly sought her approval for all that I did and worse, refused to believe I did until she was long gone. Looking back, if I had simply said:

* Her: What are you doing for your birthday?

* Me: Heading out to SixFlags. I'm getting a group together this week. You in?

I guarantee that she would cancel whatever dance class she had on my actual birthday and we'd have a blast.

So, what did I learn? The key difference between what I said five years ago and what I would have said to her today is that now, **I speak with conviction.** I say exactly what I want and make it clear how I'm going to make it happen. 

I'm going to keep this mentality regardless of the outcome I get. What if she really couldn't come along that day? Who cares. I'm going to grab 3-4 friends and enjoy my birthday. Sounds much better than what I actually did: Moping around at home wondering what I could have possibly done wrong.

I'll never have that one back but I've come to terms with it and derived an important life lesson. I don't need the approval of others to get what I want. 

Women have a sixth sense for assessing a man's conviction and how badly he needs to feel validated. L did a good job of running for the hills as soon as she realized that I didn't know how to live for myself. I've found that women are willing to compromise on many fronts-even looks, money, and social status, but will not tolerate a man living only to appease her.

I hope you enjoyed this story-it was definitely long but I think clearly illustrates what every man needs to do. Decide what you want, move toward it unashamed, and don't depend on anybody else's approval but your own. And if things don't happen the way you planned, learn from any mistakes and move on. I sure did and for that I am the most grateful.After reading several books, youtube videos and dvds about self improvement and seduction as well as constantly checking up on /r/seduction I have tried to push down what I have learned to the fundamentals of becoming your best self because I want to make this process as simple and straight forward as possible for myself and maybe for you as well.
So without everything fansy pantsy here is my list of the 10 areas I have worked on to become a better self and even if I am not nearly at the finish line yet I know that this have helped my social life and made me an more attractive man to women.
I am not going to go into the fields to much them self because I think they are quite straight forward, if you want to learn more about a certain area because it feels like it is something you need to improve on, I recommend simply googeling it.


 
1 **Body language**


- Deep Tonality

 
- Good Posture 


- Fashion/Dress well (I recommend checking out fashionbeans.com if you need some ideas (if you in a certain click you should dress to become attractive to them)). 


- Grooming 


- Strong eye contact

 
2 **Positivity** 


- High energy 


- Re-frame bad situations 


3 **Non needy** 


- Be the one who says see you later, be occupied. (this is a big one to appear as a attractive person) 


- Push pull (make sure to pull back, but only after you have made effort to push love on them, if you do not receive any love back you are better off with out them) 


4 **Be touchable, kino.** (high five, fist bump, hug, shoulder touch) 


5 **Talk a lot** 


- Talk about the other person 


- Find commonalities (this is a strong way to connect to a person)

 
- Live in to what they say, show that you really care

 
- Active listening

 
- Use threading 


- Don't ask to many questions( it is not an interview)

 
- Try to answer any question with at least 3 sentences.  (this is a technique I learned from the e-book "chatter" and it is a great way to boost conversation)

 
6 **Healthy lifestyle** 


- Exercise 


- Eat right 


- Sleep enough 


7 **Focus on yourself** (read, meditate, exercise etc).

 
- Find time to do something for yourself everyday 


8 **Push yourself** (do something out of your comfort zone everyday) 


- Learn from mistakes

 
9 **Be present**


- Ask yourself "how do I feel about that" from time to time (this helps you to become more aware of your emotions, it is a physiologist trick I got from the book "no more mr nice guy!")

 
- Have fun

 
- Don't stress or think about problems that there is no need to think about 


- Trust your subconscious (it is proven that even if you stop thinking about a problem your subconscious continues and will alert you when a solution is found) 


- Don't feel bad about the past

 
- Be open and honest 


10 **Work on your self image** 


- Write a list of affirmations and read them as much and often as possible 

*I keep this list in my phone and keep it as a reminder for what I need to improve on and when I feel like I got one thing down I've simply put a mark next to it, it is a great tool to keep track of your progress.*


*So i suggest that you do the same as me and copy paste this list into you phone or somewhere you constantly got it with you or alter it to make it more specific to you and use it as a tool to improve yourself. It has helped me a great deal.*


*And theoretically when you have crossed off everything on the list you should be an attractive human being*


**Edit:** Quite a few people is asking for futher reading advice so here is what I recommend.


**Models: how to attract women with honesty** (this book is constantly being mentioned here and that is with good reason, this book is a great self help book and it will cover a lot of the things that is listed above and is an must read!)


**No more mr nice guy!** (if you consider yourself a nice guy that don't get respected enough or not able to build lasting relationships this book will be great therapy.)


**Chatter** (I love this book! It gives you all the tools you possibly would need to become great at making conversation and it is very to the point. teaching you how to deal with conversation lows, boosting conversation, becoming a charismatic, active listening, cold reading, the importance of commonalities and many other useful things)


With that said it is easy to become an knowledge junkie and use that as an excuse not to take action,I have been there myself, but it is important to combine the two and push your self, this is really the only way to improve. So never stop going out of your comfort zone and field test what you lern from the books.



**Edit 2:**Thank you for the reddit gold stranger.

 [My blog, about seduction and self improvement.](https://unconscioussuperman.wordpress.com/2015/07/18/seddit-15-minutes-of-fame/)

**Thank you for reading.**Often times we get caught up in wondering if we said something wrong whenever a girl stops responding to our messages, I think that deeply affects our Game and makes us doubt ourselves. Yes you could have said something wrong but chances you were being yourself and said something you thought was funny or interesting so if she didn’t like it, you did both of you a favor. Having good text game is still important but after you learned how to have a good back and forth over text, never wonder if you made a wrong move when she stops responding, the reason why she stopped is none of your business, just know that she stopped and keep being you !I haven't done that in a while. She was sitting in a book store reading a book. First I went out and didn't want to approach her but then I thought fuck it. She responded pretty well eben though I was so nervous. She told me that she is depressed after some small talk and since I was depressed as well we had a topic to talk about. So we were talking about 30 minutes then I had to leave. Took her number and we may meet on the weekend. I'm happy that I did it.Okay so during lockdown I became very interested in skincare and taking care of my face. This includes trimming my beard so it accentuates my cheekbones, exfoliating, applying oil to my face , applying anti ageing cream and using a good moisturiser. At first this was just for me to be able to look my best and I didn’t think too much of it but I went out last night for the first time in a while and I never knew how much girls actually pay attention to your skin. I got atleast 5 compliments from complete strangers about my skin and obviously great, passionate and interesting conversation ensued as I went into detail about what I do on a weekly basis. 

So guys, you may not care too much but definitely remember that anytime you are talking to a girl she is subconsciously analysing your face like a bloody dermatologist 😅

Skin care routine:

Sunday Riley CEO glow face oil 
Sunday Riley hydration cream 
Paulas choice retinol (anti ageing) 
Sunday Riley daily cleanser 
Sugar face polish (exfoliation)Guys, after about an year without approaching anyone during the daytime, i finally did it! 

I was struugling with overthinking and approach/social anxiety and couldn't find a way to solve this.

Today i smashed my ruminating thoughts and became present in the moment (the now!), that's how you approach, when there's no bullshit thoughts running through your mind.

Now HOW i stopped these thoughts:

I basically starting purposefully talking to myself and using my ego in my favor. I was constantly repeating how my current dating life sucks and how there was no way around it, this is the ONLY thing that can change it in the current moment. I was constantly remebering and talking to myself how a possible "bad" outcome would not be that bad and any reaction that i got would probably make my mood so much better just because i had approached. 

&#x200B;

By constantly reminding myself of these things i gradually turned off my negative ruminations/overthinking and slowly got totally in the present moment. I searched for the most approchable girl and did it. I did not end up well, we just chatted a little bit and i saw that she was wanting to leave and i did not persist. But that does not matter, im just fucking happy that i did it and broke these whole year of not approaching.In this tough times i have had a lot of time, as im sure you too have had, to learn about myself even more. 

When you get rejected, from a girl or in general, we learned to change our thoughts from negative to positive. For example when a girl ignored you and walks away, you dont stand there thinking what did i do wrong, shit my game is not good, why does she hate me. You, or rather i, say “but i love you!”, “i am very rich!”, “dont break my heart Elizabeth”, “call me!”(then you turn around and to a guy/girl that is looking at you “she will call me”).

When rejections happens, girls or everyday situations. Take it with humor and lightheartedness and you will notice something as i did. 

I reflected on how i behaved when something bad was happening. While i was very thirsty and hungry, when we got lost with a bus, when someone spilled his drink on my shirt....     
I replied, and was behaving, in all of those examples with humor. I would crack jokes if we got lost while others would be nervous. When the guy spilled a drink on me i said while laughing “no problem, but you need to buy me a new shirt tho!”. I noticed a pattern that i created. Whenever something bad happened i wouldnt even let the bad thoughts form, i would destroy them with positive ones. 

And that is what im proud of achieving. I rewired my brain from thinking bad to good. I realized once again how game is amazing. Game is not only about women, it is also about building yourself and having amazing time. 

Stay safe, love you all!My friend gave me this advice yesterday.

It completely goes against my 'style' but then my style hasn't exactly gotten me far.

I'm always paranoid of being misinterpreted as a creep, I didn't want any girls walking the earth thinking of me as that creepy/pushy/annoying guy from last weekend...but I'm starting to see how that has really just held me back from meeting some great girls.

As a 6'5 good looking guy with an approachable demeanour... I don't know why I've always doubted that people would be attracted to me, and have always waited for incredibly obvious signs that someone is into me before taking action... never assuming that the girl across from me is wanting me to make the first move. 

Ideally we wouldn't ever make anyone uncomfortable but I think that's just a risk you have to take to reap any rewards, not just with strangers you're flirting w/ but people you know who you're trying to get more intimate with too.

I know this is 101 shit but I'm posting it as a reminder to myself, and perhaps anyone else here.

You don't have to be 6'5 blah blah to assume it either. If you know you're a respectful guy who can take no as an answer... you really shouldn't feel inherently like a creep for engaging perhaps the most natural behaviour known to mankind. 

Does anyone wanna add anything? Think that's all bullshit? Have another mindset to share?Like many guys I always wanted to be comfortable talking to women, especially being able to just meet anyone during the day. I would watch many youtube videos but was never really able to do much. 

Until when I was 25, I was like fuck this, I am gonna try until I succeed. It was very hard at first but what I really noticed was that beyond censoring myself with women, I censored myself in many small moments in daily life. These small moments, like saying a compliment to an old lady or cracking a joke with someone in line might seem insignificant but at the scale of your life they add up. This realization made me shift my focus from being goal-oriented -> did I get her number ect.. to something much more internal -> Am I able to be true to myself. As I started focusing on expressing myself, I ended up starting interactions with all sorts of people from old men to cute girls and made much more progress than I ever thought possible. 

It's easy to be blinded by outcomes and forget that interacting with people is first and foremost about expressing yourself, the rest are just side effects. 

The video goes into more details, let me know your thoughts :) 

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0lKRM76uFeI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0lKRM76uFeI)I came to this realization many years ago when I was hanging out with a girl I had a huge crush on. My phone buzzed and it was a text from *another* girl. She mentioned that she'd had fun on our coffee date. Which had been her idea.

I remember being really *annoyed* at this text, and this girl. My defenses went way up.*Who does this bitch think she's fooling*? How could she enjoy the coffee date? It was bland! Anodyne! Boring even!

After a couple of deep breaths I realized:

1. I liked the date too. 

2. I wanted to see her again.

3. I was scared of the first two things.

This was the moment I realized why I had an unrequited crush on girl # 1. My crush was a subconscious defense mechanism. 

By focusing on the unrequited crush, I didn't have to let new people in or navigate new relationships. Managing my unrequited feelings was much easier than navigating a *real* relationship. 

Or put another way, if the girl I was crushing on ever developed feelings for me, then I'd push her away. Because it would mean having an actual relationship with a person. 

Think about how your feelings are holding you back. Are you holding on to a crush just so you can avoid moving on? What would happen if your crush suddenly fell into your arms? Would the crush evaporate? Would it stand the test of time?

This logic applies really well to many of the things you do. Holding on is often based in fear of new things. A lot of the stuff I see in this sub is basically managing your fear - fight/flight/freeze response.TLDR: Improve yourself – Physically, Mentally, Financially, Emotionally, Socially, Hobbies, Lifestyle, etc.

There's NO opening line or trick or any other shortcut that is going to get you laid or into a desirable relationship. Girls are attracted to guys who are GENUINELY attractive, and a lot of the advice I see on here pushes guys to put up this facade that makes them APPEAR attractive, but this will NEVER lead to long term results and will not work on the girls that are actually worth going for. If you are ok with settling for random boring mediocre girls, feel free to stop reading here.

I see so much advice out there saying things like "be more confident", "physically escalate as much as possible", "approaching more girls will get you more results", etc. These may be true, and I'm not saying they don't help... but they are definitely not where you should be focusing your energy.

The ONLY effective thing to do is to work as hard as you can to improve yourself. Are you overweight? Too scrawny? Unhappy with your body? Start going to the gym, lift some weights, run, swim, start AND COMMIT to an ab routine, try yoga... do SOMETHING to improve your physique. Is your face below average? Ugly? Focus on your style. Find a haircut that works with your face shape. Clean up your facial hair. Go out and shop for clothes that FIT you (doesn't have to be flashy or expensive, just has to be clean and neat... a $20 plain white tshirt that fits your body type is 1000 times better than a 300$ branded shirt that fits poorly). Are you poor? Work harder. Put in more effort and thought into advancing your career. Do you have poor social skills and a shit social life? Make an effort to go out of your comfort zone to meet people (clubs, bars, parties, sports games, travel the world, etc.). Do you not have your shit together? FIX IT. CLEAN YOURSELF UP. Do whatever you can to develop a lifestyle that you enjoy and become a version of yourself that can look at the mirror and say "I love who I am, I respect myself, and I am proud the way I live". If you can say those words... EVERYTHING ELSE WILL FOLLOW. Your confidence will naturally go up, your general happiness will skyrocket, and ultimately, you WILL be able to attract NOT ONLY more, but also better quality girls in the long term.

At the end of the day, girls who are 8/10s or 9/10s go for guys who are 8/10s or 9/10s... not guys who are 6/10s trying some cheap tactic to disguise themselves as 8/10s. If you're OK with just pulling average girls, then good for you... keep doing what you're doing. But if you want to get that dream girl, you're going to have to put in some work.

Yes, this is all much easier said than done, and much MUCH harder than memorizing some line or trying some PUA trick out with girls. But if you want real results, you MUST work for it. That's the cold hard truth. It really just depends on how badly you want it. Work hard now and forever reap the benefits. I'm rooting for you... and so are all the cute girls :)I fell in love for the first time around a year ago. Once it ended I found myself becoming somewhat obsessive. The girl I fell for dumped me and it really fucking hurt. I thought it would pass over a few weeks. It didn't. I found that I'd keep thinking about this girl for months and months. Other girls would be into me but I would send them off because I still wanted this girl. I became somewhat obsessive. 



After about six months of this I vowed to make a change. I was reading a John Carlton success book and he wrote something that has stuck with me ever since. 



"Obsessive thinking often comes from your brain’s whack notion that if you don’t obsess, you’ll forget. I’ve found that your brain actually knows that writing it all down means it can relax with the memorization nonsense. It’s like burying your bone in a familiar place — you can stop carrying it around for a while, and concentrate on something else."



I thought I was obsessed with this girl. But in reality I think I was obsessed with the feelings of being wanted. Of the feelings I associated with actually having real intimate feelings with someone else. My brain never wanted me to forget what it felt like to actually have real feelings for someone. So it began to obsess. And it took the form of me thinking that I could only have those feelings for that specific girl. 



And once I recognized that I could take the girl off the mountain as they say. She wasn't that great and even that hot. What she did have was she was somebody I could really love. But once you realize you can love any other of the 4 billion girls on this planet just as much the obsessive feelings go away. 



And now I can look back and be happy that in the moment I felt that way. And in the present feel good knowing that as I improve myself I will meet an even higher quality, more attractive girl whom I can share intimacy with.




I think if you find yourself obsessed with one girl, you aren't actually obsessed with her. You are obsessed with wanted to find intimacy. And just realize that you can find that with any girl, not just the one specific girl you are in love with. 



Which is where this subreddit comes in. Because it can give you tools to go out there and meet a new girl. And not be one of those tweebs who gets hung up on one girl for the rest of his life. Or settles for the first girl he meets that actually likes him back. 


llamaGet these things happening in your life first. The women will fall in to place:

* get your work life together. put yourself first.
* get your own place. Make your space into one that a woman would be half way comfortable in. No woman wants to fool around in front of a bunch of roommates. But a guy who a girl can have some privacy with is a definite option.
* get fit. Do it for your own sanity. lift and keto.
* get some clothes. look like an adult. Dont forget the bar of soap.
* get rid of the friends that drag you down in any way. practice making new friends. practice this alot. Keep one door open towards the future as you close the ones behind you.
* need company and connection? Get a puppy. girls lose their shit over a puppy like nothing else I have ever seen in my life. It will enable you to make connections with people of all walks of life like nothing else.

I do have a  certain sense of humor in my post, but I am also sincere.

\*\* update: thanks for comments, upvotes, silver. Remember that women arent actually that hard to figure out. Imagine for a second that you were one, what would you want? Why would you want you? If you are missing any of the basics, do that first. 

&#x200B;Just make brief eye contact and give a little smile - make sure to smile with your eyes too.

If the girl smiles back, she’s likely down to chat. If she looks away or seems uncomfortable do not waste your time! Don’t take it personally and just move on.

Every woman is different. Some just want to finish their workout/study session in peace and go home to their boyfriend or s.o. Others are single and down to mingle. It’s really that simple.1. **There is no perfect dating strategy, perfect set of words, or perfect time** - Don't overthink yourself into inaction. Don't let your mind fall into the trap that if you think hard enough eventually you'll find the perfect solution or set of words that will get you the girl of your dreams. You just have to do the best that you can at the current level you are. 

  Your mind is very good at convincing you to put things off (e.g. *"don't ask people out, you're fat/ugly/balding/awkward, wait until you've fixed those things before you ask someone out"*.) It doesn't feel good to put yourself out there until you're your best self, but you have to do it because the way to become your best self by necessity involves putting yourself out there. 

 It's like someone saying, *"Once I've lost the weight and got in shape, then I'll go to the gym."* It's your brain prioritizing the short term comfort of not-failing/feeling-embarrassed over the long term benefits gained from failing repeatedly.  



2. **The way to get confident is by failing over and over** -  It sounds counterintuitive, but succeeding all the time doesn't always make you confident, in a lot of cases it actually leads to imposter syndrome. 

 Confidence comes from failing and getting back up. Babies become confident in walking by falling on their butt repeatedly then getting back up, same applies with you. Babies are novices at walking and you are likely a novice at seduction, but if the baby just waited around and studied gait patterns in order to avoid the pain of falling on their butt, then said baby would never walk. The baby who walks has fallen on their ass more times than the baby who doesn't. The michelin star chef has flubbed more dishes than the guy who can't cook worth a damn, and Magnus Carlsen has lost more chess games than virtually everyone. 

 Do you want to succeed in your goal(s)? Then start walking, fall on your ass, then get back up. 

3. **Give yourself a break** - It's very easy to judge yourself for all the times you've fucked up without taking into account your personal situation. People grow up with shitty parents, they grow up going to all boys schools, they grow up with autism, they grow up with all different types of problems and stressors that influence them and each person has a different problem. If for example you have neglectful belittling parents that don't support you, then it's going to be difficult for you to feel secure in yourself or your ability to succeed at things. If you then go ahead and compare yourself to a secure/confident person, you're setting yourself up for disappointment because you and said person are different people with different parents and upbringings. 

 You can't control the upbringings you were given, but you can control today. The fact that you're looking at this subreddit and this reading through this post shows a willingness to become a better person and that in and of itself deserves a pat on the back. If you apply them, even better. 

4. **You can't control outcomes, only your actions** - You can't get an A on a test. The only thing you can do is study for the test, but the result is not guaranteed; you can do the best you possibly can and still fail. 

 The same applies to dating, you can be smart, charming, handsome, kind, well-dressed, perfect hair, a six pack, and all the works, but you're still not guaranteed a date, because the outcome isn't up to you. Maybe she's in a relationship, maybe she's a lesbian, maybe her dog just died and she's not in the mood to get seduced. There are an infinite number of reasons as to why the result won't go your way, and a bigger number of which have nothing to do with you. 

 You can not and will not ever be able to get a girlfriend, because that is not up to you. The only thing you can do is to put yourself out there. 

 The important caveat here is that while your actions are not causal with the results, they are correlated. If you study for a test every day, you won't be guaranteed an A, but your chances of getting an A will go up, but if you convince yourself that you can get an A if you study hard enough then most likely you just won't study. 

 Think of your current actions as "buffing" (i.e. improving) future you. Every time you go out and flub an interaction with a girl, future you has just become better at talking to girls because they have concrete experiences they can learn from. Every time you study for a test, future you just got a bit more knowledgeable. Every time you choose to take the stairs, future you just got a little bit more fit. 

 Detach yourself from the outcomes of your actions and you will start actually doing things. 

 ---

*Note:* These guidelines are as much a reminder of myself as they are to you. I am not the wise all-knowing teacher and you are not the ignorant students. I'm just a guy giving my opinion (which I have cultivated from people much smarter than I), take these all with a grain of salt, try them or don't.This is a long one. But it’s worth it. I promise.

James Altucher the author of “Choose Yourself” said that he learned (through multiple life-crushing failures) to divide his life into 4 buckets (mental, physical, emotional, and spiritual) and he works on each one every day. He noticed when focus dwindled on any one of these 4 areas the other 3 would also fall. Life was and is a balance.

**Mental Strength -**

Women love to see drive and passion in those that they date, and I encourage you to set a standard for yourself to only seek women with that same trait because they rock. Your mental strength will drive the other 3 strengths. It’s not only about intelligence, it’s about fostering tenacity and ambition, because as they say, “intelligence without ambition is like a bird without wings.”

1a: How knowledgeable are you about the world? Do you know what’s important to you in the world and what’s unimportant? Do you know why that’s important?

1b: How easily are you derailed from a task? How much discipline do you have when focusing on a single task?

1c: When you’re at a party or meeting someone new, do you find yourself struggling for things to talk about with them? In what areas do you struggle?

1d: Can you push yourself when doing things that you don’t want to do?

1e: Are you negative until the positive is proven? Do you blame others when things go awry or look for what you could have done to improve and make a plan?

1f: Are you aware of what content you’re putting into your mind and how it benefits or hurts you?

1g: Your living space is often strangely connected to mental strength. Look around and see what it says about the way you think. Does your living space look like the embodiment of your mind? Why?

Further Reading to Help You:

**Mindset by Carol Dweck** : People talk about abundance mindset on this community all the time but this book is a crucial resource in bringing that mindset into ALL aspects of your life. The author provides concrete examples of how fixed mindsets lead to failures and how growth mindsets have changed the world.

**Deep Work by Cal Newport:** We’re going into a crisis of focus in the world; those who master focus will readily leave those who don’t behind.

**Physical Strength -**

In the book “Man’s Guide to Women by Dr. John and Dr. Julie Gottman they tell a story of a group therapy session containing 40 couples where the instructor asked the men to raise their hands if they’d ever felt like their life was threatened. 

A little under half of the men raised their hands so the instructor probed further to ask why and when they were threatened. Some men had been in wars, one was a police man, they mostly had one or two individual single stories of feeling threatened at some point in their lives.

The instructor then asked the women if any of them had ever felt that their lives were threatened. Every hand in the room went up, and they DIDN’T have isolated stories. Feeling their lives were in danger was a common yearly if not monthly occurrence for most of their lives. This story blew my mind.

Now I’m not saying women are defenseless daisies; I’ve met women who could kick most of our asses handily. What I’m trying to convey is that physical strength isn’t just about having a six pack to feel cooler than someone who doesn’t, it’s proof of your own inner strength, discipline, and your beliefs about yourself.

Socrates puts it well “It is a shame for a man to grow old without seeing the beauty and strength of which his body is capable.”

A few questions:

2a: Do you know the limits of your physical strength and are you actively pushing on them to help them grow?

2b: Are you familiar with how much pain you are able to endure and push through? Do you know what dealing with pain feels like?

2c: Do you feel capable and safe in a room filled with people?

2d: Have you ever been in a fight? If you got in a fight would you immediately lose?

2e: When was the last time you challenged yourself physically and rose to that challenge?

Further Reading:

**Can’t Hurt Me by David Goggins** \- I struggled to NOT put this book in Mental strength as Goggins mind is as tough as nails. He may have the toughest mind in the world, However, I didn’t run marathons or exercise vigorously before I read this book so I think it helped push me physically too. Goggins helps you understand that you have SO much more potential but it’s lying at the other side of pain so you run away from it. Don’t. Run towards it. There is a whole world that most will never see on the other side.

**Emotional Strength -**

In Karen Brody’s book Open Her, she uses an analogy of two types of men at the dog park to represent how there are two types of relationships she sees that men have with their own sexuality.

The first man has a goofy friendly dog who runs free, it does what it wants when it wants and although endearing, and maybe even exciting at first, it’s eventually clear that the owner has a tenuous relationship with their dog. They are not truly connected.

The second man’s dog is still a free spirit but the two are very connected, there is a respect and a control between them. The dog is at his command and looks to him for control.

I find this to be true of people’s relationships with their emotions as well. There are those who control their emotions, and those whose emotions control them.

3a: Are you aware of where your emotions come from? What opens your own floodgates and why do they open?

3b: How well do you deal with failure? Who do you blame? What do you do?

3c: Do you have a support group of people you trust and who you feel you can tell anything to? (Note: it is regularly advised that this person should NOT be your partner)

3d: Do you invest the same amount of focus and growth on your friendships as you do with your relationships? 

Write a list of how you would like to be treated in friendships and a list of your friends, and now flip it, use that list of what you want and improve your friendships. Treat them the way you want to be treated WITHOUT any expectation of return. It will enrich your life. I would bet anything on this. 

Further Reading:

**The Gifts of Imperfection By Brené Brown:** Although I like Brené’s other work, this book changed everything for me. Brené breaks down 3 characteristics of a well-lived, whole-hearted life that will make you (rightfully) question and examine your own life.

**The Charisma Myth by Olivia Fox Cabane:** Charisma is trainable. It really is, and this book breaks it down in 3 easy to understand traits that will literally change your life and the lives of those around you if you learn how to harness them. EVERY person I’ve met who is a leader in their field readily demonstrates a mastery of one of these 3 traits if not more than one. 

**The Six Pillars of Self Esteem by Nathaniel Brandon:** I would recommend reading this book once a year. It’s the pinnacle of growth in self esteem. It’s always worth re-visiting. 

**Spiritual Strength -**

Beyond theistic beliefs I believe Spiritual strength comes from the full alignment of one’s outer self with their inner self and a trained ability to stay present.

I dated a wonderful woman for a while who had the following poem written and framed in her bedroom. It shifted my perspective on what a relationship meant and why being spiritually centered was so damn important. 

The Invitation by Oriah 

“It doesn't interest me

what you do for a living.

I want to know

what you ache for

and if you dare to dream

of meeting your heart's longing.

It doesn't interest me

how old you are.

I want to know

if you will risk

looking like a fool

for love

for your dream

for the adventure of being alive.

It doesnt interest me

what planets are

squaring your moon...

I want to know

if you have touched

the centre of your own sorrow

if you have been opened

by life's betrayals

or have become shrivelled and closed

from fear of further pain.

I want to know

if you can sit with pain

mine or your own

without moving to hide it

or fade it

or fix it.

I want to know

if you can be with joy

mine or your own

if you can dance with wildness

and let the ecstasy fill you

to the tips of your fingers and toes

without cautioning us

to be careful

to be realistic

to remember the limitations

of being human.

It doesn't interest me

if the story you are telling me

is true.

I want to know if you can

disappoint another

to be true to yourself.

If you can bear

the accusation of betrayal

and not betray your own soul.

If you can be faithless

and therefore trustworthy.

I want to know if you can see Beauty

even when it is not pretty

every day.

And if you can source your own life

from its presence.

I want to know

if you can live with failure

yours and mine

and still stand at the edge of the lake

and shout to the silver of the full moon,

"Yes."

It doesn't interest me

to know where you live

or how much money you have.

I want to know if you can get up

after the night of grief and despair

weary and bruised to the bone

and do what needs to be done

to feed the children.

It doesn't interest me

who you know

or how you came to be here.

I want to know if you will stand

in the centre of the fire

with me

and not shrink back.

It doesn't interest me

where or what or with whom

you have studied.

I want to know

what sustains you

from the inside

when all else falls away.

I want to know

if you can be alone

with yourself

and if you truly like

the company you keep

in the empty moments.”


4a: Do you know who you are? Could you actively and honestly describe yourself to someone without using physical features?

4b: Do you have a list of standards and values that you readily stand up and would even fight for?

4c: Are you on a mission in your life?

4d: Are your actions centered and honest? Do they represent who you are?

4e: When you look at your own eyes reflection in the mirror in the morning what phrases or statements do you hear? Are they positive? Negative? Why? 

4f: Do you have a strong relationship with your inner voice? How often do you listen to it and do what it says?

Further Reading:

**The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck by Mark Manson:** A great book for anyone to read, it’s not as much about nihilism but more about understanding and acceptance.

**Open Her by Karen Brody:** I believe this book pairs perfectly with the well-touted 3% man by Corey Wayne. Like Ying and Yang. Corey shows you what works and Karen explains deeply why it works. Although Karen writes this book for men I suggest you use it to set standards for what you want in a partner as well. \`

WAYYYY TL;DR

If you get nothing else from this post, try to put emphasis on these 4 areas of your life (Mental, Physical, Emotional, Spiritual) and see the difference it makes. I promise you there is no better way to live that I’ve found. Best of luck on your journey. I hope these resources help you as they’ve helped me.

Edited: some typos and phrasing for clarityThere’s a lot of advice here given to young men about “finding a hobby or passion” “girls love when you’re busy doing your own thing.”  While I agree that it’s important to have hobbies in life and passions to pursue, because it keeps your mind focused on positive things in life, I feel there is a disconnect between how that relates to actual dating advice. 

Having hobbies and passions won’t get you laid. Plain and simple.  What will get you laid is how you speak about them to women. The reality is that the hobby itself isn’t actually that important. It could be sewing, knitting, working out, playing dungeons and dragons, cosplaying, cycling, talking long walks etc. What is important is why these hobbies matter to you, and how little you care what the girl thinks about your hobby. I’ll take Warhammer 40k as an example below.

Warhammer is an incredibly expensive, time consuming hobby. From an outside perspective to someone unfamiliar with the concepts it can look like grown men playing with toys, it can look childish. If you have a warhammer collection and are out on a date, talking about your warhammer collection isn’t probably going to go great, and the woman may lose interest because she has no idea what you’re talking about. 

This is the place a lot of men go wrong. 

They try to explain the hobby to women, instead of explaining WHY the hobby is enjoyable specifically to them. A date, unless they specifically ask, doesn’t want to know the rules of warhammer and what each character does or represents. They want to know why you invest so much money into it. They want to know what drives you to continue collecting pieces. 

Example conversations:

Her: What’s one of your favorite things to do on your day off?

You: One of my biggest hobbies is warhammer 40k!

Her: sorry, im not sure what that is…

You: Oh well, let me explain, its a game… etc etc etc…. 20 minutes later you’re explaining the intricacies of the color palette of your warriors and she’s completely zoned out looking for a way to leave. 

This is the improper, but what I see as most common, way to speak about your hobbies. It makes it almost unbearable to listen to, because it will almost all be lost on them. They aren’t interested in learning about your hobby, they are interested in learning about how your hobby relates to your life overall.  They may later in the relationship take an interest in your hobby, but during the seduction phase, they aren’t going to be putting in that effort. Below is a significantly better way to have that conversation. 

Her: What’s one of your favorite things to do on your day off? 

You: One of my biggest hobbies is Warhammer 40K!

Her: Sorry, im not sure what that is..

You: haha no worries, its a type of collecting/ game I play with my friends from university. Since we’ve all moved to different states and dont have time to meet up in person, we get together online to discuss the game/tatics. It’s been a really good way to keep in touch with people I otherwise don’t see often. 

Or

Her: What’s one of your favorite things to do on your day off? 

You: One of my biggest hobbies is Warhammer 40K!

Her: Sorry, im not sure what that is..

You: haha no worries, its a type of collecting/game I play. I started doing it with my dad before moving away to college as it was a way we bonded together and now that he’s passed it a positive reminder of him in my life. 

Or 

Her: What’s one of your favorite things to do on your day off? 

You: One of my biggest hobbies is Warhammer 40K!

Her: Sorry, im not sure what that is..

You: haha no worries, its a type of collecting/game I play. I always liked art and painting but found I wasn’t great at doing it on paper. These collectibles are paintable, and I found it’s a way to combine my enjoyment of fantasy/roleplay and art. 

These examples give an incredibly brief summary of what the hobby is and then dive into giving your date the WHY of why you do it. It shows that you’re passionate about it and leads to open ended questions about other parts of your life. You can jump off that question and start talking about families, or talk about how she stays in touch with her college friends, or if she ever had any dolls/stuffed animals growing up or if she has any artistic pursuits.  Answering that question in that way naturally leads into deeper conversation topics without actually having to awkwardly segway into them. It also shows your date you’ve got a deeper level to you than a guy that just collects figurines. 

This works for video games as well, no matter how many men will deny it does. If you play online games with your friends like WOW, don’t explain world of warcraft to her, she probably doesn’t care. Explain to her that it’s a good way to chat and hangout with your friends who don't live close enough, doing something you all find enjoyable. Or if you’re a competitive COD player, explain that you play as a way to get your competition fix in a way you enjoy. 

By expressing your hobbies in this way it also shows you’re comfortable in yourself and aren’t looking for validation from her that your hobbies are interesting. She will see that regardless of what she thinks, you’ve got stuff in your life you enjoy, and don’t care about the way it’s portrayed in the world. 

Finally, if she finds your hobbies lame or makes fun of you for them in a non playful way, insinuating that you’re hobbies are uncool, guess what! It wasn't going to work between you anyway because you've got fundamentally different ideas about what's cool and what not and at that point cut your losses and find a way to politely end the date.This a reminder to you: Reddit is not reality.

What I mean by that: Reddit users is a classification amongst the entire population. Reddit users are more likely to have anxiety, be socially awkward, not like talking in real life(hence online forums), and overall are more antisocial than the general population. This is not a rule, but merely an average. There are people on Reddit who are extremely socially outgoing. However, the average level of social awkwardness among Reddit users is higher than an average of random people on the street. 

How this applies to your game: If you see posts about “oh don’t go and talk to people” or “you’ll be creepy” please remember: Reddit IS NOT Reality. People on the internet can say anything. Some use it as a stress relief from daily life and are more cynical, snarky, or mean online because they can get away with it. Your job is to block out this noise and focus on whats taught constantly: APPROACH GIRLS & START CONVERSATIONS.

If you mess up an approach who cares? Do you remember every single one of your coworkers from 10 years ago? Do you remember the last cashier you checked out from? Probably not. She will forget you. Life will move on. But most importantly, you will improve.This is a fundamental mindset that a lot of guys forget or don't even internalize (especially younger guys) but I truly believe it's essential if you want to succeed with women on any level. It's basically the understanding that **if you don't fuck her, someone else will**. Point blank, end of story. It may not be today, it may not be this week, may not even be this month, but eventually the woman you want will be caught up in love/lust with another man (or even woman). Many guys will plug their ears to this but I think this is just fundamental, no bullshit, old school game. This is probably the game your father (or even grandfather, if you're Gen Z) had.

I think us as a guys are so used to scarcity in sex and romance that we even forget that what the world is like for a woman of average attractiveness or higher. Since women are naturally the more passive sex, eventually she will meet someone who has the nerve/gall/kahunas/daring to penetrate her bubble (literally). These are usually guys who naturally have game, are confident, have had years of female reinforcement, or just don't give a shit. These guys tend to come in all stripes but naturally, most of these guys are the guys they that would fuck a woman silly and not call her back.

I know/knew several guys like this and it was all a game to them. Some of them even classify as sex addicts. One guy I know fits this description. On the surface, he looks like he has it all together. He's built, he has a an attractive face, but he has serious mental illnesses and is a bonafide pornography addict since at least 12 years old. He sexualizes every single woman he meets. Now multiply these guys by x1000 and you know that these are some of the men women come into contact with on a semi-frequent basis. Would you want your sister/cousin/family friend meeting one of these guys? They will by default because a good guy like you decided not to step up.

Also think about this: here in the States and the West, we are coming out of a 1 year+ long quarantine. 2020 was a year of complete madness. No one alive has experienced anything like it. Most women (people) have spent the year locked inside staring at a phone/computer screen inside an apartment or studio feeling a combination of dread, fear, longing, etc. An entire summer was pretty much lost. Many people didn't see friends or loved ones for long stretches of time. There was no travel or it was limited. Bad news was pouring in constantly. It was inescapable.

Now, restrictions are lifting in many places. Finally, we are at the end of a long, hard tunnel. Summer is here. People want to get out. People want to be active. People want to connect. People want to travel. People want to party. People want to celebrate LIFE. And with all that comes the possibility of romance/sex. Imagine being a woman who doesn't have a boyfriend and hasn't had sexual contact for a year plus. You're at a party and a guy comes up to you. He exudes confidence, he is masculine, he is funny, he is charming. Oh, and he makes you feel good. Would you want to have sex with him? Or at the very least get to know him better and be...closer to him?

I'll close with this. I'm 29 years old. At this point in my life, I've been with so many different and amazing women, especially living in California. I never used to be like this. I've been scared of girls. I've been a "simp" before it came into fashion. I've been a "beta". I've been the guy who was in a girls' room "studying" and didn't make a move because I thought she was out of my league. I was called "beautiful" by a woman and driven back to our dorms by that same woman late at night with her asking me "so what are your plans for tonight". She was exactly my type....and I threw it in the toilet. For what? For what?

So I know what it's like. I know what it's like to fuck up. I know what it's like to feel shitty about yourself. I've seen all the girls that I crushed on get into relationships, get engaged, get married. About half of them are guys that quite frankly don't have much going for them. And I thought that I wasn't good enough.

You need to realize that if you don't make a move, somebody else will. And quite frankly, they may not even be that much better than you. Get out there. Stop hesitating. Stop doubting yourself.

*EDIT: It seems that different people are receiving this different ways. The main point I'm trying to make is this: all roads (eventually) lead to sex. That is the "end destination" of many relationships. At some level, you as a man connecting with women will lead to sex. It doesn't have to happen on the first encounter or even the first month but you should realize that is the engine driving the attraction.*

*You may not be "the type of guy who goes after that". That's fine. But you don't get into a relationship with a woman just wanting to be "friends". There is an undertone of romantic lust there (and there should be). Realize that if you don't do it, someone else eventually will. And that "someone else" may not be as a nice a guy as you.*After ending a 6 year long relationship a few months ago I had to start approaching girls again, ask their number and take them on dates. Some friends I've made over the past few years had never seen the "single me" have told me I am "crazy for just approaching girls". 

Listen, I am not that confident or very good looking that I just walk up to a girl without any anxiety. My heart races almost every time I do and of course I am afraid of rejection, especially in front of my friends. However, there is one thing I keep saying to myself: **Are you really going to let what other people think of you matter more than what you think of you?**

Whether the conversation goes awesome and I get their number or if she immediately hits me with the "go away" (which rarely, but occasionally happens), **I'll be proud of myself**. I'll think "holy shit I just did that". Rejection is also a **much better feeling** than to wonder "*why the f did I not approach that girl***"** for hours or even days. Say this to yourself next time you are afraid of approaching a girl.

I am not some guru or dating coach. My body-count is less than 10. That being said, I have approached quite a few dates lined up and so can you!Many men suffer from a frame of mind that says a woman is a prize that has to be won. On the flip side, dating coaches have been preaching the opposite, that the guy has to make himself the prize. While it's good to work on yourself and become the best possible version of yourself, I don't believe anyone should be the prize. Rather, it should be a mutual coming together of two people who are attracted to each other.

The mindset of prizes and conquests leads to guys not being able to act normally. I have found it liberating to just let go of those notions. There should be no chase. There should just be asking out someone you find attractive and have fun with them.Hey guys

Last year I did a challenge called 100 Women in 50 Days where I went out and approached 2 women a day to get over the crippling fear I had of it. This was one of the best things I ever did  because over the course of those 50 days I slowly built mental callouses to the idea of being rejected by women and was actually contacted by a TV company to appear in a documentary as a result.

Anyway there’s lots of great value in here so if nobody minds I’ll be posting it in this thread so others can learn from it.

Here goes :)

One thing that doesn’t often get spoken about is how hard it is for men to approach women with romantic intent. It’s actually one of the hardest things we ever have to do and that’s the reason why the vast majority of us only ever do it while drunk and specially defined scenarios like a bar or a club. Well I don’t want to be that way anymore and have decided to get over this fear once and for all so to that end I’ll be approaching 2 women every day for 50 days and writing about what happens.

And just so we’re clear; this isn’t about ‘getting laid’; it’s about breaking through my personal limitations and learning to become a much stronger man. When a guy approaches a girl he doesn’t know, every one of his insecurities are shoved right into his face in technicolour HD and it’s in that moment that he really finds out what he’s made of.

It’s time to find out what I’m made of. Let’s do this.

 

Day 1
Woman number 1 – Anastasia

I spent the earlier part of the day walking along, seeing women who were clearly heading to work and justifying that it wouldn’t be right to interrupt them as a result. Really and truly this was fear speaking and deep down I was disappointed with myself. In my nervous state, I actually said hello to one woman but she carried on walking with so much vigour that I genuinely don’t think she even noticed me so I can imagine my volume wasn’t quite what it should have been. Either way I had a particularly miserable yoga class with a new teacher at lunch time and afterwards walked up to her to ask for some advice on some of the poses, which she gladly provided However; while we were talking, I realised  that I still hadn’t done my first approach of the day, so I asked her out for a coffee there and then and she accepted with a smile. It was weird asking out my Yoga teacher in the gym so was pretty nervous about it to be honest with you.

Either way, we then went to Pret and had a damn good chat about her and her life. Her name’s Anastasia, she’s from Russia, has been here for a few years, has a 7 year old son, and is currently in a relationship that she realises is going nowhere and probably needs to ends for both her sake and her partner’s. She told me that my inviting her out for a coffee made her day and that she thinks this challenge is a really cool idea because men have it much harder in life than people realise.

Woman number 2 – Asha

When walking away from my coffee with Anastasia, I saw a businesswoman walking by, thought #fuckit and approached her. She was startled at first and giggling with nervous laughter from start to finish. I asked for her name and she told me it was Asha, I asked where she worked and she said for a law firm in the area. I then asked why she seemed so nervous and she said ‘Cause I just had lunch with my boyfriend and left him about 30 seconds before you approached me!’

Needless to say I took that as my cue to split the scene and split the scene I did, wishing Asha a good day and hopefully leaving her with an interesting story to tell her friends.

1 day down, 49 to go.

HASHTAG FUCKIT

**FYI I’m starting a private WhatsApp group for men who want to be amazing with women. DM Me if you want to join**So I took a pledge to really start achieving stuff in 2021, I posed the question to myself, **how productive can I actually be?**

What could I actually achieve if I fully realised every single day this year? how many skills could I develop? where would I end up?

So January has just closed it's doors and here's what I did.

* Fixed my sleeping schedule, I started getting up at 6am and discovered I'm rediculously productive the earlier I get up, as the day goes on my focus drifts but from 6am to around 12pm I can get an unbelievable amount of stuff done. I now go to bed at 10pm and read for an hour until 11pm.
* Started listening to audiobooks when I'm doing menial tasks, anything that can be autopiloted, cleaning, walking somewhere, running. I read 2 full audio books and have 3 that are almost finished, including Obama's monolithic 28 hour autobiography.
* Started tracking my time, using Google Calander I journal my day using a traffic light system, green is good stuff, yellow is acceptable, red is stuff to avoid in future. I'm totally honest with this, no bs, if I watch youtube for a half hour, I include it and it's there in bright red for me to be ashamed of.
* Started creating tasks for myself to do using sticky notes, I learned about qeues in programming and decided to implement them into my life. Take a pad of sticky notes, write from top down (without removing the notes from the pile) your tasks for the day, you deep focus on each individual task and remove it when done, stick it on a wall for you to look at later on.
* Spent less than I earn, didn't eat a single pre-cooked meal, I cooked all of my food for myself in advance and kept the cost at a rediculously low amount. Turns out it's rediculously easy to cook on a budget, buy chicken, marinade it, stick it in the oven to roast. Make some rice with chicken stock and veg all that stuff costs at most £5 and lasts 3 days minimum. Use said chicken for sandwiches for lunch and breakfast. Credit cards are paid off and I have savings and investments now.
* Started working through a Web Development bootcamp, I should be done by summer and with the things I've learned at University. I'll be able to do freelance work over summer easily and earn more than I would at a regular job.
* Started running again, my goal is a half-marathon at the end of the year. I run 2.5 miles every day with a 3.5+ mile long run thrown in somewhere during the week. Sunday is my day off but I run in any and all weather, it's 1-3 celcius up north atm and I've been out running in the snow and rain, it really aint that big of a deal after 30 mins.
* Set some long-term goals and planned my life around them. I want to get my own place, get my license and a car, earn bank while at uni, rotate a bunch of gorgeous women, run a half-marathon. I want this all done by the end of 2021 and I truly don't give a fuck what people think about it.

This has been the ***best*** month of my life, literally. I can't believe how much I have done and how great I feel. I'm carrying so much momentum into next month that I refuse to spend time with anyone who will sap that energy. It takes a lot to build this momentum but just one boozy lazy night to ruin it and that's not an option. I'm happy to peace out when my buddies are drinking and staying up late, I give zero fucks if they find it weird or say something, my life, my plan, my choices.

How was your January? and how is your february going to look?One thing that's holding a lot of guys back from approaching/asking women out is the possibility of rejection. The mind-blowing thing is that in trying to avoid rejection, they freely choose the one thing that is even worse, to not even try. 

If you don't put yourself out there, you won't get rejected, but you'll never be succesful either. Sure, rejection stings for a while, but not trying stings forever. A no will allow you to move on, a 'what if' will haunt you for a long time.Saw a post by a guy saying his convo’s with tinder matches would constantly dry up and go nowhere. I’ve got friends who experience this heaps too - no trouble getting matches on apps etc but they just never progress to hanging out. This might help some dudes here:

You guys matched on tinder or hinge or bumble or she gave you her number so OBVIOUSLY she finds you at least somewhat attractive / her type physically. Her matching with you or exchanging numbers DOES NOT mean she is interested in going on a date with you - she is just feeling that she COULD be if you don’t fuck it up. The more you try to talk over tinder / DM / whatever the more likely you are to fuck it up so get to the date ASAP.

Every day after you match that you don’t meet, she is getting OTHER matches and the convo with you is drying up. And OF COURSE the conversation dries up - you just don’t have THAT MUCH to talk about with someone who you haven’t met in person PLUS you’ve moved slowly down her list of options and newer options are moving in. If you’re good at talking to girls in a fun way then it’s easier to keep raising attraction over messages but in most cases: just hurry up and get to the date. 

~~Suggest~~TELL her by exchange 6-8 on tinder that you two are going on a date this week, tell her time and place, let her agree to this, THEN get her insta or other social media. Heaps of guys try to talk on tinder, then get her insta, then chat more on insta to try increase attraction, then suggest a date. WRONG. Think of her interest in you - it probably peaks like 5-7 exchanges after you start talking on tinder THEN STARTS DECREASING. That’s because you are slowly transitioning from an exciting potential dream match into another boring guy who is saying the same old boring shit that every other guy has said.

What works here changes slightly depending on if she’s a ‘good girl’ who needs to talk for a while to get comfortable enough to meet or a little freak looking for a one night stand. You CAN NOT TELL FROM PICTURES OR BIO’S what type of girl you are talking to. You can either filter out in your initial chat or just account for both with the following:

1 You match on tinder (or whatever)

2 you say some LIGHT AND CHEEKY things over 5-7 exchanges on tinder so she decides ok yeh this guy is (very / semi / acceptably) good looking AND he seems cool, he could be fun to hang out with. Light and cheeky means don’t ask boring questions. Most exchanges should be a light hearted statement THEN SOMETIMES a question. Example:

Stiff and boring:

“Hey where you from?”

“Oh cool nice area. What do you do?”

“Oh yeh cool. Do you like your job?”

Light and cheeky:

“Sarah marry me 😍”

“how good is this sun! Currently on the balcony with my cat working on our tans. What you doing?”

“Oh a teacher that’s cool. Better be on my best behaviour 😏”

3 you take charge and tell her you two are “hanging out Friday night - you, me, and a bottle of wine on my couch”. If she’s hit buying temperature because you’re new and exciting and full of potential PLUS you’ve been light and cheeky and you’re taking charge like she wants you to then it’ll be on - she will either agree to Friday OR say she’s busy Friday but offer an alternative night OR say she’s not the kind of girl to just come over to a guys house.

If its either of the first two then great you’re about to get laid good for you. 

If its the third one then great you’ve found a girl who isn’t a ho or at least has put her ho-ing on hiatus, so take her out somewhere on a date and then back to yours. If she’s a 6 or a 7 that you were just trying your quick luck with (and not interested in putting in the effort of a date with) then prob just bail at this point.

If you’re a guy who usually tries to talk for ages before trying to suggest a hangout then you might surprise yourself with how many girls agree to this - even girls who LOOK like good girls who won’t be down for it. A lot of people on tinder etc just wanna get naked already.

If she says anything like ‘we’ll see’ or ‘it’s a maybe for now’ or “sorry I’m busy Friday :(“ AND DOESN’T offer an alternative night, this isn’t her blowing you off. It means she does not feel comfortable yet and just needs a bit more time to decide that you’re safe to hang out with. At this point you say

“cool :) what should I get for dinner tonight Sarah I can never pick between between Mexican and Thai!”

Or whatever shit you wanna say. Just notice you DON’T ask what night she IS free. If she wanted to offer an alternative night she would have offered it. You DON’T try to convince her to cancel her plans and hang out with you Friday or suggest a different night or even bring it up again. Move on to the next light and fun exchange. 

Immediately after she replies to this next exchange you say you need to go to the gym or start cooking or see a friend or whatever the fuck, “but let’s talk on insta cos tinder sucks to chat on”. She’ll add your insta, add her back and don’t message her for a little bit. This is not “playing games”, it’s learning to NOT be an unattractive overly-keen needy dude. 

The reason we got her insta is in the hopes that we’ll at least be separated from the pile of new matches she’s getting on tinder every day and it just feels more personal. You can chat to her on insta later that night or tmw morning but ideally just send casual pics of what you’re doing or reply to her insta story etc. keep it casual and DONT ASK FOR A DATE for another 4-5 days MINIMUM. Just light fun chat with the freedom to talk about more serious stuff if she brings it up - because if she brigs it up then it means it’s important for her to exchange that serious sorta information with you. Again - no boring questions unless she asks them. You asking boring shit is just drying up the conversation and her kitty. Light and cheeky shit for the rest of the week and then drop the date idea close to the following weekend, this date will be in public because that might be important to her / might why she blew off the initial date idea of a wine on your couch.

“Sarah you like Japanese food and cocktails?”

“Omg that’s my fav!”

“Awesome I know the best joint. Friday night?”

Or whatever date you wanna do on whatever night you wanna do.

If she again says she’s busy and doesn’t offer an alternative I will 100% of the time just let that match go and move on. She isn’t gonna be convinced and is either too scared to do anything with you yet or will never actually wanna hang out because some girls are just like that. She may be more comfortable soon, so if you really like her you can keep chatting and try again in a couple weeks, but I just switch off at this point completely and move onto the next match.

You’ll be surprised how often after switching off in a few weeks they’ll just randomly pop up in your DM’s “so when are we having that wine” - usually this is after you post a casual story of what you’re doing one day where you happen to look good, a pic after gym or cooking a mad meal or something like that. And of course you DO go to gym and cook etc because the easiest way to get girls to want to fuck you is by having at least some parts of your life together. Right?

Anyway if she suggests a date herself out of the blue then at that point obviously she’s comfortable and the date is likely to happen IF YOU MAKE IT HAPPEN THAT NIGHT OR AT LATEST TOMORROW. If you plan it for a few days later like at the end of the week with this sort of girl 80% of the time she is gonna flake.

You’re just not going to meet and fuck every girl who you match with. In fact you’ll end up meeting a pretty small percentage of your matches despite what anyone trying to sell you some bullshit pickup product is telling you. BUT doing the above keeps me fucking one or two new girls most weeks when we aren’t in self-isolation, which is enough to keep me happy. Hope there was something useful in there for someone :)I (26 M) went out partying alone for the first time two nights ago, and it was quite fun. After some glasses of rum cola, I went to the club quite early (10 pm), drank a beer and listened to the live band that was playing that day. After \~ 30 minutes the band finished and to keep myself occupied I bought some cigarettes (never really smoked but thought it might be good for starting conversations) and went for a smoke. I asked someone to light my cigarette, sat down on a bench and tried to plan my evening while also looking for some people to chat up and start socialising. That was pretty hard for me since I am more of the "I wait for people to approach me" type of guy and dont really like conversations just for the sake of having them. The first person I was trying to talk to wasnt really into having a chat. After some time a guy bummed a smoke and we talked about smoking, addiction and what it takes to overcome it (That´s more like the type of conversation I enjoy, since it is less superficial and I can learn more about the ideas/principles that drive people). Since he was an avid smoker he argued that it is too hard to change his behavior on his own and needs his circle of friends to also quit smoking to change. I argued that if everyone in his group had that opinion, he could never change, because everyone in the group would wait for the others to make a first move. After talking some more and a short chat with a girl sitting down next to me, the dude went for a piss and I headed inside the club again.

The DJ had started playing and the dance floor began to fill while I was outside smoking. Since I really enjoy dancing I slipped into the crowd, looked for an empty spot and started to dance. I really enjoyed myself dancing to the music and watching drunk people doing funny stuff. A good looking girl talked to me but I couldnt really find the right words to keep a good conversation going, so she drifted away. Some time later a random dude and his friend squeezed themselfes into an empty spot next to me. I gave them a little bit more space and continued dancing. Some moments later he pushed me pretty hard to make space for two of his friends who were just joining him - kind of a weird flex by him, he probably wanted to start a fight or thought I was trying to hit on him. So I backed off into another empty space on the dance floor and continued to move to the beat. After some time a group of 1 man and 2 women started talking to and dancing with me. We goofed around a bit, shared some drinks and I noticed one of the girls giving me extra attention. We talked some more and touched each other playfully. 

The night ended and after fetching our jackets I and the girl went outside and started making out. She was unsure whether to go to my place or not, but her awesome friends kinda wingman'ed her into going home with me. Arriving there, we kissed a lot, had some foreplay and I lost my virginity. 

Regarding the sex-questions I now have: [I made a post](https://www.reddit.com/r/sex/comments/evqq0o/i_26_m_had_sex_for_the_first_time_now_i_have/) on r/sex to hopefully get some answers. If you want you can jump there and maybe answer some as well!

So all in all it was a pretty nice evening and it ended better than I anticipated.I have been having a great time with my girl and some female friends but I have been seeing some interesting things in my life. My girl and I talk about what attracts people and why people do things. She told me some things and noticed that some things were clicking finally. So I thought I would share some things.

Notes:

* **Girls don't get romantically involved with safe guys who are not exciting to them.** (classic nice guy syndrome)

* **Confidence is not about being right but assuming you are until otherwise proven. Don't second guess yourself unless you absolutely should.** Don't be a douche about it. If someone can prove you wrong then admit fault and go on about your business, it isn't the end of the world to be wrong, it can be quite refreshing. You don't always have to prove yourself either. It isn't nessesary to always prove yourself right. State what you need to and listen to the opposition. If the concept they are stating is wrong and it isn't a huge deal then let it go, or at least don't argue for a long time because it doesn't matter. Being confident doesn't mean be arrogant, because arrogance means you are not confident in yourself enough to admit fault. **Don't be a douche, be confident.** [further explanation](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/s3kgi/quicktips_i_find_important/c4au9st)

* Women **don't** want a guy who is always agreeing with her. She likes to be teased. Not insulted. Fake insults are teasing.

* Women want a guy with wit, not rehearsed jokes. Although once in a while a decent canned joke is ok.

* Being likeable does not mean the same thing as exciting or cute.

* When you are drunk you are saying and doing things you want to say or do. Have the confidence to say and do those things when you are sober.

* When girls say let's just be friends, they are not really asking to be your friend most of the time. This is their way of saying goodbye. I honestly enjoy having female friends but when they say it, it generally doesn't really mean they want to be friends.

* Most females that want to be your friend genuinely are actually secretly interested in you. The other small percentage that genuinely want to be just friends are actual confident women who just enjoy the companionship.

The thing is, you got to be interesting. Find things you like to do, talk about, events, etc. Also need to tease more. Women love to be teased. They love the roller coaster of emotion between a real conversation and some teasing mixed in. They don't want all teasing and they don't want all serious. Got to mix that shit up. They are real people. You love to tease and joke with your friends but women you get a bonus feature. You get to be more intimate with the jokes and conversations. This is what makes them want to jump you. Be careful because when you get good at it you are not going to be able to get the women to leave you alone. It's sorta funny after a while. But for now you don't got to worry about it. Move forward till you see that you have mastered this shit.

Become more fun.

---

**Until you have repeat success with women you don't want a gf.** This means just date a lot of people. Dating is just a series of dates. Dates are just things you do with a person you could possibly be attracted to. Date / dating are just words that give a weird connotation to things. Stop worrying about it.

**You want to be good with women before you settle down.** If you don't you are going to suck ass with your gf and eventually you will get married and she will then later get bored and angry with you and leave you for a fun exciting man. It doesn't matter if you are stable. **Women need excitement.** You would be bored as shit if your woman was stable but boring as fuck.

---

**Most people do not give themselves permission to be themselves.**

I have a few guy friends who aren't good with women because they don't give themselves permission to be awesome around women and they think they have to do certain things. Tweak, maybe. Act completely different, no. Women like real men. Not fake ones.

A few tricks to get your brain to say you can do things:

* Assume she is already into you. Honestly if she is on a date with you, you already have done well and she is already interested to know you better. She wants to know you, not some made up persona.

* Think as if you are not allowed to game the girl because you already have one. This enables you to be who you are and not care if she is into you or not in which gives you the supreme ability to do whatever the fuck you want. This is a damn good reason guys who are married or are dating women get more attention. The persona they show is who they really are.

* Realise you get to live once and when that chance is gone you are dead. This should enable you to enjoy life and what it allows you to do. Life is the ultimate sandbox game. You get to do whatever it is you want and it is set on the hardest level possible. Rock that shit. Good chance you won't die from a conversation with your date.

When I go out dancing and playing pool I wear super silly hats. This tells my brain that everyone already now knows I am a goofy fucker. I no longer have to try and hide that because my cover is blown. I then get to act as I want without recourse because I can only go up from there.

---

* Don't worry if people don't agree with you if you know they are just being incredibly sensitive. You can't always have people agree with you. Just make sure  you do your best at being an awesome person for yourself. You can't win them all.

* If she is a little upset and not wildly upset, let her get over it. You don't have to get in on every single emotion she has. That just creates problems. 

* If your woman is upset and you know you didn't do anything you can usually cheer her up by telling her you care, giving her a hug, making funny faces at her, changing the subject all together to something she must dwell on in order to properly converse. **Transfer the energy from her shitty thoughts to good thoughts.**

* You can never be sure if someone gives a shit. You can only be sure of what you feel in that moment and yourself. Stop worrying so much about what people think of you because that only makes it worse.

* If they cheat you probably should move on. That doesn't mean you can't be nice to the person. Everyone has their own issues. You may forgive, but not forget. (I love my ex but I will never trust her with a relationship again. That doesn't mean I don't wanna be her friend while honoring and loving my current partner.)

* When a girl says something fucked up and you know if you answer the question logicaly in which you should never have been asked, you need to just be silly or not answer. Shit tests are easy to pass. Some people worry about the wierdest shit and that is why they ask or say some of those dumb things. Don't play into it because you can't win. Change the context from serious to silly because those irrational things are fucking hilarious.

* The power of the word "no" is fucking amazing. You really can't answer the word no. So if someone says a bunch of things and they are looking for an arguement and their entire arguement is just one giant shit-test kind of thing, the answer "no" is amazingly powerful. Concise, simple, and delivers the hand of God to their face. You then can move on from there to other topics of conversation or just walk away.

* Women will please you much more than they expect to be pleased. This may become frusterating. Don't worry about it. The balance is a bit odd with this. (My woman does amazingly huge amounts of things for me and yet I can't think of enough things to do in order to express my appreciation to her for them. So I just be kind and awesome for her. That seems to work.)  Do not get tons and tons of gifts. It will become expected. You do not want that.

* **We are to become the best version of ourselves, not someone else. First you must start by revealing the version of yourself you actually are and then work on that.**

* You may think you are an introvert. Try to be extroverted for a period of time. You may feel physically exhausted. If that ends up being the case after a few months of trying to be extroverted you probably are physically introverted. This is OK. Alpha is about mindset, not nessesarily the length of time you can be exuberant in energy. **Introverts & Extroverts are equally capable of being Alpha.**

* Being nice doesn't mean you are exciting. Women need excitement. Even the nice girls.

* Being Alpha doesn't mean being douche.

> Speaking of douche... my woman calls me a douche or douchebag sometimes as a tease. She doesn't mean it but it is hilarious. You can make so many funny comments out of it. 

> * Douche. "Wheres my bag?" You don't get a bag.

> * Douche. "You asking me to clean out your dirty vag?" lololol / hug / kiss

> * Douchebag. "bigga-bagga-douches (sounds itallian haha)"

> Have fun, don't take shit too serious. Life is fun as hell.

* Everyone has a different background, so don't worry if they don't match you.

* Everyone has a battle. Don't freak out on people so much.

* The golden rule states that you should act unto others as they act unto you. It doesn't state that they will recipricate. Don't count on it or you will be sorely mistaken.

* **Do not dwell on the ideal outcome of the situation**, dwell on the moment and enjoy it for what it is and look at the situations as they come and go down paths you enjoy. If you wanna fuck the girl and it comes up then great you can stear it that way subtley but don't make it your priority. Make your first priority to enjoy yourself. Make the outcome of fucking the girl an optional goal, not the primary goal. **Be outcome independant. Be in the moment, not the future ideal.**


[**Continued in comments**](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/s3kgi/quicktips_i_find_important/c4aungn)For the record, I'm 20 years old, never dated, the only time I kissed a girl was 8 months ago, right after learning about the seduction community. First time I ever went out at night was this semester, with a group of exchange students I'm not super close with but they know how live at night while I don't. I wouldn't say I'm bad socially, but I'm really inexperienced.

I still went out at night with them during the semester, but honestly, I felt like I was clinging on to them and not doing approaches because it was safer, while also not feeling like part of the group and truly comfortable around them. 

My experience of night life was feeling like an alien, jealously watching others making out, hoping one day I could do the same. 

Yesterday, after much consideration, I decided to go out to the bars alone. Started the night on a very bad mood, thinking I'll end it like an alien, jealously watching others getting it. 

Got to the venue,there were many approachable groups of girls but I didn't do any. Met some guys, they paid me a couple of shots but then we parted ways. Then later on I found myself back with the aforementioned exchange students group. Felt disappointed in myself for being back to them. I went out to take a leak and when I came back I saw a set of 2 girls, and I've made my first approach on girls.

This felt good, I was there to approach girls and I did it. We had a good time chatting, eventually they had to leave, so I took their instagrams and we parted ways. This feeling of accomplishment made me approach another set, these 4 really cool girls. I wouldn't have done this if I wasn't alone.

They were all very open about their sexuality (they were what society calls "thots") and really fun to be around with. They offered me a discount for a nearby disco and invited me to go along with them. Last time I was at a disco I behaved like a fish out of water, ended up sitting in the corner depressing on my phone. Tried the same thing, but these girls weren't having it, they weren't letting me not have fun and pushed me to dance with them. This made me really glad to be there, and it gave me a positive experience about going to the club.

When I came home and told my roommate, who has good looks and game, about these 4 girls I met who'd kiss each other no fucks given (in the mouth, and make out, just for the lols, they weren't lesbians) and that triple kiss they did, he went nuts and says that he wants to go out with me next time.

I didn't get any kisses, I didn't get laid, I was very beta around them. But at the end of the night, going out is something I now look forward to, not something that I dread, and that, for me, is a step in the right direction.

Tl;Dr: Went out alone and depressed, left out happy and accomplished, despite not being kissed.So I've had this idea to start a thread about tips and tricks that aren't directly related to bagging whatever girl you choose, but kind of are. Things you can do when you're *not* out in the field in order to make your life in the field, well, easier. Please feel free to chime in and add anything you'd like to this list. If it gets big enough and doesn't suck, perhaps we can get it on the side bar. So here are a few things I've learned over the years... 

**Bedroom**

* Cleanliness is next to godliness. Keep your place *clean*. I don't mean it has to pass the white glove test at all times, but shit, keep it in order guys. For me, it's always better to go to *her* house when it's time to get down to business, but we all know that's not always possible. A nice looking pad goes a long way in getting you to your goal. 

* Your bed is important. Invest in it. I've had many, many women ring me up and ask to stay the night at my house because my bed is "so much more comfortable." A bullshit excuse to get in my bed, but not one I'm complaining about. High thread count sheets, a decent looking bed frame, and an incredibly comfortable mattress make a world of difference. Besides, you spend a third of your life on that thing, don't skimp. 

     - To go along with this, pillows are important. You should have at least four of them, with matching pillow cases. And for fucks sake make sure they aren't old as all hell. I have two firm one and two soft and fluffy ones so no matter what, if she stays the night, she's comfortable.   

* On a related note, *make your bed before you go out for the evening.* Honestly, I generally don't make mine because I'm kind of a lazy fuck, but every time I go out, I do. When you bring someone home, every little thing helps. 

* Have an extra pair of gym shorts handy. This is what I typically sleep in because they're damn comfortable. Some women like to sleep naked. Some like to sleep in just their underwear, and some will ask you for something. Every girl I've ever tossed a pair two has told me they're going to steal them because they're incredibly comfortable to sleep in. Plus, sometimes girls just look insanely cute in guy's clothing. 

* From a comment below: Candles are awesome. Look nice, and more importantly, they make shit smell nice. Always a good thing. Vanilla and sandalwood scents are my jam. Reasonably masculine but not overpowering. Don't, however, keep them right next to your bed. Take it from me, if things get crazy, a spilled candle and a small fire can be a mood killer. 

* Get a dimmer switch for your light. Some girls like to see everything. Some like it pitch black. In my experience, a little dim mood lighting is usually perfect. 

**Bathroom**

* I don't let any girl leave things at my house for obvious reasons. However, this can cause a few problems for women. As such, there are a few things I keep around for their benefit (mostly). 

     - Toothbrushes. I buy a bulk pack of cheap soft bristled ones for girls that stay over, *and* to clean my shoes with. The latter reason is what I tell them they're there for so I don't come off as a total scumbag. It's also truthful. 

     - Wet wipes. Two reasons: Again, any girl will appreciate them when it's time to clean up. Also, goddamn they're amazing when *you* have just taken a post-chipotle deuce and things are a bit gritty down there. Trust me.

     - Saline solution. I wear contacts. So do many women. They'll appreciate it if you've got it. Don't wear contacts? Shut up and buy some anyway, with a little case to hold contacts. If you're asked why you have it, it's because a friend from out of town stayed with you and left it there on accident.  

     - Hair dryer was listed below by puaCurveBall. I'm not generally one to let a girl shower at my place, but I can certainly see where it'd be useful. Along with this, a comb or brush would be good to have as well. 

     - Clean, nice, soft fluffy towels. I figured this should go without saying but enough people have mentioned it to merit it being here. Make sure you've got both bath-sized towels and a few wash cloth sized ones as well

     - As I mentioned in a reply below, a bar of Dove unscented soap in the bathroom. Gentle enough for almost any skin type, always good to have around for her to wash up with, regardless of what you use.

* In my bathroom I have a small decorative little jar type thing. It's filled with little sample sized packets of advil/aleve/aspirin/whatever. Always good for helping quell a hangover the next morning, both for yourself, and your friend. Bonus points: since it's just sitting out there in the open, and chances are pretty damn high that she'll use your bathroom at some point, she can help herself to them. 

**Logistics**

* Condoms and lube: keep that shit near by. I have a night stand with a drawer on it. Guess where those goodies go? When it's time to get busy, it helps expedite the process and make things less awkward. Before I had that night stand I kept them in a small watch box underneath my bed close to the head board so they'd be easy to get to in the dark. 

     - In addition, it's never a bad idea to keep non-latex condoms around for a girl who may have allergies to latex. 

     - Going out for the night and want to have some condoms and lube handy but aren't sure how to carry them? Best way I've found: Get some [trial sized lube samples](http://www.cheaplubes.com/liquidsilk10ml-foilsample.aspx) in the little foil packets. You can easily fit that, and a couple of condoms in a [business card holder like this one](http://www.amazon.com/Business-Card-Case-Cross-Silver/dp/B002VVKZ8S/ref=sr_1_6?s=office-products&ie=UTF8&qid=1327480770&sr=1-6). Easy to keep in an inside jacket pocket, or the back pocket of your pants. Looks reasonably classy, and not as goofy as keeping that stuff in your wallet, which you're probably going to be bringing out a few times over the course of an evening. 

* Water. After a good romp, your lady friend and you will need to hydrate. I keep a case of cheap bottled water in my closet for easy access (and to avoid awkward 4am naked run-ins with the roommate). 

* Music. Seems silly, but most people seem to like good tunes to get naked to. I have a few select Pandora stations that I'll pop on that I've spent enough time clicking the like and dislike buttons for certain tracks with that they never let me down. My go-to's? Zero 7, Massive Attack, Pretty Lights, etc. (I've got Pandora One so I don't get ads. Kinda funny when you're going at it and all of a sudden you're getting sold car insurance, though.)

     - Additions from others: instrumental hip hop, The Weekend, The XX. Not going to keep going with this because music tends to be a very personal thing, but you get the idea. 

* Taxi drivers: know one, and know one well. I'm a chatty motherfucker, so every time I get in to a cab, I talk like crazy and get friendly with the driver. As such, I've got the personal cell numbers of a guy that "forgets" to start his meter until halfway through the drive for me, and another that will let you choose a song from a list and sing it to you on your way home. Always entertaining. 

* Even if you don't smoke, it's not a bad idea to carry a lighter. You never know when some lovely lass is going to ask you for a light. It's like you don't even have to try to open in that case. 

**Kitchen**

* As Trooper below said, have a bottle of wine handy. Or go one further like I do and have a decently stocked bar.You never know what her drink of choice may be. Here's a break down of what I find to be the essentials. And don't get the cheap stuff either. You don't have to buy all top shelf booze, but a plastic handle of vodka screams "college, broke, and doesn't know any better."

     - Vodka, gin, whiskey, rum, tequila, and both type of vermouth (dry and sweet) should always be around, as well as a bottle of red wine (someone mentioned shiraz although I'd go with a merlot), and a bottle of white (my call is for pinot grigio on this one as well). 

     - Mixers, you'll need them. Vodka and crystal light don't go together well. Soda water, tonic, coke, diet coke, cranberry juice, OJ, margarita mix, and maybe some redbull. Get the coke in cans, and the tonic/soda water in the small bottles, instead of a large 2 liter, so they last longer (being carbonated and all)

     - Learn how to make a few basic cocktails if you don't already know how. Margaritas, greyhound, sea breeze, martini, etc. A shaker isn't a bad thing to have around either.  

* Keep some easy to make snacks handy. If you're going to be cooking a dinner, you'll be prepared for it I'd hope. But if you stumble home with some lucky lady at 3AM and have the munchies, save yourself some money, and time, and get your grub on at home. Cheese and crackers, and little microwaveable things from Trader Joe's tend to work well for me. 

     - As puaCurveball suggested, Luna bars/granola type bars are also damn handy to have around. 

**Car**

* Are you driving? As karlbarx noted, keep your car clean. You don't want your date to step in to a veritable rolling trash can. Something I forgot to mention because I now live in a public transport friendly city.

     - When I used to drive every bloody day, I'd also keep a nice cozy warm blanket and a pillow in my car. You never know when they'll come in handy. 

     - I also kept $20-$40 in cash in the glove box for those situations where I happened to be without cash, not have an ATM near by, and whatever venue I was at didn't take plastic. 

* Per sithyiscool's suggestion, keep a go-bag, of sorts, in your ride, with a decent looking change of clothing in it. A few toiletries (mouth wash, hair product, etc.) probably wouldn't hurt either. 

* A spare phone battery and a car charger are always incredibly useful. 

* Tide-to-go stain sticks are amazing. Get them and keep one in the car.Picture this.

You see a beautiful girl at a bar, just your type...

She really is the type of girl you got into the game for.

You gather the courage to approach and instantly she starts laughing at your teases.

It is going so well! Better then you could have wished for!

You feel so good that this super hot girl is laughing at every word out of your mouth.

All your teases and jokes are hitting!

You fantasizing in your head: *“What would it be like to date this girl” “Can you imagine what my friends will think of me”.*

The interaction is so fun that there is nothing that can go wrong.

And then…

**It DIES.**

Yes, she got *bored and simply walked away!*

**ITS OVER.**

Has this happened to you before?

You probably have no idea what you did wrong, but its actually extremely simple.

And most guys keep making this huge mistake.

These guys are what I like to call “Dancing Monkeys”

You can also call them clowns or entertainers.

**Girls laugh at the clowns they do not sleep with them.**

Just because you are getting emotional reactions does not mean you have got the girl.

Its just step 1.

Most guys make girls laugh and they love that feeling of validation so much that they want more and more and more!

They keep making her laugh and she loves it.

**SHE IS ENTERTAINED BY THE DANCING MONKEY IN FRONT OF HER.**

And then you try have a serious conversation or get to know her and she is gone.

WHY?

Well once you have hit that point of being placed as a dancing monkey, there is no going back!

The key is to never ever get to that point.

Instead after a few emotional reactions **SWITCH FROM PLAYFUL TO GENUINE.**

This is the key.

Don’t get addicted to her emotional reactions. They are not going to get you to where you want to go.

You have to switch from playful to genuine. Its your job.

How do you do this?

By simply changing your tone to a more genuine tone and not joking around and saying: *“Okay, lets get serious for a second, I want to know more about you… tell me xyz about you”*

This switch needs to be done.

Without it you are risking becoming the dancing monkey instead of the cool guy that can make her laugh and have a conversation with her.

Now, it may be tough at the time to cut off all this validation that she is giving you.

Your brain is telling you *“just tell more jokes, shes laughing!”*

No, stop! And go genuine!

This will increase the chances drastically of having a SOLID interaction and not having her walk away when the the dancing monkey has stopped entertaining her.

What are your thoughts on this topic? Let's discuss it!  
If you enjoyed the article and want to reach out to me directly feel free too.This will not be a cliche post about not putting beautiful women on a pedestal. (I actually think we should put them on a pedestal, as long as we also put ourselves on a pedestal too)

I was at a bar two days ago, and I see this absolutely stunning woman. You know the type. It almost hurts your brain and heart when you look at her. I remember thinking at first "OMG WTF". That looming feeling of "wow, I'll never get a woman like her" started to invade my mind.

Minutes later, this other woman shows up and starts talking to her. That woman, coincidentally, was someone I've known for a very long time. I approach to say hey, and she introduces me to her friend. We start talking, and I notice she's beyond sweet. She tells me about what she did for university, and what she's up to these days, and I share some stuff about myself as well. We texted today, I asked her out, and she said yes.

A beautiful woman is simply a woman who happens to be beautiful. She still has aspirations, dreams, education, career - her life doesn't STOP at the fact that she's beautiful. She still wants to go out, socialize, meet people, have sex, and/or fall in love, the same way all other women do too.

This may seem REALLY obvious to some of you reading - to me however, it wasn't.

Happy new year!

&#x200B;

&#x200B;- Do not change yourself for others. There is always a chance that she may leave you for some other bloke. Why change your self for her? Invite her into your world, not the other way around. Honest rejection is more fulfilling than fake intimacy any day. 




- That's a quote by Neil Strauss. "Most people seem to believe that if a relationship doesn't last until death, it's a failure. But the only relationship that's truly a failure is one that lasts longer than it should. The success of a relationship should be measured by it's depth, not by it's length." 
 Yeah, sometimes knowing when to move on is just as crucial as knowing when to persist.I was in my prime (‘game’ wise, and physically) before Covid, and a situation I saw happening a lot that no online comment or book warned me for: How many times you just have to let it go.

Full disclosure: Before this year, I was the most yes-man, simp, low morale motherfucker, this year I was averaging having sex half of the times that I went out, keeping contacts with the ones I wanted, and having fun 100% of the time.

If you’ve ever been a *simp*, you know what I’m talking about when I say that sometimes being a weak man, moves you forward. The fact that I lost my virginity while being someone that I would cringe at proves this, and proves so for many of you as well.

When you’re a guy with no game, you still get to go on dates, but they suck, and ultimately it feels like the girl is with you for a non-genuine reason (is it my money? Is she with me out of boredom? Is she using me for free meals?). Before the date, she flaked on you twice, you had to start every conversation, and you went to sleep every. Single. Night. Thinking about her, until she finally found time in her schedule for you, just for it to be underwhelming after it’s all said and done. 

#If you’re ever in a situation you feel disrespected by a girl (you beg for a date, left on read, offended, flaked on.) move on. As you’re reading this, think about yourself, your potential, and make a mental promise that you’re going to respect yourself at all times.

If you feel disrespected by a girl you barely even know, cut any and every emotional nerve. Fuck that shit, no girl is worth your morale’s murder. She texted back a week later? Great, it doesn’t matter. Move on.

How many times I’ve been in situations that if I just acted like a spineless man, I would’ve gotten a date/kiss/sex, and yet I didn’t do it? Plenty, and I don’t regret any of them. 

As far as you know, you’re the only person who’s a person and not a robot. I, /u/DefinitelyHorny4U am a robot, and so is everyone else, including those hot girls you want to do naughty things with. Why are you letting robots- people who you will never see again, fuck your morale raw and leave it on the bed with cum all over it? And not even bring it a towel *pfft*

Things seem to be going south with a girl? Don’t *waste* any more of *your time*, she didn’t appreciate you for who you were, so her chance is gone. After you do this for a while, you’ll notice how much happier you are. I’m tired of seeing posts “she didn’t respond to my text 2 days ago to confirm the date tomorrow, but maybe tomorrow she’ll confirm after I ask again, which words and emojis should I use in my next text.” FUCK. THAT. Why are you doing this to yourself? Where’s the self respect- He/She wears a ring.

Indicates they are either married, currently going through a divorce or open for a threesome.
Better to just ask and be suspicious.

- Just got out of a long term relationship.

Although rebounds can lead to LTRs, it often doesn't and ends with you being dropped as soon as their ex comes back.
Don't get trapped in the on and off cycle of toxic relationships. These people are often very needy and nothing you do or give will ever be good enough.

- They have a history of cheating on their partners.

No need to say more. Chronic cheaters are needy and unable to sustain relationships because they prioritize short term feelings over long term goals. Sometimes, it may even  be due to emotional traumas.
In this case, encourage them to get help.

- Asking for money very early on.

- Love bombing before and after the first dates.

It's a red flag because it indicates they are looking for someone else to fill their own cup.
Ideally, you want someone like you who already has their own cup filled.
Lovebombing is also what a lot of narcissists do to lure you in.

For those who dont know, lovebombing is when, for example, you tell someone you love them after first 10 minutes of meeting, overtexting/blowing up phone with calls and basically being very clingy early on.

- They are glued to their phone while on a date with you.

This is very disrespectful and if it happens to you, ask them to put the phone or away or just walk away.When a guy who isn’t traditionally good looking is seen with a beautiful woman, the initial thought is that she is out of his ‘league’, which is a ludicrous statement when you think about it.

If someone is with another person, they are obviously ‘in their league’ because they have made the choice to be with them. 

There isn’t a glass ceiling when it comes to attraction, where the most high quality women are only reserved for guys with certain good looks, money, or status. It can’t be denied that those things attract certain women, but one should never interact with a beautiful woman with the belief that she is special, while he is lucky to be dating her, having sex with her, or even being in her presence.

You have to view yourself as someone she is equally lucky to be around. Whether it’s your intelligence, skill, charm, unique insight, your drive, your humor, etc.—you have to always focus on what makes you a prize. She may be beautiful, but what else can she offer as person? You will always have something you can offer to enhance someone, but you have to believe it authentically and project it in how you act.

No matter what you do, there will always be a significant number of women who fall into the category that aren’t attracted to you. But never view this as a level based system where you can’t achieve a certain height. This limiting belief will almost always lead to insecurity, neediness, and ultimately failure.

Develop yourself, work on your social skills, take care of your body and appearance, and more women will fall into the category that is favorable for you.Listen..I was one of those guys to try and sweet talk a girl (basically tell her what she wanted to hear) but anyways, once i switched from ‘does she like me’ to ‘do I like her’ that’s when I trapped started to see progress. I recommend reading: Attract women through honesty.it’ll give you that mental switch you need. I used to be afraid to tell a girl I find her attractive or just getting rejected, now I’m getting rejected lol but it feels better then not approaching itself. Stop your narcissistic traits of trying to seduce a women and just let her fall for you by being “you” not what you aught to be.This guy changed a fundamental aspect of a common conversation exchange forever.  He didn't even know it.  This dude walked by while on the phone (could have been with his mom I have now idea) and said "Why was it good. No, I'm asking **why** was your day good..."  I NEVER THOUGHT OF THAT BEFORE! I've always asked "hows your day going".. I then get the typical "oh it's good" then get stuck.  What an amazing way to really get them to think about what they just said, and give you talking points.  You can then use conversation threading (something I've picked up on here) to take that one thing that made their day "good" and expand off of it.  Perfect opener, I love it.  It could even be used at a bar/club: "hows your night going"? I guarantee you'll get the "pretty good" or "good".  Then ask **why**.  It's actually a pretty deep psychological question if you think about it.  It makes them assess their current situation and maybe they're not "good" but having a downright shitty time.  This could be an opportunity for them to vent. 
Anyway, maybe I just had too much caffeine today.  I just thought I overheard a stroke of genius and thought I'd share/see what you guys thought. 

EDIT: Front page! Wow. Thanks for the upvotes and comments guys.  I'm a super newbie so this feels good to be part of a community who's here to help.  I’m seeing a lot of “it’s a numbers game” posts and honestly playing a numbers game will only score you insecure girls who need validation, or girls who just happen to be down and fuck the first guy that approaches them.

I was at the club last Friday night and there was a lot of gorgeous girls, I danced with a few and had a great time. Then I saw one that stood out. Maybe it was her purple dress and matching eyeliner idk but I wanted her. 

I approached her with some garbage about the music and asked if she wanted to dance. She said “no thanks I’m fine”. (First rejection)

I went back with my friends, danced with a few other girls but I was stuck up on being rejected so I went for round two. I pulled a complete simp move and just asked if I could get her a drink or anything. No surprised, she said “no fine but thank you though” (second rejection) yikes.

Well by this points you guys are either cringing hard or laughing. Well the thing about seduction is that there is no rules so I started planning my third approach. Honestly by this point it was far more about her rejecting me than actually wanting her but whatever I was committed. 

So as I was prepared to turn to talking about fate and the stars and whatever garbage to give myself an excuse to try hitting on her again, I saw her talking to another guy. But the guy was way uglier than me and it only took a second for me to realize she wasn’t interested in him at all.

So I tapped her on the shoulder again and said “hey I’m sorry to bother you again but that guy is kinda creepy, he probably saw me talking to you earlier so if we dance a little bit he’ll get the hint and back off” she looked at me and smiled and said I can dance by her but not with her, nonetheless she gave me flirty vibe.

We danced a little and I gave the guy a look signaling to back off. I told her it worked and she smiled and pulled me aside and off the dance floor. It was weird cause I’m used to being the one taking girls girls to corners where I usually escalate and kiss them.

She said “honestly, I thought you were just another douche but that was really nice of you to look out for me” i laughed and told her “don’t be fooled I’m still a mega douche” we laughed and started flirting. 

We actually had a lot in common and I used a few vulnerability tips from Models and told her how much the DJ playing meant to me (it was an underground Swedish DJ who I genuinely was a big fan of). She too opened up and we spent the night drinking and talking in the corner. When the club closed I told her that I wanted to keep talking to her and if she was comfortable she was welcome to come back with me at my place and she agreed.

I’ll spare the details but we talked the whole Uber ride back and and we slept together that night and have had sex three other times since then.

Anyways my point is that it’s not always just a numbers game and sometimes she may reject you just because she has the wrong idea of you.Went to a club in Detroit, went by myself because my friends won’t go out at night. I always go to the bar or club with zero expectations. All the times I hookup are when I go with the attitude that whatever happens it’s no big deal. 

Anyways this girl came up to me with her friends and do you want to come dance with us? I said fuck yeah and went along ... they started telling me how HOT it was that I was alone?!!! Lmao. So I had used dolce and gabbana light blue cologne and they were asking all about it, then asked me to drive them to the tiny Airbnb they were staying at so me and this girl fkd in the bathroom, knocking shit over, her on top of the sink 😂 funnest night out I’ve had in awhile. 

Tips: 
wear nice clean clothes and some nice shoes. 

Use good cologne

Have no expectations

Be confident 

And dance even if you think you look stupid. 

Find bar or club where you are comfortable. I prefer dark.

And to all the other short kings out there- don’t let you height limit you. Talk to the tall hot girl at the bar, Do you know what a lot of women I think find sexier than being tall?- confidence,  good manners, and being a fun person!
I study comedians and watch Seinfeld and curb. Also I’ve found acting/dressing like Larry David and Tony sopranos will get you laid.* Nothing is more important than confidence

If you are a confident man, women will be more attracted to you, more likely to make an effort to continue a conversation and more forgiving of any mistakes you make during an approach. 

* Appreciate the process. Don't expect immediate results.

This is a long process and I can't count how many men I met during my journey who got into game with the same eagerness as I did, but would soon burnout when they didn't see the results they expected right away. I suffered through a lot of brutal nights that shook my confidence and left me wondering if I would ever get to where I wanted to be. In these moments I had to remind myself that I wasn't doing this for immediate gratification and these brutal nights were learning experiences that would pay dividends in the future. If you let the lows knock you out of the game, you won't get to experience the highs waiting for you up ahead. 

* Your opener doesn't have to anything special as long as you deliver it confidently. 

I missed out on countless opportunities because I felt like I didn't have the perfect opener. Eventually I learned that a simple, but confidently stated, "Hi, I'm SwoleBuddha. How's your night going?" worked just as well as anything else. 

* Be funny, but not a dancing monkey.

Women like funny men, but if all you're doing is throwing out jokes, you will come across as one-dimensional and won't build any genuine, long-lasting attraction. 

* Don't give up on an approach just because it doesn't immediately go well. 

Sometimes a girl will be into you from the word go. If this happens, consider yourself lucky. More often, a girl will be intrigued, but skeptical. She won't appear interested, but she'll still be standing in front of you. This can be difficult for a beginner because the pressure of continuing the conversation will entirely be on you. If you're anything like me, you will be overcome with awkwardness and will want to bail. Don't bail just yet. Sometimes it takes women a minute to warm up to you. You are, after all, a complete stranger, who just struck up a conversation with her. Power through the initial awkwardness and give the woman a chance to show her personality. 

* Don't drink when you go out

It's expensive and if you're going out multiple times every week, will be bad for your wallet and your health. Also, you're  trying to learn a skill. If you need alcohol to talk to a girl, you're not really learning, you're avoiding learning.

* Success with women will exacerbate other problems in your life.

I met a lot of guys on my journey who were into game, but really needed to focus on general self-improvement first. Having a girlfriend is difficult and if the rest of your life is a mess, your other problems will only grow. This doesn't mean you need to be earning six figures before you ever talk to a girl, but be able to hold a steady job. Get a handle on your other responsibilities before you get into game. 

* Have standards and stick to them.

The hottest girl you can get is the hottest girl you can walk away from. I didn't make up that line, but I can't remember who did. Learn what qualities you like and value in a woman and don't waste your time with women who don't meet your expectations. 

* Embrace an abundance mentality.

Things aren't going to work out with every woman you hope it works out with. Such is life. But you're a total pimp and you can meet an even better woman tomorrow. If you can approach dating and pickup with that mindset, you will be all the better for it and save yourself a lot of headaches.

* Leave them better than you found them.

In any interaction you have, be it romantic or platonic, remember to be a value-giver and not a value-taker. I didn't overcome my approach anxiety until I could look at the woman I wanted to approach and say to myself, and mean it, "*I don't know how this interaction will end, but I can guarantee her night will be better for having met me*." That's an extremely empowering attitude. If you truly believe that you can bring joy to another person's life, there's no reason *not* to talk to them. But you won't get this feeling until your intentions are congruent with the above mantra. When your priority is to bring joy into the lives of others, there's no room for lies, games, vengeance or deceit. 

&#x200B;Because if you’re scared, then you know it’s time to grow.

So you’re afraid of women, they make you tremble and stutter. You’re afraid of growing old and dying alone, you’re afraid no one will like you, that no one will be attracted to you. Scared of rejection. Scared that you’re not making enough money, scared you can’t support your family, scared that one day you’re going to sleep and never wake up.
Just relax, breathe; we are human and this is what we feel. Let’s not even get into that, because most of us are here to learn how to get our dicks wet as many times as possible with the hottest women possible.

First thing is to **stop complaining**. We all know there are problems in the world, as there always has and will be, but what matters is how you handle it. Everyone has their own problems, whether they be a heroin addiction, STD’s, money troubles, marriage; think of something and someone in the world will have it. You either do something about it, or you shut the fuck up about it. Anything else is complaining, and once you start complaining, you’re just falling into a hole that no one will bother to pull you out of.  Stop complaining, for the good of everyone around you, for the good of the world, but most importantly for yourself. 

Everything you do should be for yourself first. You come first, nothing else. You can’t take care of someone unless you’ve taken care of yourself. Don’t do something if it’s to impress someone, or because you’re scared of someone, scared they’re going to leave, scared you’re going to be judged. Do it because you want to. You think this is selfish? Think about this; would you want to receive help from someone who’s life is falling apart, who can’t handle themselves in any social interaction, who does not have the respect of those around them, who has no resources to give you, who’s dressed like their mothers dress them? Even if you wanted to, if you can’t help yourself first, you can’t help anyone, so don’t even bother. If what you’re doing is just to impress women, you’re just going to let yourself and everyone you interact with down. We are animals and animals have intuition, they can sense when something is off or if the vibe is out of whack. You can’t fake something that you don’t have because eventually people will find out and not only will you be rejected, you’ll be cast off like an expired condom, not even good enough to have been used. This is the inner you, your character, so work on it.

**Be physically fit**. You don’t have to have abs or look like Adonis, but at least be able to physically carry women/children, or at least **look** like you can. It’s all about perception. Dress in clothes that fit, you are not a boy. Dress like you hang with attractive people, that you go to finer establishments. You’ll also just feel more confident.  First impressions matter, and the way your body interacts with the world will be everyone’s first impression of you, so make your body work for you not against you.

**Confidence**. This comes when you are striving towards something, when you trust in yourself, that you trust yourself to carry out what you say. Confidence is knowing that you are a man that can make plans and actually follow through with them. It’s knowing you have control over your emotions and body even in a completely new or uncomfortable situation. 

This subreddit is for people who are looking for help because they’ve been having trouble with women for most of their lives. It’s not a place to spew your frustrations and waste people’s time. It’s not a place to make your smart, witty comments at the expense of someone else just to make yourself feel better. There are some poison people making comments here that will fuck people up. These are people you have to ignore because they are losers. They are losers online, and they are losers in real life. When you have success in life, out come the people who will try to bring you down, who will try to poke holes in you, who hate to see people other than themselves taste success. Fuck these people, don’t allow them to drain your energy. Fuck ‘dem haters. Know how to distinguish discussion from worthless noise.

*I wrote a bunch of stuff here about easing up on the porno, but I was alerted that this isn't nofap, and I don't want my post to get deleted again. Anyway, we're all perverts, just don't get carried away*.

Physical presence. Body language. Clothes and style. These are all so fucking important that if you don’t think they are then you are either famous or rich, and even if you are, it’s still fucking important so just shut the fuck up if you think they’re not. Don’t be fat. It’s not hard to do. If it is harder for you than others then that is just the way it is. Don’t be fat if you want attractive women. It can and will stop you from having deep and meaningful relationships with some women because some people just don’t want to bother penetrating through all those layers of fat to get to the real you. I say some because there are always exceptions, but if you are striving for exceptions, just fuck all this and buy a lottery ticket every day.  You want to project an air of “*yes, we both know I can physically dominate you, but you don’t have to worry around me cause I’m not fucking crazy and I protect my friends and family, and if you choose to be a part of my life, I’ll protect you too. I’ll dominate you in bed and we’ll both be loving it.*” This is the kind of stuff you should project when you interact with people in general. *A cool fucking vibe.* Attractive people like being with other attractive people, and the first step to being attractive is to have a fit body. Have an active lifestyle; go to the gym, take martial arts, eat healthy, and just overall take control of your diet like a man. 

You have to understand that you are in total control of your own life. The only two things you truly own in this world are your body and your mind, so cultivate them like your life depended on it, because it literally does depend on it. You can keep making excuses, keep blaming others, keep complaining, but no one can take control of your mind to make you do the things you need to do. If you let your mind stagnate, your whole life will stagnate. Actually, it wouldn’t even stagnate. You’re either growing and improving, or you’re decaying and dying. 

**Keep getting out of your comfort zone** because that is the only way that you will grow as a person. The more experiences you have, the wiser you become. That is why you come across some people who are older than you who behave in ways that make you want to punch them in their dumb face, and others that aren’t even old enough to drink but just have that look in their eye that signals “*ya, I’ve been through some shit but here I am motherfucker*.” It’s due to experiences. Take this for example; two men equal in age who grew up middle-class, one you leave in his mother’s basement and the other you plop down into a Brazilian favela. Assuming both will survive, after ten years, who will be hardened to survive the problems of life? Which of these men do you know can make it through struggles? Assuming both are good people, who are you going to go with in a zombie apocalypse? One year in that favela will beat ten years in a mother’s basement.

Be interested in shit too. Don’t know what a Brazilian favela is? Look it up. Don’t just brush away things you don’t know or don’t understand. If you really don’t care then that’s fine, but if you are just being lazy, then what else are you being lazy with in your life? Just be interested and enthusiastic with life. Be interested in people, listen to what they say, see what you can learn from each person you meet, see how they react towards your presence, because that’s how you’ll be able to gauge how you’re doing in life. Living a good life means living good with other people. We are social beings. 

It’s all about experiences, so get as much as you can, no matter what stage you’re at in life. Once you stop experiencing, it means you’re dead. 

Stop asking for help on specific situations. Every situation is completely different with a hundred different factors. If you keep asking for help with each new situation, you’re going to end up going crazy due to how stressful your life will become. Instead, focus on building the foundation of your own character so that you will be a man that knows he can handle any situation that comes up. In the end, you can depend only on yourself. 

Don’t ever complain, don’t feel sorry for yourself, and keep your head up because you’re someone who doesn’t let life get you down. It’s okay to feel down sometimes, life is a rollercoaster. The point is that you have to try to always climb back up.

So back to women. Live your life to the fullest, experience as much as you can, be fearless, especially when interacting with others, and women will naturally be attracted to you. People will flock to you, will want to be within your circle, will want to be a part of your life. If you lead a shitty life, get ready to have all your fears come true. The point is, getting women is not the end. It should not be the sole purpose of your life, because if it is, you’re not going to be getting women. Who cares if she doesn’t text you back. Who cares if she doesn’t want to talk to you at the club that night just because she’s had ten chumps already try to get in her pants. Who cares if she flakes because she got too nervous. You’d never know the real reason behind most of the shit that happens. All you can do is control your own emotions and your own reactions. Don’t be phased, try to keep your eye on the big picture in life, not just whether or not you’re gonna smash pussy this weekend. But again, go for it. Don’t make excuses if you’re not smashing; be self-aware. If you’re making excuses before even approaching and talking to a girl, then you’re the pussy. Don’t be a pussy.

**Here are some material**. Each topic you can dive so deep that you can spend an entire lifetime on it and still not know everything about it, so don’t think these are black or white. Think for yourself too. Just take what you believe in and apply it. Be your own person.

[Amy Cuddy on body language (TED Talk)](http://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_body_language_shapes_who_you_are?utm_medium=on.ted.com-static&awesm=on.ted.com_Cuddy&utm_campaign=&utm_content=awesm-publisher&utm_source=t.co)

[How to speak so people want to listen (TED Talk)](http://www.ted.com/talks/julian_treasure_how_to_speak_so_that_people_want_to_listen?language=en#t-53099)

[Olivia Fox Cabane on building charisma.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LMu_md_5PQ4) She wrote a great book on it too.

Every individual is different, but in a way we are all the same. We are all afraid of the same things, we are all struggling through the same issues, but know we are all in this together. You are the only one in control of your own life. Know what you want, and go reach for it. No complaints, no excuses, no bullshit. You can do it.Almost all of my friends are girls, and I've heard multiple times from them that I'm often the guy who just didn't make it weird. I've realized that when I meet a new girl, I tend to immediately go into friend mode, and I kind of just want to hear how people talk to girls they're interested in compared to how they talk to girls who are friends. 

I realized I don't know how to talk to girls as targets of my interest instead of as friends.I did this by accident the first time, but it flows so well. If you're taking a girl out on a date - first of all, make a reservation somewhere. It shows that you are a leader and know exactly what the plan is. None of this, "What do you want to do?" bullshit when you pick her up.

When you call to make a reservation, ask the host or hostess what their favorite meal is. Make small talk, be friendly, say you've never been there. Chances are, they'll be working when you show up.

This is how it usually plays out for me: I show up date in hand, say my name, and the host/hostess lights up because of our conversation earlier.

It shows some social proof to my date, a bit of a DHV even, and the hostess puts you in the best seats available. They always wonder, "How does he do that?"

TL;DR Women love social, outgoing men, be social.So this has happened me twice and I feel like I need to share.

First girl: met her on tinder, we have sex (one time? Two? Can’t remember), and then she says something along the lines of “this is not really a good moment for me, sorry”. I say that’s fine, hit me up if it changes. Two-three months later she does and we end up dating for a bit.

Second girl: meet her at a party, no sex (she’s a virgin) but I still sleep with her that night and we have some fun. The night after we hang out but she’s moving flats and busy so it stops there. The following night we’re supposed to meet but she say “I can’t, I’m too busy”. I say “that’s fine, hit me up, take care”. Few days later she does and even proposed the place to go.

Both times I was extremely chill. After being “rejected”, instead of sending some needy messages and begging them to give me another chance, I just told them to take care and hit me up when they felt like. Which is what I truly believe. I want them, but I don’t need them — so if I have a chance with them that’s nice, if I don’t it’s fine, I’ll do other stuff.

This is abundance mentality. It’s knowing that you have a lot of shit going on in your life and if someone wants to come along good for them. I have my friends, my work, the gym, my dancing that keep me busy. I’m totally fine. But if someone wants to tag along for the ride I will let them in.

And mind you, I’m not spinning plates or anything. I don’t have a harem. It’s just that I fixed my life and I know what I want and I will get it. That is what drives me and makes me attractive.My favorite method is this. When in person, suggest the date. THEN, get the number when she says yes. The date is on her mind. The number is only a means to an end. 

As soon as you have a girl's number, text her *right then and there.* Yes, while she's with you. Then see if she got the text. Send something cheeky, like "Hey, beautiful."

Now, the first text is out of the way.

Later that night, or the next day, send her something like,

"Hey, Angela. Let's grab that drink this week. When you free?"

She gives you a schedule. "Hey! I should be free Tuesday or Thursday afternoon."

"Let's do Tuesday night."

Then you follow up with,

"Avenue at 8pm?"

"Sure! :)"

"Cya then."

":)"

It goes like this

- Suggest date in person
- Text her in person so the first text is out of the way
- Next text her that day/night or next day about setting up date. Ask for schedule
- She gives a day(s)
- You pick one, then in a second quick follow up text, the place and time
- She agrees
- Confirmation text ("see you then")
- Done. 

Then, the day of, send her a text like, "Hey, see you at 8 tonight." It's better than, "hey are we still on?" Also, pro-tip. If she asks to confirm, she's SUPER into you.

Hector CastilloI've been on this subreddit for a year and a half and it's helped me a bunch. I leave for the Air Force in December so I thought I'd give back before I'm due to basic training. Here's a graphic I made for myself a few weeks ago that I want to share.

[I call it The Five.](http://imgur.com/BzaFkjw)

Lately I've taken a real interest in lifestyle development, so I've been studying the lifestyles of everybody. From my older brother to my younger brother. Friends. Celebrities. Nobodies. Generally happier people. Depressed people. I ask questions and take notes on what I see.

The idea hit me after watching [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pdRKzteqUG4) RSD video where Owen talks about becoming a 'man in your prime.' Around ([*15:13*](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pdRKzteqUG4#t=913)) he mentioned five main areas which caught my attention. He then went on to compare different friends he has that, for example, are really fit but aren't good with women *or* have tons of money, but are really out of shape. I quickly grabbed a pen and paper then sketched a quick diagram. From there I took it upon myself to magnify the areas he briefly mentioned into an simple, digestible form using my decent photoshop skills.

I think it's important to mention that **you don't need to be "10/10" in all of these aspects of life**. Like Owen said, I think a solid 6/10 is fine. Figure out where you're slacking then try and have these handled to an extent. The point is to be *moving towards* that and having a more balanced and abundant lifestyle.

-----------

Here's a brief explanation to a few things in the diagram:

**Health**

* Feeling good. Looking good. Smelling good. Putting good food inside of you. Exercising, whether it's lifting, running, rock climbing, whatever your form of fitness is that you do regularly. 

* One thing I've done is use [this calculator](http://www.calculator.net/ideal-weight-calculator.html) to give me a ballpark idea of what my healthy weight looks like, and  started moving in that direction.

* Having a nice clean living space helps clear my mind and get shit done. If you have your own apartment this means keeping it at a manageable level. If you live with your parents, like me, keep your room clean. It makes all the difference. I absolutely love having a clean room, as it allows me to better organize my thoughts and my day. And anyone coming over feels comfortable.
 
**Wealth**

Not to be mistaken with wealthy. 

Money, education, and a future plan. Having your finances under control psychologically decreases stress drastically.

You don't have to be rolling in dough to handle your finances. Whether you're an entrepreneur with your own business or a cashier, you can get control of your money. Know how much you're making, know where your it's going, and get your priorities straight. 

* At the beginning of every month [I start a new note in my Notes app](http://imgur.com/jH6kbTu) and separate things I **need** to pay for vs things I **want** to buy that aren't necessity. Sometimes I don't get to buy my wants, but atleast I'm stable. When it's acquired I put a bullet point next to it. Next month, repeat. I've done this for a year and love it.

* /r/personalfinance is a great place.

* Education doesn't necessarily have to be school, there are many resources online to self educate. When I wasn't in school for a semester, I hit up the local library everyday and learned to code.

* 'Future plan' means some kind of optimistic idea of where you want to be in the next 3-4 years. This gives you something to look forward to. I know people who are just in school to be in school, and don't really care for what their future looks like. Even if it's just "I plan on getting my associates in comp sci then working towards getting an apartment with some friends," that's a plan.
 
**Relationships**

In a nutshell, everyone but you. Keeping in touch with family. Friends. Game. Going out to events. Having social hobbies (Yelp reeeally helped me on this one!). 

* "Congruent Friends" means having friends who share your interests and goals, that inspire you and vice verca. With friends like that you'll wake up ready to take on the world.

* **If you don't game ATLEAST work on becoming a more social person in general so you can talk to everyone.** There was a time when I realized I didn't really want to be better with women in particular, I just wanted to be able to talk to anyone. So I went out every single day for a month and started reeaally small with asking people for directions and time, while going about my day. After a week, I mastered that, and moved onto more self amusing things like cracking a little joke with whoevers behind me in line at CVS. Over time I ended up meeting a bunch of cool people in my town, putting smiles on a lot of faces, and becoming less shy. Now if I want to know where this guy got his shirt, I can go up and ask.
 
**Self-Love (or "Inner Game", "Self Acceptance")**

Treating yourself. I call it self love because when you do things like read, meditate, build, create, learn new things for the sake of learning them, *even watching captivating films*, you're showing yourself some damn love. It's *your* time. You're getting smarter, you're spending time with yourself, and getting to know you better.

* Personal skills/hobbies. Piano. Skateboarding. Cooking. Photography. Poetry. Beat boxing. Dancing. Shit you could do for hours and not get bored.

* Creating could be anything. Writing, drawing, making music. Making something that wasn't there before. I'd qualify this post as creating.

* Self acceptance is learning to be comfortable in your own skin. A year ago during a time I was very insecure about myself, I literally sat down and faced all my insecurities at once. I made a list on my phone of every single thing I didn't like about my looks. It was hard to get going at first, then once I started getting into it, shit just started rolling. Surprisingly after doing that, I looked over the list.. took it all in, and felt fucking great. My skinny ankles and bird nose weren't a problem anymore, because **I already admitted it to myself**. I accepted it. And more importantly learned to love it.

* I've been journaling for four years using one app. As a result I know myself very well. I know what makes me mad, what gets me excited, what makes me jealous. I've learned tons about myself through doing this. Get to know yourself, and for gods sake, learn to love yourself. You will be in situations where no one's around, and if you don't like yourself, your head will explode. 
 
**Higher Purpose***

This category is somewhat 'optional' because alot of people simply don't have a passion, a dream, or want to do something that's bigger than themselves. And that's cool. But I've noticed that people who live for something bigger than themselves or have a passion for something tend to be more driven and have a certain fire lit under their ass.

* This can manifest itself in having a burning passion to be the worlds best singer for example. And it's something you don't even have to think about, it's something that just moves you. You sing in subways. You sing at parks. You sing everywhere, you don't give a fuck whose watching because you're feeding that passion.

* Bigger than yourself. Could be God. Could be being selfless unconditionally. This could be volunteering at a homeless shelter because you genuinely love it and expect nothing in return. 

I only just recently found my 'purpose' and even still I'm not sure. I'm young. I see it as something you feel like you could confidently teach other people and wouldn't get bored doing it. Again alot of people don't gravitate here, so don't stress Higher Purpose.

-------
If you've understood the essence of this post, you should know that it's **tailor the Five to your life.** We're all different. That's why I tried to make it somewhat vague.

[Here it is again.](http://imgur.com/BzaFkjw)

**Use the five as a little check-in to see what areas of life you're doing well in, and where you can improve.** Since then, I've come to realize that I spend alot of my time doing "Self Love" things, and I'm all set in the Wealth aspect. Could do better in Health and Relationships. 

I found out that I've become a bit of a hermit. So I've made an effort to finding the people I want to surround myself with in places I'd most likely find them; like improv workshops, open mic poetry slams, and also RSD's freetour last week.

A person with a decent amount of progress in each category will most likely have their shit together, guy or gal. Do it for yourself. 

Hope this helped.So I was a my pet store and I saw a girl I noticed her purse and I walked up to her and said I liked it and I asked where she got it and left after I blanked and her friend was returning, this was my first time ever doing this and my mind blanked but it felt amazing and I left with a giant shit eating grin. I didn't get her number but that wasn't my goal I just wanted to approach someoneI've been reading seddit for a few months now and thought I should share something.

I, like so many others on here, have been extremely frustrated with my sex life. I'm 23 yrs old and after the recent ending of a 4 year relationship, I was kind of a boring and socially awkward horny dude with no friends. Thats all changing.

About six months ago I really started doing things to improve myself, and that is the most important thing in my life right now. I picked up guitar; have been coding my ass off (accepted that I am a computer nerd at heart, and will now proudly proffess this to any woman who asks what I do); moved in with a bunch of randoms to improve my social skills; lost 20 lbs; the list goes on.

Up until about a month ago I was still struggling to approach women until one awesome weekend. I'll try my best to explain what happened over the past month, but I am not entirely sure how it happened myself. I have had oneitis for one of my female roomates good friends. I'll call her Kate. Kate is an HB8 with an insane body. I had befriended her, but over the months have kept out of the friend zone by teasing her ALL the time. About a month ago my female roommate left town, and Kate and I decide to hang out. Typically I don't get 1 on 1 time with her so I'm pretty stoked about this.

She arrives at my place, and to my dismay, she has a friend with her. At that point, I assumed I was completely friend zoned. She brought a friend over to hang out, meaning she clearly doesn't want me alone. I was a little irriated and totally made the worst of the situation. I rolled over for this girl, and let her invite MORE girls over to drink with us. Soon enough, there were 6 girls at my house, me and a couple of my roommates. I couldn't get it into my head that there were 6 HBs in MY house, all I could think about was the fact that this chick was using me and the location of my house to pregame for her night of partying. 

Then in comes my savior, I'm gonna call her Helga. An HB6 at best. The clear leader of this pack of women. A complete bitch who thinks she owns my room the second she walks in. The type of girl who somehow gets these women to follow her and is a complete cock block once they do. She walks into my room where we all are hanging out, and I try to introduce myself. She literally says "Do I know you?" In a tone that i'm sure you can imagine. I was pretty irritated at this point and that pressed my last button. I locked eyes with her grabbed her hand and laughingly said "You do now bitch, I'm gnouwn, and you're in my house". It just came out, mostly out of anger, but for whatever reason this was the key to the night. The rest of the night Helga was trying to prove herself to me. Every time she said something, I would ignore her or tease her and by the end of the night she was practically begging me to have sex with her. I was ignoring her because I genuinely did not like her, and she started to like me because of it. After I kicked them all out, Kate texted me with Helgas phone number, saying Helga was way into me (no shit) and I respond saying that I don't do booty calls this late.

2 nights later this same group of girls come over, plus a few new ones. All of the girls are being way more friendly to me after I put Helga in her place. Again though, Helga will not leave me alone, and immediately one of the new girls who doesn't know Helga starts to try to cut in and start talking to me. We will call her Mary, and she is a HB8. I hit it off with her pretty quick, but she is the one initiating conversation, I didn't have to do anything. I get a call from a friend at a party who wants me to come over. So I get this group of girls in my house and head to the party.

I finally realize what is happening as I walk up to the front door of the party. I am about to go into a party, with a group of 8 girls and a few of my guy roommates. 8 HOT WOMEN ARE FOLLOWING **ME** INTO A PARTY. I walk in with my head held high, and loudly greet my friend. I make the decision at that moment that I am awesome, all these people want to be me. Not 5 minutes after entering I make eye contact with a HB9 accross the room. *All these guys want to be me and all these girls want me.* I don't think twice about it and walk straight up to her, no idea what to say. I smile and say "You're pretty". She responds "Is that your best pickup line?". I say "Yeah, and based on the smile on your face I think it is working". Conversation continues. I won't say it was perfect but I got her number :D

I leave the party after a bit to head home, and a few of the girls from **my** group follow me back. On the way back I lend Mary my jacket because she is cold. We get back to my house and Helga comes back to my place soon after, and I see more of seddit at work. Helga sees Mary wearing my jacket. Without asking goes straight to my closet and rips out some clothes and sweatpants and puts them on. It's so obvious that they are fighting over me that I have to hold back laughter.

Oh and remember Kate from the beginning? After seeing how high value I am, she wouldn't stop texting me the whole week following this. We hung out the following weekend, one thing lead to another, and we slept together :D

**edit:** Here is more on what happened with Kate that some suggested i edit in.
Kate was texting me not stop all week. I had this ongoing joke all week that she was secretly an alien, which for some reason she loved. That weekend she invited me to a friend of hers to hang out. There were 4 of us. She was physically pushing/punching/wrestling from the moment I got there, and it was obvious that she was more into me than before. We ended up playing some games, and eventually the other 2 went to bed. I sat with her on the floor and talked for a while, eventually we started playing footsie and her body language was clear.

I was actually kind of nervous at this point, because I knew I could get some. I stood up and told her I was going to get in bed, and I smiled at her and told her exactly what room I was going to. Made it obvious that she could come with me, but I wasn't going to force her. I turned around and walked straight to the room without a second thought. I was happy enough that I had a good night, and I knew she was into me. I may have wanted more but was content with what happened. Not 5 minutes later she was in bed with me and I was removing her clothes.
I was at the gym working out and 10/10 girl (I know, I know, first mistake my stupid mind was doing was putting her on a pedestal) walks past me several times looking at me, didn't smile at me or anything, just held eye contact longer than normal, I thought "well, that's green light right?". I couldn't bring myself to smile at her, I feared I would creep her out with my forced smile. She then comes next to me to the squat rack and starts doing some exercises. All the time I was like "Come on dude, talk to her, beat that anxiety, you can do this". 

After 3 sets I talked to her, we exchanged a couple of words, she smiled at me but I didn't feel like she was into me. Then we went back to our sets, I asked whats her name, she didn't ask for mine, now I was definitely sure she wasn't into me, otherwise she would have asked mine, right? I asked if she came often to the gym, blah blah blah, "I come with my boyfriend. There he comes". 

THERE HE COMES, I turned around and sure enough a dude with his friend was coming towards us, I looked right at him and held eye contact, he looked at me for 2 seconds and looked away, I don't, some macho alpha bullshit came down on me. 

And that was it.

I know I should be proud for approaching, I know it wasn't a rejection per se, but still, it sucked.

On the bright side (not related to this sub), 5 minutes later, I manged to start a conversation with another dude that is a regular and we had a couple of laughs, so I felt pretty good after that. Hope we can become gym buddies.Sometimes I see a post asking how to do social circle game.

Or someone says "Social circle game doesn't work. I only have 3 friends from high school." Of course this isn't going to work! You're doing it wrong. You're missing the first two steps of Meeting New People, then Building A Friendship with them.

Social Circle Game takes more time at the beginning, but once you set it up correctly, you get lots of results for little effort. 


STEP ONE

Meet new people either through social hobbies, meet up groups, online apps or cold approaching.

Here is where having a Social Hobby you enjoy doing, and which women also do, is important. I like to do dancing and beach volleyball, and genuinely enjoy these. But I also meet lots of men and women. But just meeting them isn't enough.

STEP TWO

Take the initiative to get to know them, or create a friendship group with them. 

GET TO KNOW THEM INDIVIDUALLY

This means catching up with them one on one to build a friendship. I once met a woman at a meet up group, caught up with her a few times and we became friends. Then she introduced me to her friendship group.

I don't like cold approaching, and don't do it often. But a few months ago I cold approached a woman, and instead of trying to seduce her I became friends. We both were interested in marketing, and built a friendship based on that. Then she introduced me to her friends who were also interested in marketing.

It's not always going to work like this. A lot of people you meet might not become your friend, or may not introduce you to others. But those who do are Connectors. They can keep introducing you to new people. The woman I met at the meet up group, about a year later she made friends with a new group of people. And she introduced me to that new group as well. 

It becomes like passive income for my social life as I don't have to do much work. The Connectors meet new people, then introduce me to them. Not everyone you meet will be a Connector, but you only need a few of them to automate your social life. Connectors like meeting new people and bringing friends together. As long as you respect them, don't act creepy, and thank them for introducing you to new people, they often will keep inviting you out. 

It's also important not to just use Connectors to meet people. Help them when you can and give them emotional support, or introduce them to your friends if they want to meet new people through you. Sometimes I like to organize events with a Connector where I combine my friendship group with their friendship group.

You also need to have the mindset of wanting to make friends with everyone, not just Connectors. If you're actively out hunting for popular people, you give off a weird vibe. Make friends with everyone, those who have lots of other friends will introduce you to them if they like you. You also don't want to be dependent on others for a friendship group, so you must practise building your own friendship group.


BUILD A FRIENDSHIP GROUP

Often I will meet 5 or 6 people, then organize to do something together like have lunch, picnic in park, go to movie or museum, etc. If you organize events with the same group of people enough times, you create a friendship group. 

You will need to pay attention to see if they get along with each other, or if someone is arguing with others and need to be cut out. But once you find the right combination, you have a fun friendship group.

They may not introduce you to new people, but can give you emotional support, help you in other ways, and be a lot of fun to spend time with. 


STEP 3

THEY INTRODUCE YOU TO THEIR FRIENDS

As mentioned earlier, when some of them are friends with you, they introduce you to their friends or invite you out to parties.

And if you have a Social Hobby you're good at, enjoy doing, and which women do, you will meet women passively through that as well.

This is what Social Circle Game is.

But most people want to be at Step 3, without doing Steps 1 and 2. In my experience, it doesn't work this way.


OTHER POINTS.
Some other points to remember with social circle game:

Don't be that guy who tries to pick up all the women you meet through friends, or get the contact details of all the women.

Speak to the guys as well as the women. Sometimes I spend more time speaking to guys I get introduced to, because I genuinely believe male friendships are important.

Listening without judgement and accepting the other person for who they are is a powerful skill to create a connection with someone.

You have to take the initiative to invite the other person out and build a friendship with them. A lot of times they want to be your friend, but are too shy or lazy to take the initiative.

Not everyone will want to be your friend. But that's fine. Find the people you click with, they are who matters.

I'm half asleep while typing this, so I hope it made sense.Hey humans

So a lot of pickup/seduction advice usually centres around specific techniques you can use to seem more cool and witty, and while that stuff’s awesome it doesn’t really cover all the bases. No matter how many funny lines or stories you have in your back pocket to impress girls, if you don’t have a strong undercurrent of self love underpinning them then you’ll eventually fuck it up and lose their interest.

Girls have innate confidence detection systems in their minds that in my opinion are sharper than anything us guys have, systems that are always running in the background whenever you talk to them.

If you’re pretending to be someone you’re not it’ll cost valuable mental energy that you’ll eventually run out of. As that starts to happen, chinks will form in your external shell of bullshit bravado; chinks these girls notice and then lose attraction for you as a result of.

This is actually something that happened to me all the freaking time when I was younger until I really realised that I was using canned material as a mask for my damaged self esteem and decided to do something about it. Basically I realised I had to heal myself from the inside out instead of the outside in and you probably need to do that too. If you’d like some actionable tips you can use to build real confidence from that radiates from you naturally then that’s what this post is about. But I’m gonna be honest and let you know that none of the exercises here are easy and none of them are overnight fixes. If you wanted to get in shape physically then you’d need put in proper graft to build the body you want and the same thing is true of mental performance too. But anyway, enough rambling from moi, let’s get started.

You ready?

[Here come the pain!](https://youtu.be/zZbCMqZqaV0) 

**Talk to people all the time**

If you want to be good at something you need to do it a lot. It’s how we all learned to walk, talk, write, use PS4 controllers, jerk off, and whistle, and being sociable is no different. Most people are basically confident in situations they’ve mastered and nervous in ones that are new and scary so a great way to max out your charisma is just to talk to a crapload of people until you get good at it. Instead of walking around with blinders on and isolating yourself from the people around you in public, say hey and talk to them. Strike up conversations with old women at bus stops, gay male cashiers in supermarkets, pretty girls in line at the college cafeteria and pretty much everyone else in between. Put yourself in so many new and scary situations and on such a regular basis that your brain eventually goes *Hold on! This ain’t so bad actually! In fact I actually kinda like it* 

That realisation will definitely happen if you push yourself and when it does you’ll be way more confident and charismatic in social situations. Your fear will drop and rather than being nervously stuck inside your own head and filled with self judgement, you’ll be more in the moment and able to express yourself with power.

And on that note, don’t be afraid to have conversations about the things you’re interested in too. Enthusiasm is contagious and you’ll be surprised how many people will be sucked into a discussion about stamp collecting if the person who starts it is deeply passionate about it.

*Try this as an exercise: talk to people whenever you can.*

**Forgive yourself and everyone who hurt you**

Forgiveness is huge, so huge that I actually wrote a whole [post](https://www.reddit.com/r/GlobalAlphaMales/comments/9r08d2/become_the_best_version_of_yourself_with_the/?st=JPWEUI14&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;sh=83eb2545) about it but I’ll summarise it quickly like this. Think of your brain as being a 100 meg a second modem and imagine that being both happy and miserable both take up valuable bandwidth on that modem. The more beefs you have with other people or even yourself then the more bandwidth you’re eating up which will stop you from being free to radiate the good vibes people love to be around. 

They say that hating someone is like drinking poison and expecting them to die and from my personal experience that’s really true. When you dislike other people or yourself it’s like a weight that you carry around your neck that you don’t even realise is there until you eventually get rid of it. And when you do, you can’t believe you ever put up with it for so long.

We all have people who’ve hurt us and who we think don’t deserve forgiveness, and maybe we’re right, but forgiving them helps us more than it helps them. And we all have things about ourselves that we don’t like and secretly punish ourselves for. Maybe we fucked over a friend years back and feel guilty about it, and maybe we feel like shit for not living up to some standard of beauty that society pushed onto us. No matter what our reasons for disliking ourselves are, the fact is that we still need to forgive ourselves to be properly happy and help reclaim the innate charisma we were born with.

*Try this as an exercise: Spend 15 minutes a day forgiving yourself and everyone who ever hurt you for the next month and see how you feel by the end of it. The results might surprise you.*

**Be grateful for everything you have**

Pretty much every majorly successful person says that being honestly grateful for what you have magnetises even better things to you. It’s kind of like people who are grateful attract great things while people who are ungrateful just repel them. Now I think that’s probably true, but I’m not 100% sure. What I do know though is that grateful people feel happy about their lives and radiate a positive energy that makes other people want to be around them. I do know that ungrateful miserable people who always see the negative sides of life and always have a reason for why a situations fucked are just draining to spend time with. And I do know that once I personally started practising daily gratitude I found it easier to approach girls because I cared way less about whether or not they rejected me, which in turn made them reject me less!  So yeah; be grateful for what you have. No matter how bad you think your life is, if you’re reading these words you’re actually one of the most privileged humans who ever lived, born into a time when you have limitless access to knowledge most of our ancestors would have killed entire towns for. You most likely have a family, a warm bed, health, functioning eyeballs, WiFi access, youth, legs and more. Hell, even the fact that you have easy access to this information is a huge deal. In the 90s when I was a teenager I’d have had to trek to a library to find this stuff but today people all over the world are reading this shit on their phones like it’s no biggie smalls.

You’ve got way more going for you then you realise but it doesn’t have to be like that. You can realise what you’ve got to be grateful for. People always say that you don’t know what you’ve got until it’s gone, and speaking as someone who [shredded the tendons in his right wrist](https://ibb.co/sqYGS1R) years ago and has never been able to use his hand the same way since, I can tell you that this was true for me. But you know what? Lots of people don’t even have hands, or can’t move from the neck down and remembering that reminds me of how blessed I am. Hell, I could have been fucking killed by that accident but I wasn’t so that in itself is a huge win.

*Try this as an exercise: spend 10 minutes reflecting on what you’re grateful for each and every day.*

**Talk nicely to yourself**

So we each have 2 minds, the conscious and subconscious. The conscious mind is the one that’s reading my words in your skull right now and the subconscious is the one that kept you breathing in the background while you were reading without you even realising it. We feel like we’re consciously in control of our actions but actually over 90% of our actions come from subconscious programming we received as kids and that we continue to to install on a daily basis as adults. Here’s how it works. Imagine your brain as being like an iPad with IOS 12 running on it, well the IOS is basically the beliefs you hold about you as a person and what’s possible for your life. When you consciously think thoughts that run in accordance with your established beliefs then nothing changes, but when you think thoughts that run against them then that’s like installing IOS 12.1 onto your mental iPad. Now the new IOS won’t appear overnight, and you will face internal resistance as the established belief system tries to fight to maintain its dominance, but you’ll eventually get there. At some point your sub conscious will accept the new programming.

In any event, my basic point is that you have to be very mindful of how you talk to yourself because your subconscious is always listening to your thoughts. If you call yourself a loser or uninteresting then that’s exactly what you’ll believe yourself to be, and how do you think girls will react you you when you’ve got that belief running in your mental operating system? How do you think you’ll react to them when that’s the way you see yourself?

*Try this as an exercise: whenever you catch yourself putting yourself down in some way, flip it, reverse it, and say something positive instead.*

**Write a daily journal of your feelings**

You know how babies are able to just cry and scream their eyes out for a few minutes and then go right back to normal afterwards? Well that’s because they actually allow themselves to feel their emotions instead of bottling them up, which is the exact opposite what adults tend to do. Repressed emotions weigh us down just like beefs with other people and negative self judgement do (maybe they’re both just different forms of repressed emotions) so they need to be released for your sake.

*Try this as an exercise: write a daily 5-10 minute journal of your feelings. Just put pen to paper or finger to keyboard and just write without ever stopping. Don’t contemplate and deliberate over what you’re going to write, just freaking write without thinking about what’s going to come out and let nature take its course. Type non stop and watch as your subconscious pulls up crap that you’ve been repressing and need to deal with. You’ll be surprised at how much better you feel afterwards.*

Ciao for now, humans.

Excelsior!

*I've also co-launched WhatsApp and Telegram groups for men who want to become amazing with women. Hundreds of guys sharing their success stories and getting advice on their sticking points. A real brotherhood. If you'd like to join, drop me a DM. Hit me up for Skype coaching too.*What makes a good listener?

A good listener doesn't listen to respond. They listen to **learn**.

"Listening" is not just "hearing". It's asking good questions that help you **understand** the other person.

My girlfriend told me *"I don't like it when you tell me how to do things. I feel like you're judging me."*

*"I'm not judging you."* I said. *"It was just a suggestion."*

**I was not listening.**

Regardless of how I experienced it, her experience was that I was judging her.

A bad listener focuses on explaining his own experience.

A good listener focuses on learning about the other person's experience:

* "Which part makes you feel like I'm judging you?"

* "Was it what I said, or how I said it?"

* "How would you like me to make suggestions in future? Or would you prefer it if I didn't make suggestions?"


A good listener improves the way he relates with the other person by learning how they think. Learning what's important to them.

A bad listener learns nothing.

At an interview for a sales job I was asked *"How will you bring us 10 new clients in your first month?"*

I didn't have an answer prepared. I panicked and blurted out the usual ways of reaching new clients. It was an empty, generic answer.

**I was not listening. Any monkey could've rattled off that list.**

When the interviewer asked that question what he really wanted to know was: *"Does this guy know what he is doing?"*

A good listener would've unpacked the interviewer's question and learned what the interviewer was looking for:

*"You know I haven't really thought about specific strategies. What's your biggest bottleneck right now in getting new clients on board?"*

A good listener aims to understand deeply.

A bad listener misses the point.

If you want more actionable advice like this, get your daily dose of communication hacks and people skills [here](https://beardstrokings.com/learn?utm_source=red-sedgirlsmakesense).I was thinking about this the other day. It goes both ways. Pretty girls feel like this towards guys they think are attractive too. They don’t show it. They try to play it cool. Like we do.I think it’s useful to try and talk to as many women as you can. You dont necessarily have to flirt with every girl you see on the street, but every chance and opportunity you get to talk to a girl, i dont care if shes ugly, fat, trans, gay, old, taken, or infertile. I think just talking to women more and more in general can boost your confidence and courage to approach then. Plus even just keeping a lot of females as friends can make it seem like you get lots of girls, which is attractive to girls. So the next time you’re in class, or at the beach, or just anywhere with people try to socialize with EVERYBODY. Itll help you in the long runYour ego also fucks you by making you think that your trials and tribulations are more important than they really are. If a girl at a bar rejects you, it is not the end of the world, nobody will judge you forever, and in about 15 minutes nobody there will even remember what happened. Many guys subconsciously fear that if they get blown out everybody around will judge them and they will feel like a loser forever. But that is just their own ego making themselves out to be more important than they really are. Did you go out recently? If so, did you see any men approach women and get rejected? If so, did you judge the guy or even remember what happened? That’s right, probably not. Nobody really gives that much of a fuck about you, good or bad. Unless you do something seriously predatory or fucked up, nobody will remember what you did or what happened to you, even if you get rejected in the most humiliating way possible. Real life is not like the movies, where asking a pretty girl out is a huge deal and when you get rejected the whole school laughs at you and thinks you are the biggest dork until the end of the school year.

Women don’t give a fuck either. If you walk up to a girl and talk to her for 5 minutes and she is not interested, you will not ruin her night. She will probably not even remember what happened 10 minutes later. I have been “rejected” by many girls and went on to have conversations and relationships with them, sometimes later in the night and sometimes in other contexts. Also, beautiful women are constantly dealing with creepy guys stalking and harassing them, friends and lovers treating them like shit, shitty and jealous friends, their families judging and harassing them, and other serious problems so in the context of her daily life, a stranger she does not want to fuck striking up a conversation and complimenting her is the least bad thing that will happen to her that day. By realizing how insignificant your actions ultimately are in the grand scheme of things, you learn to stop giving a fuck.

And if people, men or women, DO judge you for approaching women, guess what, they are the weird one, not you. There is nothing morally or practically wrong with approaching a stranger you find attractive or interesting and trying to talk to them. In fact, it is literally the only way to meet somebody you did not have a previous connection to. Literally millions of people have met new friends, lovers, and spouses through cold approach. It is also well-accepted in the Western world that people go to bars and clubs to meet new people so being mad at being approached at a bar is like being mad that a waiter came to your table at a restaurant. Being able to approach strangers is a superpower, and if anybody hates on you for it, they are just being jealous (of course, unless, you actually are doing something wrong like harassing them).

My site: [http://www.woujo.com](http://www.woujo.com)When you meet someone and within minutes you start thinking he/she is amazing and literally perfect, when you get obsessed, realize several things are happening here:

· You’re not okay by yourself and just crave someone to tell you you’re enough

· You stop seeing them as a person; he/she is now just a projection of the qualities you feel you lack within yourself

You put them on a pedestal and deep down think you don’t deserve that person. Because of this subconsciously, you act in a way to confirm this reality — **self sabotage**. You can’t be your authentic self when around them. You over think, get anxious and try to play this image of someone you’re not to fill the gap between the two of you. The other person feels your incongruency and will start to distance themselves from you.

This kind of obsession only happens when you lack self-acceptance. You don’t think you’re enough. Realize that there’s nothing to be enough of to begin with, **you’re just disconnected with your own self**. You don’t know your value system so you just end up using the default societal ones. Society tells you this other person is better than you because they’re better looking, they have more money, higher social standing, cooler friends and a better life than yours. That you’re somehow out of their league. You can try your best, you can climb as high as you want but this is a game you will not win. 

The solution? 

Optimize first and then stop playing! Start thinking for yourself. Start being conscious of your own personal values. There are many hot guys/girls out there, what makes this one special? How self-actualized is this person? How introspective and connected to their own nature are they? How is their sense of humor? What are they passionate about? **Qualify them through your own metrics**. Learn the difference between real love and this toxic obsessive version. The latter stems from your lack of self-acceptance. 

Don’t start self-attacking if you don’t know what your own personal values are. Most people don’t either, it’s what we are conditioned to. Start by understanding you who really are and embrace the responsibility that comes with self-awareness.Moments like this make shitloads of rejections worth it :D

This really cute redhead is working at the reception at the gym where I often go. I thought about approaching her, but she had a ring on. Then one day I was waiting for the elevator with her (but didn't recognize her). She looked at me twice and smiled a bit. When the elevator arrived to the gym - she ran out and ran past the queue. I waited in the queue and when it was my turn and she was giving me my key, she said:

"Here you go, guy from the elevator"

"Wow, I didn't recognize you! It was so confusing, why would anyone run to the gym and ignore the queue!"

She laughed.

On my way back I handed her the key:

"Here you go, elevator girl"

She laughed. Then I said:

"You're cute, how about you give me your number?"

The look on her face became sad and guilty and she said:

"I'm so sorry, but I can't. But I'm very flattered that you asked!"

"Ok, got it, no problem, have a great weekend!"

&#x200B;

Next week when I showed up at the gym, she came to hand me the key and said:

"I wanted to apologize for my behavior last time. I have a fiance, we've been together for 6 years and that's why I didn't give you my number"

&#x200B;

I was shocked. No ghosting/flaking. Not "thanks, no" or weird looks. I was treated like a human being and she was a 8-9 (even though I find this 0-10 metric silly :D ). That was probably my most inspiring experience with approaching girls to date!So I found this guys story after following the 'humans of ny' post earlier today. This is a pretty good estimation of what you should be shooting for on your "journey"....This is what I hope my end result will be. 

Tl;DR Fucking read it, I wouldn't go through the time of posting it if I didn't think it would help you. 

http://www.humansofnewyork.com/post/31895988596/the-dating-coachwe had a somewhat large party this Saturday in my dorm and a girl i already knew was there. she is very attractive and also very flirty, i think she talked to every guy at the party. we talked a bit and i was also flirty just for fun. towards the end of the night, said girl, told me she had a some shots in her room and we went there. she was really drunk, which was not the most attractive thing. she never even found the liquor she just started to put on make up. anyways at some point we were hugging and she started to kiss my neck. that’s when i told her she was wasted and we should maybe head back to the others and get her some water. she just started giggling and said she was gonna cuddle her teddy bear instead then. then she just lay there on her bed and i sat on the bedside. after about 5 min of debating with myself what to do she asked what i was going to do and i told her i’d head back and said goodnight. 

the girl is super attractive don’t get me wrong, but she just strikes me as a little sketchy. i had not been the only dude invited to her room that night and couple that with how wasted she was i was just not feeling it. rejecting a girl is one of the most bizarre experiences i’ve ever had tho. 

So guys,

# ​SHIFT YOUR FEARS

Are you afraid of that special beautiful her rejecting you?

**You should be more afraid of living a boring, sexless life.**

I'm a comp-sci student who trained himself to lift once a 2 days, so hear me out.

I  was bored as hell, and went out skating. I was wearing very generic  clothes, nothing special. A pair of jeans, some tee. I even forgot to  put my watch on, not to talk about any other accessories.

As  I changed my mindset and gone out skating, this happened. On my way  home, I saw a random stranger looking for books in an exchange point. **As I went by, smiled and said "Hi"**(Kind  of a cold approach but without all the cold approach awkwardness), we  immediately clicked. She said "Hi" back and asked me some questions. So  there we go, we talk about literally anything, for more than half an  hour. She was giggling, laughing, smiling. She was clearly into me. Fast  forward, and I have a number close and scheduled a date.

Though  I didn't get laid the very same minute, the whole interaction was  pretty wholesome for me. That was my first successful cold approach **which created good emotions for both me and her.**

**And  I know that even if she wouldn't be FWB with me, she will for sure  introduce me to her friends. That creates a MASSIVE outcome  independence.**

TL;DR

# BE SCARED OF A BORING LIFE AND WASTING YOUR PRIME YEARS AWAY.

# SMILE AND SAY "Hi"Perhaps it is the way I approach, but every time I approach I either get a number or get a "You're so sweet but I have a boyfriend" response. Here are the tenets of my approach.

1. I always makes sure she sees me before I approach. This means walking in front of her before speaking to her. I want to make my presence known beforehand so she isn't startled.

2. I do daygame. In daygame, try to right off the bat give them a cute/pretty/beautiful compliment so they know why I am talking to them. I used to just start small talk with them for no apparent reason, but I always got the feeling that they were wondering why the hell I was spending so much time talking to them.

3. I don't care that other people are listening in. Ironically, most of the time they are supportive of my approach. Regardless, I choose not to care about people listening in.

4. I am always closing. Even if the interaction sucks, I always ask for the date. It is just a good habit to have and you never know when they will say yes.

5. I ask for the date instead of the phone number. To me, it is more manly and less playerish to ask for the date. It shows your intent, and displays that you are there to take her out, not to chat on the phone.

6. Regardless of how it goes, I always end on a high note. I always say it was nice meeting them. Mainly because I might run into them again and I don't want any problems.

7. I ask them about their passions. I try to direct the conversation toward what they love to talk about, not just the mundane and regular.

8. I do pickup with a purpose. I never do pickup for the sake of doing pickup. I do pickup while going to work, while going to the coffee shop, or while waiting for the train. I am always doing something with my life. Even when I am doing pickup with a buddy, I am spending time hanging out with him. This changes the whole dynamic of pickup. Instead of measuring your success by how many numbers you get, you measure success by how your job went, and you got numbers as a bonus.

9. I follow the 3 second rule. I see a hot chick, I have 3 seconds to decide whether or not to approach her. If I think yes then I go in immediately. If I think no then I pass. 

10. I text girls immediately after I meet them. Literally immediately. I text them something along the lines of "It's the beautiful Jane! How is the lab? -heretogetbetter". If they don't respond the same day I keep their number but delete the thread. Gotta make space for new threads.

This is what I have found helpful in my daygame. Right now it is 2:48 and I've already got two numbers, all without missing my stride going to work and heading to the coffee shop.Over a year ago I sat in my computer chair typing a goodbye post to the readers and customers that I spent 5 years of my life teaching and working with. I tried to explain why I was leaving a company that I built with no plan to ever return.



Today I am sitting that same chair trying to type a post that I have wanted to share with people for over a year.  There is A LOT of bull shit that SOME coaches and companies shove down the throat of the consumer to SELL you shit. I am here today as in insider to dispel that BS and give you actual advice and I'm not going to charge you a dime or make you visit my website because I want more hits. Out of all my 5+ years involved in the dating scene & teaching these are the most important lessons that I could EVER give anyone. 



**1) Your Appearance Matters, Fix it.**

Dating coaches like to say that looks don't matter and thus work on your game. They are liars. Looks matter for more reasons than you know. First off, looks matter because women value men that they are going to show off to their family and friends. If you look like a wreck she won't show it off. Think about your first car? Was it a pile of shit? Rusted, maybe broken down? You don't want to show that off, you just want it to fill the void until you can upgrade, welcome to the world of women. 



Secondly, your appearance matters because it is an outward expression of how you feel about yourself. It shows your self-discipline and dedication to who you think you are. If you value something you take care of it, period. 



Lastly, I have learned time and time again that a very high quality woman will sleep with guys who aren't that physically attractive but they RARELY get in relationships with them.  If someone tells you looks don't matter then they are lying or don't know WTF they are talking about. Looks can be DRASTICALLY improved by educating yourself. See /r/malefashionadvice 



**2) Attraction isn't something you do, it's something that you become.** 

Want to know how to build attraction? Become attractive. Words, lines, routines, banter, all this BS people shove down your throat isn't what women find attractive. What women find attractive is **the person delivering these things**. Attraction at its core is self confidence and when you actually talk TO a girl instead of talking ABOUT her, you are starting to teach yourself confidence, this is why approaching works, it teaches guys to overcome their fear and replace it with confidence. 



**Here is how to become attraction rather than ACTING like you are attractive.** 

Develop a since of fashion and look good EVERYTIME you walk out that door. 
Take care of your body, lose weight fix your smile do whatever you have to do. 
SMILE like you know something they don't. 
Watch and study people who are attractive, IE James Bond & Chuck Bass (Gossip Girl). 
Slow down. Relax, stop reacting so fast. 
Make eye contact with people. 
Socialize with people. 
Do fun things in your life, IE live your passions, travel, learn about wine, scotch, culture. 



**3) Men tend to look for sex objects and women tend to look for success objects.** 

Success comes in many forms depending on the woman evaluating the man. Coaches and companies drop the ball here because they don't tell you how to actually KEEP the girl interested. Guys, flat out honest advice here, fix your lifestyle. If you are bringing a girl back to your mom's basement you are not "cool" you are a serial killer. All the awesome clothes and cars in the world aren't getting you past that one.  If your place looks more like a Goodwill than a home, you might want to work on that.  Because women usually don’t go to Goodwill to have sex. Fix your life before you fix your game. Success starts at your home NOT at the bar. Keep your house/room clean, smelling amazing and NICE. Don't know how to do that, fucking learn. /r/malelivingspace 




**4) Confidence is Almost Everything.** 

Coaches and companies miss the mark here when they try to sell you lines rather than the truth. The truth is, confidence is everything when it comes to women. I say to people all the time it's amazing what you get away with in life and love when you have a suit and a confident smile. I am not going to sit here and talk about the countless stories I have and sell you some BS product, I am giving you the straight forward truth. Confidence is everything in life and love and whether you find it in the pickup community or a monastery in Thailand, you must learn to create it in your own life. Confidence is the key to unlocking the rest of your goals in life. I spent my entire life learning how to create confidence in my own life and I can say that it has been among the greatest gifts that I have given myself. 



**5) Being a Value Giver.** 

How we value ourselves come through in the people that we talk to, how we value other people is a tell tale sign of a confident man or an arrogant man. When you give value to other people regardless of their sex, race, religion and attractiveness to you, you are bringing people up rather than putting them down like so many others do. There is a lot of negativity in this world today but being a person who gives value is about giving freely without expectation or reservation.  An arrogant man insults and seeks to make himself better than others around him and a self confident man seeks to better the people around him. Why does this matter when it comes to women? If you have to ask that question, you are already doing it wrong. Giving value to others is about THEM, not YOU. If you have to ask what is in it for me then you are already being a taker rather than a giver. When you give value to others you come from a place of selfLESSness, not selfishness. When you seek to better the people around you, you will notice a lot of other things fall into place, but please don't believe me, TRY IT.




**6) You Don't Need A Coach or Company To Teach You.**

My students never needed me, they wanted to learn and get a different perspective on things because they were confused. Every student I had came to me with one thing in common, they wanted confidence. The fact of the matter is you don't NEED a dating coach, the dating coach NEEDS you or they are broke. Why am I telling you this? Because you should expect more than old rehashed lines and routines from the people you pay money to. There are MANY good teachers and companies out there and I encourage you to find them if you want a coach but know that you can do this 100% on your own.  If you work on developing a sense of style, hit the gym, eat right, socialized and be a willing participant to break the walls of fear that have kept you from succeeding you WILL be successful with women.  



I could write several articles on many other things regarding this topic but I will finish here by saying the following. Life is meant to be lived outside the confines of a message board. Pursue the passions that you have inside of you because life isn't a dress rehearsal.  When you find what you are passionate about you awaken a fire inside of you and women see that. Passions will come and go, and this is ok but along the journey don't give into fear because something is uncomfortable, embrace it and define it. 



**TLDR; Fucking Read it.**
Warning: long post, and I have dyslexia, so deffinately some errors


I can start off by saying, this is going against the "dark triad"/"toxic masculinity". Not because people with these traights dont get laid, but because they exlusively get laid with people who are toxic as well. Mabye the girl staying with the wife-beater isn't healthy either? Controversial thought, I know. But In short, you should try to be as healthy as possible, and youll be happier in short and long term with healthy people. 


Here we go:
1. STRENGTH
-this is both physical and mental. Ofcourse Dwayne Johnson is an attractive alpha because of his wide physique, but he also has a thoughness to him thats rare. Personal strength is about pushing against fallback, and not being pulled down. This works for flirting as well, not giving up because it was difficult. Being fit and being mentally strong is key. (This is why batman out alpha's superman, even tho superman could kill him). In short, strength is the ability to enforce yourself on an enviroment or situation.


2. LEADERSHIP
-No, I dont mean the "grab her hand and pull her along" kind. Thats not leadership, thats being a boss. The only people who would follow you are those who needs something, like money, and theyll leave when they get a better offer. Leading is about jumping into the unknown so others can follow. Its about paving the path. A true leader will have people following him because he pushes the way and isban example. Dating wise? A leader takes the leap. He goes for the kiss, so that she kan join in. He takes the next step, pursues his dream, so others follow. You think MLKjr payed people to follow him, or used fair/antagonized the enemy to get people invested? No, he paved a path into the unknown, and therefore people followed.


3. KINDNESS/EMPATHY
-Took this one early, cause its deffinately going to chase some people off. I can just start by pointing out two things. A) empathy, along with humor, are signs of genetic fittness. B) "BuT mEn ArE aGrEsSiVe", yes, but empathy is an outlett for agression, not exlution. Say a bully is (unprovoked) beating up your friend, so you run over there and fight the bullies. Thats agression, but its not weak. Weak is wasting it on something that serves a fragile ego. Strength is pushing against that witch supresses. Potentially sacrifising yourself by fighting a lion long enught that your family can escape. Empathy, with agression as a discharge. The spartans cared about theyr comrades (a lot), same with vikings. Or are these too beta for you? 
Addition, pleasing isnt kindness. (Prepare for cringe analogy) kindness is Jesus, who knows he can go to heaven whenever, knowingly helps people, teaches people, suffers for people, when he gains nothing. Or Vegeta admitting he knows he is going to hell, but is doing the right thing anyways. Thats empathy, and its manly goddammit. 

You remember when you had that fantasy of saving the school frlm a attack by beating up everyone, or when you watched ufc. Why is this better than just starting a fight at school or watching people foght in the street? Its either saving or consentual under protection, aka empathy


4. AUTHENTIC/VULNERABLE
-Nothing screams curage more than entering the valley of the beast and saying "Here I am, throw what you can at me and I will take it". The man who can throw his truth, his oppinion, his dreams out, without blurrying them is vulnerable. When was the last time you stated your dream without hesitation? "I WANT X". Not that "if it works out/in worst case plan be, mabye some day" bullshit. Just straight out said what your deepest parts wanted. Hell, a five year old is more prepared to face the views of others and the world than you are. You think Mike Tyson, Muhammad Ali, Connor McGreggor ever cared what others thought of their dreams? You think Russel Brand was scared everytime he told one of the 1000 girls he slept with that theyre beautifull? No, cause thats not others buissness. Its your truth, and mabye youll get a no, mabye youll change dreams, whatever. But never fake or undermine them. 
(This goes under jokes and opinions too. You might not be educated enught to be right, but you will never be wrong, just uneducated)


5. SHAMELESSNESS
-This kind of rellates to the last one, but now its not your values, opinions, and dreams that are shamed, its your physical being. How many here have been ashamed of their body before going to bed with a girl? Wow, almost everyone. Why? You last 30seconds? So what. No really, so what. It takes 15 minutes on average to recharge. Say its going to happen, do some other stimulation for 15min and go inn again. Last too long? Tell her, and realise that sex iant allways about the climax. And if youre lucky she'll want it for a while. Youre fat? Well she is in your room allready, its not a lot to hide. Small penis? Use tools. Embaressed about liking girls? What slrt of toxic SJW have you veen watching on youtube? You are a unique individual, and you have ups and downs, but youre still you. If you were going to learn to draw, would you be ashaned of the first drawing you made? No, because its you trying your best. If you realise writing is more your thing, will you be ashamed at the drawing? No, because its still a part of you. NO SHAME. Love your body, love your desires, and love your interests. You think Alexander Hamilton was ashamed of being an imigrant when he buildt the american financial system? Ofcourse not.


6. STOICISM
-Big subject under one word, but it has 3 small parts. Presence. Its what the women want. Youve heard them say it. "I just want a guy who listens". Yeah, thats presence. Not, what is she saying that I can use for my own gain/chances. Just being aware. And as I mentioned before, humor is atractive on a genetic level. You need shamelessness and presence to take in everything enugh to be funny. Probably why youre lore fun around your family, than with hot girls (unless...alabama). You know that cool funny guy, you know the one. You think he is in his head?
Purpose. Having something bigger than yourself is both super attractive and super masculine. Its almost the embodyment of 1. 2 and 7. Having something grand that you know is right for you. A women doesnt like you, but you have your purpose, lose your job, you have a purpose. Lose a leg? Purpose. Dont belive me, then check out onarmed/one legged bodybuilders. Purpose can be anything. Fitness, a dream, self improvement. As long as it keep you going.
Memento Mori (if you had one year...) if you died tonight. Grim reaper litterally tells you, you have an hour, then your gone, what would yourbreaction be? Would you be gratefull that you, unlike any other, got a chance to say goodbye, or would you be crying in desperation of all the things you didnt do. This is basically the plot of saw and one piece honestly. Live every day woth your purpose in mind. Youll never be free, so forget the whole "I didnt experience relaxation" youre never free. I all comes down to one question. Every life has a message, was yours one worth listening to. Can you die knowing that you did what you could?


7. FREEDOM
-If you read any of the male self improvement books they never stop talking about "masculine=freedom, fwminine=love", so I had to add it. Freedom is all of the above. Its a mindsett and a destination, more than a traight. Its no one answer. Freedom to do what is your purpose. Freedom to chase women/or men, its 2020. Freedom to be with your family. Freedom for you, but most importantly of all. Freedom for others. Thats where masculinity lies. Why was america...once...seen as ultimate freedom? Because they helped others. Why is nice guys so unmasculine? They have no freedom for themselves, and theyre trying to take it away from one particular woman (oneitis). Why was the left only angry that a woman didnt win when it was trumps election? Because to them Obama and Biden was a step towards freedom. Ultimate freedom is freedom without taking it from others/pushing them down. Thats masculinity. You can talk to any girl, say whatever you want, and leave if you dont connect. Thats freedom. Anything else (like forcing stereotypes from the 1950 on everyone) is not freedom. That, again is bullying, whitch is weakness and lack of empathy. (Also, why is it allways 1950s? Harry styles getting shit for wearing a semi dress. Dkd youbsee what the founding fathers wore? Did you see how the greeks *gestures at everything*? Where is the forced stereotype of us forcing women to do all amth cause its witchcraft. Ill take that one ; p )


I will add that the people I myself find as highly masculine all have these traights. Everyone is unique, so the proportions are different,but all the traights are there in say "russel brand, mohammad ali, craig fergusson, chris hemsworth, dwayne johnson, tyler from rsd, ect"

Long post. Hopes it helps some of you. If any of this makes you really angry, it might be bacause it hits to close to home. Make sure you are open for different views before attacking (2*)

Tl;dr
Strength (physical and character)
Leader
Kindness/empathy
Autentic/vulnerable
Shameless
Stoic-precence/purpose
FreedomAfter reading a lot of hoopla on inner game, flirting and other BS that there is out there, I came to an undeniable conclusion that most of these were full of shit. Sure, you could learn something of value from there, but most of it BS. So, I started using my common sense and got success.

I started working out. Not just because I wanted to date hot girls, but because I wanted to improve my health. This after having a fatal hospitalisation due to liver swelling. I improved my diet, which was now balanced and vegetarian. I did eat boiled eggs for breakfast though. And, I started working out. Hired a trainer and started finally. There were many points in time where I simply wanted to run away from gym and sleep in my cozy bed. It was painful, but worth it in the end. Now, for a year I have not been sick. Not even a cold.

Secondly, I started visiting a good barber. I can't emphasise how important is having a good hair cut. After getting my haircut, I kept going to the same since it is important to go to the same barber for maintaining a good hairstyle. I have specs so I bought a stylish pair of eyewear.

Thirdly, I improved my fashion sense. I started taking my female friends for shopping my clothes. If you want to attract females, better ask them what suits you. Besides, they have a much better fashion sense than males.

Meanwhile, while executing all this, I started socialising. Like just going out there. Started chatting up any girls that I liked. Initially, I had nerves. I was frantic, nervous. But gradually I started gaining confidence. I read somewhere that when girls reject you, think of it as their loss instead of yours. Initially, I will be honest, I got depressed upon rejection. It shattered my confidence, but I kept at it. I had to. And eventually, this benefited me. I became desensitised to rejection. Whenever I got rejected, I got a bit sad but moved on. 

Then after some time, I finally got success. Hence my confidence increased. But a big part of it was me getting fit. I cannot emphasise the importance of what being fit did to my confidence. No longer had a pot belly. No longer was I skinny. So I would say this, going to gym and being fit will boost your confidence enormously. You do not need to Arnold Schwarzenegger. Just be fit. Muscular. Don't go overboard with it, lol.

Another thing that has kept me happy in the relationships is:-

* I do not dip my pen in crazy ink.
* No games. No push pull. Be genuinely busy. Develop constructive hobbies. Develop interests. Be an interesting person for the sake of living fullfiling life. Not to get chicks.
* Never pursued a girl that was playing games. I have my self respect intact. No girl is worth losing it. I have a rule about dating. If after first date, the girl does not herself ask for another date or start a conversation, I consider it to be the end of it. Never drive single handedly. After some time if a girl is not reciprocating, or is confused. I tell them to make up their mind.
* Be forth coming once you start dating about what you want. No pussyfooting about what you want. Do not be friends if you are attracted. You will end up suffering.
* Do not be manipulative. Do not put a nice guy act. Girls can see through it within seconds. They might end up using you and then dumping you before you get anything.
* Do not stalk. Do not be pathetic. No means no. Develop a thick skin and learn to move on.


tldr:- Use your common sense. You do not need a love guru or a dating guide or any other BS.Alright, so the title is meant to be the third update to my asking-the-guy-out saga:

1st post: https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/68yxwp/do_guys_appreciate_girls_asking_them_out/

2nd post: https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/6d7tlm/update_do_guys_appreciate_girls_asking_them_out/

Here's my third update. After being absolutely miserable for not having the guts to ask him out for 2 entire years (a part of it was my fault for being so closed in on myself and never really going out of my way to flirt because I was scared of making a fool out of myself) I decided, fuck it, I'm terrible at giving hints and he's terrible at receiving them, so I might as well just ask him out. And you know what? It was the best decision I've ever made. 

I'm probably one of the least confident people out there so you can imagine how much guts it took for me to be open about what I wanted. I wouldn't have done it if it wasn't for my friends' endless support, constantly trying to push me to do it regardless of how annoying I got. I mean, that's what friends are for. At some point I got really, really insecure with myself which made me wonder if I was good/attractive enough for him to consider me as a potential date, and I would've remained that insecure if I didn't have my friends to snap me out of my delusions. 

If you're a girl planning on asking a guy out, your flaws are going to magnified tenfold and it's normal, but make sure not to invest in these thoughts so much that you fail to make a move in the end. How did I do it? I acknowledged that I have flaws and so does he. I'm wasn't going to ask out a Greek God, I was going to ask out a classmate who's probably as big of a geek as I am which is why I assume we'd get along. I don't think people naturally get attracted to pure looks alone. I gravitate towards little idiosyncrasies more because they're more telling of how compatible you'd be with another person. The date was really great in that sense because I learned so much about his idiosyncrasies and that's when I realised that he was being more open with me and it made the conversation just a lot more natural and upbeat. This was a big deal for me because I thought I was going to end up carrying the entire conversation because I was the one who asked him out, but it turns out he's got a big mouth of his own and I loved it. We talked about our passions, what we had in common, realised we hated the same teachers and loved the same music and each revelation about a character trait or an anecdote turned into another topic of its own that we'd talk about for a long time. After we finished the movie, we walked around the city for 3 solid hours. We both lost track of time because we were so deep in conversation. 

So, I implore you, my ladies, to go ask the guy out. Why? If you're crushing hard on a guy, your friends are probably sick of you talking about him and unless they're extremely traditional, they probably would've made you ask him out or at least suggested it. If they're extremely traditional, think about it, does their submission to traditional gender roles benefit you? Would you rather just get an answer once and for all or hang onto that sliver of possibility until he starts going out with somebody else and it's too late? I've stayed up nights reading post after post about the same issue, looking at it from a male's perspective and believe me, men are dense as shit. I had to freaking clarify that when I said "let's catch a movie together" I meant "I'm asking you out" and his responses to the two different statements were wildly different. So, if you're going to do it, and you should, be clear from the start. Don't give him any of the subtle figure-it-out kind of shit, that's not "giving him the chase", that's just being ambiguous I really don't think helps very much. Be 100% open with what you want (a date) and how you want it (a movie/a carnival/ whatever). 

I also took the advice from some people here to not confess. That's probably the best advice I got, because I was planning on just confessing to him straight without any followup which in hindsight was actually a pretty ridiculous idea and unfair for him. He probably wouldn't really know how to respond to that, unless you two are very close and he'd give a genuine response straight away. However, if you two are not that close, which was the case for myself and the guy I liked, it's better to just ask him out on a physical date. Why? Well, it's easier to reject a date than a confession because he'll look less of a dick that way, at least from my perspective. I didn't want to put him in that kind of situation because, I don't know about you but if somebody I didn't really like approached me, I'd feel like a total asshole for not reciprocating feelings and feel less of an asshole if I simply just denied a date. And yeah, that's the other thing:

Don't be scared of rejection. It's a normal part of life and I went into asking him out with the expectation that he was going to reject me because if he did reject me then, well, my expectations would have been met and my emotional turbulence would come to a halt. If he agrees to go on a date, that'd be a massive surprise and it's a happy ending for everyone! Alright, there's a chance that if he rejects you he'd spread it, but like... people will move on from it. Gossip has a lifespan of maybe 2 weeks and eventually they'll start talking about something else, so don't get too bummed if it happens to you. If he's a dick about it, he'd scrutinise you and that's when you know you've dodged a bullet ... so be proud of yourself!

The thing is though, I wanted to ask him out not because I wanted him to agree to it (if that's your mentality, throw it out the window, otherwise you'll be met with overwhelming disappointment... unless you are 100% sure he likes you back) I asked him out because I wanted to change something fundamental about myself that I've been struggling for so long, which is my low confidence and low self esteem. Screw the people that say "Don't change everything about yourself for a guy" hell no, I didn't change anything about myself for him, I did it for myself. I wanted to go on a date with him and to do that I had to leave my shell and put myself out there which was the most liberating feeling ever. You know you've done it right if the weight of his response isn't nearly as significant as the immense pride you'd have for yourself for overcoming that obstacle. Stop being afraid of rejection. That constant anxiety you get from thinking about the 'what-ifs' is so time consuming and you could be a lot more productive by just TELLING HIM. Unless he's a douchebag born in the 17th century, he's going to be flattered and won't judge you for it. 

Concentrate on freeing yourself from that anxiety instead of chasing after a dream that's more fleeting that you realise. Obtain it, my ladies.

 **Let's say the goal is to run a marathon, who do you think is gonna actually do it.**

The guy who simply puts his running shoes on and gets out the door. Or,

The guy who watches endless youtube videos on how to run a marathon and thinks, "I'll start tomorrow".

&#x200B;

**What about losing weight?**

The guy who puts down the soda and donuts in his hand right now. Or.

The guy who finishes the soda and donuts thinking, "Tomorrow I'll start".

&#x200B;

**What about an alcoholic?**

The guy who instead of finishing his drink, pours it down the sink. Or.

The guy who finishes and thinks, "Tomorrow".

&#x200B;

**What about quitting smoking?**

The guy who stubs out his half finished cigerette and bins the pack. Or.

The guy who thinks, "After this pack".

&#x200B;

**What about success with women?**

The guy who simply says "Hi" to the girl he currently looks at. Or.

The guy who thinks, "Not here, not now".

&#x200B;

The only thing that matters in life is how you attack the present moment, the future isn't something different from what you are experiencing right now as you read this. It is you experiencing the present *x* minutes/hours/days from now. So, the way you attack this exact moment, is how you attack the rest of your life.

There will never be a more comfortable time, action is always required right now because the present is all there is.

It's choosing to chat to that girl **now**, when you see her. It's choosing to do the work that you are putting off **now**. It's choosing to put your phone down when you are about to order takeout **now**. It's choosing not to light that cigarette **right** **now.**

Tomorrow will arrive and be exactly the same as you are experiencing right now and the decision for action will be no different.\-This part of my life ilustrates , how unfair life is. I heard someone say: you get what you negociate in this life, not what you deserve. Keep that in mind when you read this.

\-Few moths back, i was dating a girl. It was actually a relationship, but it did not work after all. Anyway, this girl, always had her orbiters(guys who offer her free attention, flowers, gifts etc...). She is not the hottest girl, but she looks more than decent. I would give her a 7-7:50  i guess. Where she shines, it s her attitude. She has an avoidant attachment style and "thanks" to her father a hard attitude twords men. She acts like she does not need men and she likes to dominate guys. That s why most men see her as a prize. Us men, we are hunters...And the harder the challenge, the grater the reward. That s why, this girl has all this free attention.

\-One night, we were at her apartmet. We arrived at about 21 . All good, we talked a little and then had sex (made love-for those who are sensible LOL). Around 23 maybe, after the indoor olympics, i decided to go home. At her door step, were flowers. While we were having sex and she was screaming and moaning, that guy, came to the door at put those flowers there. There was no note, so i m guessing he wanted to knock on the door but heard what was happening and just put them down and left.

\-Moral of the story: Do not invest in people who have no interest in you. A showed interest, not a talked one. While you buy them gifts, write them letters, buy them drinks , taking them to dinner... , there is a big posibility that person is involved with someone else. This time i was on the lucky side, but i can t not stop and think how that guy must have felt in that moment. Every time you have the urge to chase someone who rejected you, or your ex, or the one that got away, or God knows....REMEMBER this story. Love yourself, don t offer free attention, free feelings , or buy things for people who don t feel the same for you.Thinking about starting a website which is based around skills and hobbies people can do. 

The premise will be "you're boring because you don't do things, here are some things to try" 

Detailed sub niches within the website explaining about the different hobbies and skills, the equipment, benefits, where to purchase, etc. 

I would look to create a community around it, probably on facebook, where people talk about new things they've done, how it helped, more personal insights into the hobbies or sports. 

This is rushed as I'm on my phone but let me know if it would be something you're interested in.I think it´s time I invested time in writing a little essay about how I went from a sad, loveless addict to a healthy, happy individual with abundance in my life.

I took so much advice from this subreddit in the beginning and I want to give something back. The only way I know how is to try to convey some of the information that helped me, and some other information I wish I had access to at my beginning.
This is going to be long as I am going to cover my story, what I did to change, and how my life is now.

My story begins almost 5 years ago. I got dumped by my first girlfriend. We had been together almost nine years. She was the one I lost my virginity with, and she was definitely ´the one´.

I got dumped for another man, the biggest punch in the ego that is possible, and I was absolutely devastated.

When we had gotten together in our teenage years, I was completely immersed in my hobby (I play an instrument), and was giving off the best possible vibes, that is abundance and non-neediness. I was a virgin who did not care. Throughout the relationship, I changed from a boy who needed nothing aside from himself and his hobby, into a man who got so dependant on his girlfriend that it was pathetically sad. Sentences like ´you are the source of my happiness´, and ´if we ever break up, I´ll never be happy again´ were some of my mantras.

I had slowly but surely stopped pursuing my own goals, and my life revolved around smoking weed and playing video games. The fact that I had a beautiful girlfriend was my life-line, my solid proof that I had my shit together, even though I was a socially retarded, scared, malnutritioned and addicted low-life with no goals and no drive to reach them anyways.

When she left me, I was left in a post-apocalyptic world emotionally. The illusion of me being a real man was shattered, and I was forced to face the fact that I was a lonely, underweight weed/videogame addicted half-man, who had absolutely no experience in approaching girls or even just having a normal social life.

It was absolutely unbearable. Literally unbearable to the point that I could not, at all, stay inside my own head, stay inside the apartment that we had shared, stay in my old routine and lifestyle. I HAD TO CHANGE. EVERYTHING HAD TO CHANGE.

When I began this journey, I only wanted one thing; a new girl. A new safety net for my ego, in the form of a girl who validated me and would give me happiness and self-confidence.

I knew I had to prove to myself that I could, in fact, stick my little pipi into another human being that wasn´t my ex girlfriend. This was a major concern for a man who had only had sex with one human being from the time where puberty was still not completed. 

So I did what every normal person would do. I went to an online dating forum, made a profile, and went to meet the absolute first human being with a vagina that would have me.

2 days after getting dumped, I was having sex with a 43 year old, 140kg mother of 3.

It was not my proudest moment, but it proved to myself that I could actually have sex with other people than my ex, and that if I could get this 1/10 girl with absolutely no effort, then maybe, MAYBE, I could get a 6,5/10 girl if I made a huge effort.

I watched a video from RSD (unfortunately I cannot find this video anymore), that featured Tyler after he had gotten dumped literally the same day as filming and he was already out doing pick up. It was a 2 hours long video, and I don´t remember much of it apart from these 2 very important points;

1. After a long term relationship, never get into another relationship for at least 1 year. (I promised myself to be single for 2 years, because my relationship was so long).

2. Start hitting on every girl you meet, no matter the looks or status. This is to achieve 3 important goals; to get used to rejection, to stop putting girls that are very attractive in a different ´category´ than other girls, and to learn very quickly through failure.

I realized that I had to stop looking for my Ex Version 2.0, and that I absolutely had to have at least some amount of casual sex to grow up as a man and to go into the next potential relationship as a person with experience and abundance.

Having one night stands would help me let go of my ex.

I started looking for any tips, cheats, clues and information on how I could transform myself from a self image of a loser, to a person that was attractive and magnetic.
I found this gem of a sentence that motivated me greatly for the next years to come;

You need to become the partner that you seek.

What does that mean? It means that if I want a sexy, beautiful woman who is also ambitious, fun to talk to and interesting, I MYSELF need to become a sexy, beautiful man who is ambitious, fun to talk to and interesting.
Why would a beautiful, motivated woman settle for anything less?

My self image was a problem. I thought of myself as an ugly loser. A fact that could  not possibly be changed. 
WRONG.

I realized that you can do so many things to boost your looks and confidence. You certainly cannot replace your genes, but taking care of your body, your clothes, your hair, your hygiene and your health can easily transform you from the every day average joe to the top 10% of attractive men. 

There is so much difference that can be achieved by developing a routine of self care and by educating oneself at least by some degree on how to dress and how to correct your posture.

I learned a valuable lesson that to this day I live by;
Maximize your looks and let go.

This means that I will do everything to feel confident and look as healthy as I can, and when I have done those things, I will LET GO OF THINKING ABOUT MY LOOKS! Being conscious about your flaws, after you have done everything you can to take care of yourself, is a completely useless thought. You change what you can, and you let go of the rest.

To me, this meant changing my daily routine drastically. I started going to the gym. EVERY DAY. I gained 20 kg in one year!!
I would stay in the gym late at night when almost noone else was there. I would punish my body, screaming as I lifted as heavy as possible. I did not care if it looked cringy, and it was a good lesson in not giving a fuck about what strangers thought of me. Anytime I felt de-motivated I thought about my ex getting fucked by her new boyfriend. It made me go as hard as I could. The pain of lifting weights on the absolute limits of my strenght was easy compared to the pain of sitting at home, marinating in my self-pity and heartbreak.

I changed my diet. I had often gone days without eating anything but crap, sitting in front of my computer all day and perhaps stuffing down a bag of doritos and candy right before sleep. A typical stoner diet.

I always thought that my metabolism prevented me from gaining weight. I thought this was just the way I was built, and that skinny guys like me could not do anything about it. I searched the internet for days and weeks, searching for tips, cheats and tricks on how to become big and strong. In the end I found a two step guide for skinny men to gain weight;

Step 1: Realize that you are a grown man
Step 2: Eat

This meant that every meal, I would eat until I was full, and then I would literally hype myself up and stuff my face with about 100% more. In between every meal I would be chugging down protein shakes and smoothies. I ALWAYS felt incredibly full, burping and panting throughout the day, feeling bloated.

This change of diet along with the lifting started making me grow pretty fast. I could literally see myself changing in the mirror from month to month. I started to develop biceps and chest muscles. I did a lot of squats and pull ups. Today, girls often compliment me on my butt, my arms and my back. I literally think that this extreme workout routine kickstarted some hormones in my body, as I went from a babyface to a man with a very full beard in about 2 years.

I started brushing my teeth 3 times a day. I started flossing every time I brushed. If you do not floss, your breath will smell like a rotten horse carcass, and the worst part is NOBODY WILL TELL YOU. Have you ever told someone that their breath stinks like pig vomit? Most likely not, because it is such a punch to the ego to the receiving end. Hot girls take care of their mouths and so should you. I also started using mouthwash.

Because of the gym I showered every day, instead of every 3 days like I had before (sometimes less). I bought a cologne and deodorant and started applying them (not too much!).

I started getting haircuts monthly instead of letting my hair grow into a nerdy mess like some mad scientist. I made sure to have an opinion on how I wanted to look, showing my hairdresser pictures of celebrities or attractive men that had hairstyles that I wanted. I also made sure to ask their opinion as not all hairstyles match any facial shape. Some men have long faces, others round and so forth. Same goes with glasses. If you wear glasses, the shape of your head and face matters when it comes to selecting the style you want.

I started thinking about the clothes I wore, frequenting subreddits like ´malefashionadvice´ and ´streetwear´. Just like in the pick up community, there are alot of extremes when it comes to those subreddits, and you have to fish for the tips and advice that fit your own personal taste.

This routine I have described became a part of my lifestyle, and I continue it to this day. This means that I never have to worry about my looks. I do what I can, and then I let go. I don´t bring subconscious thoughts about my looks into my conversations with girls or anybody else.

I stopped playing video games. This is not a popular opinion, but I think of video games as a child´s activity. There are men who can harmlessly play video games and still be responsible grown ups with a fulfilling life, but I can´t. I have a very addictive personality, and if I get into video games I will play for hours, days and weeks. I cannot afford to do that. I don´t want to meet girls who live the lifestyle that I used to live, along with the self-neglegence that came with it, so I stopped playing video games myself. 

Instead, I went all-in on my old hobby. I started practicing my instrument a lot and got back into some bands and started playing. This was very important, because it allowed me to have a life with some substance, instead of being a lonely stoner with the sole purpose of finding a girl.

I decided to say ´yes´ every single time someone asked me to join them at some activity. It took some time, as I had spent so many years isolating myself as a stoner and video game addict. After some months my schedule was always filled with fun activities and parties, because people started realizing that I wasn´t saying ´no´ to everything anymore. They started realizing that inviting me to a party or activity would likely result in a fun time.

I went to every single party I was invited to, and I always brought something to share. A big bottle of rum or a funny friend that would be appreciated by those at the party. I stopped attending to get something, and started attending to give something.

I said yes to going to poetry readings, meditation camps, romantic comedy movies, a 7km mini-marathon, mountain hiking trips and a huge variety of other activities that were so vastly unlike anything my former bedroom-dwelling stoner loner self would have ever done.

I of course downloaded tinder.
Tinder is a supplement to a healthy social life. It is not the source of a healthy social life.
To me, this meant that revolving my whole life around meeting girls off tinder was not an option. THEY would have the OPPORTUNITY on joining me to any of those activites and fun adventures I just described. It meant that it was not an option for me to spend hours and days chatting to girls on tinder. Whenever I got a match, I would send a pick up line, a short funny story or whatever, and if I got a response I would IMMEDIATELY ask her out. 
I would pick a date, activity and a time and invite them to join. I would never say ´hey uhh do you maybe wanna meet sometime?´

Rather I would say ´on Wednesday, I am planning to go bowling with a group of people. Meet me at this location at 9 o´clock if you want to join´.
Did it work every time? No!

But being so bluntly forward, I was not wasting any time chatting with people who were just on the app seeking validation and meaningless chat with men, and I filtered out girls that were interested enough in me that they were willing to meet me.

I started to realize that most girls out there had a type, and I was some of those girls type! I just needed to find those girls, and that meant wasting as little time as possible on girls whose type I am not. This meant approaching alot of girls and getting rejected alot. I had to train myself to not care about rejection, because every rejection was a step closer to finding a girl that was my type who liked me back. I looked at every rejection as a huge win, a proof that I was actually putting myself out there, being vulnerable and doing my best.

I would very often just meet girls on a regular Tuesday night at some bar. It was way less intimidating for an introvert like me than to meet at a club on a Friday night. It was also less intimidating for the girl, as it was just a casual Tuesday night. This meant that I had the girls full attention from the get-go, and would not have to put in a huge effort to get her to be alone with me. I am best at pick up when it´s just me and the girl. Many men are.  

On these dates I would chat, I would escalate, I would assume attraction and do all those other things that you can easily read about in the sidebar of this sub. These ´tricks´are important to close the deal and to actually end the night in having sex, but I had one main goal that surpassed any other goal; I wanted to meet people and have fun. Anything other than staying at home alone, playing video games and smoking weed.

This goal meant that I was not giving off the desperate vibe of being dependent on the outcome. Most of the time, I ended up going home with those girls. Some of the time I would end up going home alone. But surprisingly, more often than not, I would meet those girls again and end up having sex with them. They knew that meeting me was a low-intensity situation, filled with fun and I wasn´t a creepy man with low self esteem who was indirectly begging them to fuck me.

On my way to these dates, I would hype myself up by listening to gangsta rap or whatever put me in a confident mood. I would recall any other time in my life that I had success with women or anything else, and I would tell myself that I was there to give good vibes, not to leech them off of the girl.

I had to have the balls to  escalate, physically touch girls and to go in for the kiss. Being able to get girls on dates is only half the battle won. 

Being a man in today´s society can make it terrifying to escalate or to take the lead in an interaction with the other sex. We are so afraid of being called out as being creepy or rape-ey that it is an absolute mental blockage for many men.
When you learn how to escalate appropriately, take the lead and turn things sexual, the other person will most of the time be incredibly thankful, assuming that they find you attractive. Girls feel shy in social situations too!
The big trick is to learn to read signs of attraction so that you know if you are O.K. to go forward with your approach, and to learn how to escalate. I will not spend much time on these subjects, as these things have been written about in great deatail by men way better than me at teaching those things.

I can point you in the right direction though;

I read ´Models´ by Mark Manson. You can find this book online as an E-book and download a free E-Book reader to read it. Many successful players regard this book as a Bible.

I watched some of the videos from ´RSD´. Mainly the ones featuring Tyler and Julien. I don´t watch all of them, and I certainly make sure not to gullibly lap up every word they speak. Alot of their material focuses on getting absolutely desperate men to attend their courses for money, and I don´t regard myself as a desperate man, and neither should you. That being said, they have some really good pointers and they can definitely motivate you to get out there and be vulnerable.

I read alot of the material in the sidebar of this sub! Check it out, there are so many good reads there, and this subreddit used to be frequented by men who are actually very good at pick up. Unfortunately these days, most of the front page is posts by men who are writing in self-pity about their failures in getting girls. Those threads are toxic and don´t teach you anything. Go with the material from men who you can look up to and think ´I want what this man has´. Let the success of others feed into you and be convinved that if they could do it, so can you. Most successful pick-up artists are by no means naturally born, gorgeous pussy magnets. They are most often average joe´s who learned how to behave, live and be attractive. So can you.

One of my favorite threads of this subreddit is written by u/PUAcurveball and is called ´How I rebuilt myself´.  I cannot thank this man enough for writing that text, and I used to read it every time I was going out on a date.
It focuses on building your ´Inner game´. An absolutely fundamental part of being able to pick up attractive girls. As I have described before, I changed my looks and self care, but I am certainly not built like Khal Drogo or have some Instagram-model facial features. There is an absolute necessity for me to have a great sense of self love and self confidence through other means, and the key to that is Inner game. There is a whole section on the sidebar that revolves around this.

I also started meditating, preferably daily. It does not mean sitting crosslegged for hours on end. You can easily see a change in your inner world by meditating for as little as 10 minutes a day, if you do it honestly. There are heaps of guides on youtube on how to get started.

I quit smoking weed with the help of AA, and I found great pleasure in being able to pick up girls without the emotional crutch of alcohol and drugs.

In these years since my breakups, I have slept with around 50 women. In the year where I put in the most effort, I slept with 14 girls in 8 months. I am not here to tell you that I slept with 3000 girls because almost nobody does. I have a life outside of pick up. But I have had sex with gorgeous girls. I have met women who said that a night out with me was more fulfilling that months of a relationship with their ex. I made sure to fulfill any and every fantasy I had, so that I would go into my next relationship feeling like I had not missed anything. I slept with petite girls, I slept with thick girls, I slept with older women, I slept with hip-hop girls, I slept with goth girls, I slept with crazy girls, I slept with smart, down to earth girls, I slept with foreigners and I slept with girls of different races.

I expanded my hobbies and added new ones. I travelled to other countries and continents. Because I stopped spending money on weed and alcohol, I started having enough money to travel and to buy a powerful car built for street racing (one of my new hobbies).

I went from a lonely, addicted, malnutritioned boy to a fully grown man, who ends each day by thanking the universe for all the great adventures, people, friends, and love in my life. I sometimes tear up when I think about the transformation I have gone through.

The funny thing is that having sex with hot girls is far from being the high point of my life these days. I can literally get the greatest enjoyment of experiencing a beautiful sunset on my own. That is the essence of abundance.

I now have a gorgeous and ambitious girlfriend who shares my most fucked-up kinks. We motivate each other to keep pursuing our goals and going to the gym. We will often say to each other; You are not the source of my happiness. But I am happy to go forward in this life with you by my side.

I am so very happy that I waited for years to find a girl that I was sure that I wanted to stay around. So many times I could have ´settled´ for a girl who was perhaps hot, but shared nothing in common with me. I have many friends who did this. They changed themselves to be able to be with those girls because they did not have the patience to keep looking for a match that was fitting for them. It was because they are so uncomfortable in their own life, that they will literally jump at the first girl that is willing to validate them and is hot enough for them to be able to be seen with in public. I wish they had worked on being okay with being alone, and being the source of their own happiness. They certainly are not happy now as a lot of their time and headspace goes into worrying about loosing their girl.

I love this community. I hope and wish that it can rise again as a source of encouragement and guidance for boys like me that are willing to put in the work to become men.

I will end this by offering you to start taking responsibility of your own life and destiny. Every moment you live is a potential crossroads in the timeline of your life. Every decision you make can push you in the direction of abundance, or loneliness and misery. Do you want to continue being alone? Or are you willing to kill your old self so that a new you can be born? 

I believe in you. Good luck.Recently I started learning how to meet and talk to girls and one thing that I realized is that whenever I try to stay very close to them, touch them randomly, keep strong eye contact, get closer, they stay there. However, when I pull away and switch to pure platonic talk, they get bored and quickly leave saying "*It was nice to meet you*".

My whole life I've been scared to show intent to girls and was getting resentful sometimes to them, because they don't make moves on me. That makes no fucking sense I know! Now I start to realize that maybe the girls who liked me felt the same way about me due to my inaction, because in reality it's my responsibility as a man to take the fucking action.I created these summaries with a team and hope you find them useful. Let me know what you think and if you have any suggestions of what videos i should do next please let me know.

Have a great day.

&#x200B;

**If you're interested in future videos and want to subscribe here's a link:**

[https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub\_confirmation=1](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub_confirmation=1)

&#x200B;

\-----------------------------

**Here are the links:**

Make Your Bed:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c)

&#x200B;

The power of the subconscious mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw)

&#x200B;

Getting things done:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc&t=1s)

&#x200B;

The power of intention:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY&t=1s)

&#x200B;

Deep work:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA&t=8s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA&t=8s)

&#x200B;

The magic of thinking big:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8&t=3s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8&t=3s)

&#x200B;

The alchemist:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU&t=36s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU&t=36s)

&#x200B;

Blink:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk&t=246s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk&t=246s)

&#x200B;

Atomic Habits:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU)

&#x200B;

The E-Myth Revisited:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g)

&#x200B;

Mindset:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo)

&#x200B;

The art of war:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8\_5qhA2y-E4&t=32s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_5qhA2y-E4&t=32s)

&#x200B;

Rework:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k)

&#x200B;

The lean startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE&t=67s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE&t=67s)

&#x200B;

The hard thing about hard things:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl\_Q3E5d33U&t=2s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl_Q3E5d33U&t=2s)

&#x200B;

Crush it!:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI&t=6s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI&t=6s)

&#x200B;

Delivering Happiness:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8&t=4s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8&t=4s)

&#x200B;

The personal MBA:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU&t=2s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU&t=2s)

&#x200B;

The $100 startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE&t=1s)

&#x200B;

Zero to One:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc&t=1s)

&#x200B;

Grit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s)

&#x200B;

Start with why:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY)

&#x200B;

The compound:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0&t=218s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0&t=218s)

&#x200B;

The Prince:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ&t=78s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ&t=78s)

&#x200B;

The willpower instinct:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ&t=103s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ&t=103s)

&#x200B;

The slight edge:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS\_ZU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS_ZU)

&#x200B;

Meditations:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI&t=30s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI&t=30s)

&#x200B;

Who moved my cheese?:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw)

&#x200B;

The One Thing:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM&t=16s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM&t=16s)

&#x200B;

The richest man in babylon:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs&t=20s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs&t=20s)

&#x200B;

The power of habit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA&t=24s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA&t=24s)

&#x200B;

Secrets of the millionaire mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g&t=1s)

&#x200B;

The 6 pillars of self esteem:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB\_-w10&t=8s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB_-w10&t=8s)

&#x200B;

The 7 Habits of Highly Effective people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_nGzZ9m\_Xsg&t=3s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nGzZ9m_Xsg&t=3s)

&#x200B;

Thinking Fast and Slow:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw&t=224s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw&t=224s)

&#x200B;

The 4 hour work week:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g&t=1s)

&#x200B;

The power of positive thinking:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM\_19KBc&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM_19KBc&t=1s)

&#x200B;

The power of now:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w&t=35s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w&t=35s)

&#x200B;

Think and grow rich:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww&t=1s)

&#x200B;

12 rules of life:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU&t=26s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU&t=26s)

&#x200B;

The 5 love languages:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY)

&#x200B;

Rich Dad Poor Dad:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8&t=28s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8&t=28s)

&#x200B;

How to win friends and influence people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM&t=137s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM&t=137s)

&#x200B;

The inside out revolution:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo&t=31s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo&t=31s)

&#x200B;

Models:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo&t=5s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo&t=5s)

&#x200B;

Man’s search front:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk&t=18s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk&t=18s)

&#x200B;

The subtle art of not giving a fuck:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&t=253s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&t=253s)

&#x200B;

How to stop worrying and start living:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug)

&#x200B;

The millionaire fastlane:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA)

&#x200B;

5 extremely powerful techniques to master motivation:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM&t=37s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM&t=37s)I see this all the time and it is so unattractive. A guy sees a cute girl, and thinks "if I go and dance near her maybe she'll start rubbing up against me, or take the lead." Then five guys get this same idea and then five guys are just dancing around some pretty girls. Knock it off, you're all wasting each others time. If you want go dance with a girl, make eye contact, smile, offer your hand palm up, and let her grab it, and then slightly tug so she has to take a few steps towards you to dance. Jesus, it's not that hard. If it's dark in the club, you can lightly touch her arm or hand until she acknowledges you. If she gives you an IOI, same thing. Smile, giver her a slight tug, and dance the night away.

More than half the girls will probably pull their hand away or just grab their friend and continue dancing. Good. Now you didn't just waste your night dancing near a girl that was never interested.
You may read this and think it's too much to remember or overthinking. I agree. I wrote this to be a COMPLETE guide, i.e., everything you will ever need to know and stuff that works in almost every situation. I don't expect you to memorize or do all of this. Most of this stuff will come naturally to you, but some of it may seem counterintuitive or just never crossed your mind. I just wanted a reference guide for myself to compile everything I've learned over my long time doing this. 

**Preparation**

**Be attractive** For things you can’t control, make peace with the universe and accept them. For shit you can control, look in the mirror, be objective, ignore your prejudices and insecurities, and just fucking fix what is wrong with you. If you can’t tell, ask a girl to tell you. 

**Your goals** 1) get her emotionally invested in you (doing things for you, showing you positive body language, talking deeply about herself, being positive, and following you on your journey), 2) lead her around by developing a plan, tell her about it bit by bit, have her come along, change locations 2 or 3 times, end up at your house, 3) get her talking about herself and eventually pushing the interaction, 4) have genuine fun, which means do things you really find fun. If she thinks you’re pretending to have fun just to hang around her, she’ll think you’re corny. Even when you are dancing with her, she should feel like you really enjoy dancing and aren’t just doing it for her. 

**Your weapons are emotions** The only way to break through a girl’s emotional wall is by delivering a strong emotional experience. You want to provide her the full spectrum of emotions: the low emotions (affection, comfort, relaxation, warmth, sexual energy, protection, silliness, authenticity), the high emotions (power, leadership, confidence, dominance, invincibility, weirdness, new experiences, high energy, masculinity), and the transcendent emotions (joy, transcendence, “love” in the abstract sense - don’t say “I love you”). Teasing is fine, but only if done on an underlying framework of positivity, friendliness and warmth. You must also speak intelligently, to overwhelm her thoughts AND emotions. 
 
**Strike the right balance** Game is like surfing – you must stay at the “lip” of the wave -  not too aggressive, not too passive. If you are too emotionally invested, she loses attraction and goes looking elsewhere. If you ignore her too much or act too platonic she thinks you’re not interested and goes looking elsewhere. You need to be slightly less emotionally invested in her the whole time, which means you need to know when to step on the gas and when to tap the brakes. I can’t teach this, it requires practice and the ability to read her. 

**Stepping on the gas** is 1) making deep eye contract, 2) touching (preferably skin to skin), 3) Saying “bond-y” things like “we are the best dancers at this party”, 4) emitting sexual energy (just imagine sexual energy is a magical thing that you can just emit, you will know what I’m talking about), 5) inviting her to the next step in the adventure (“hey, let’s go to bar X after this drink”), 6) talking about deep/personal things. Women are very insecure, so if you don't keep your foot on the gas, her insecurity may make her check out of the interaction. Read her body language to determine if you should keep pressing the gas, but when in doubt, press. If she doesn’t like you, she can leave, or tell you to leave. “Creepiness,” to the extent such a concept exists, is simply emotional overinvestment. Don’t get too invested, and don’t do anything objectively creepy. If she unfairly thinks you’re being creepy, that’s not your problem.

**Tapping the brakes** is going cold. 1) looking at your phone, 2) breaking eye contact and looking around, 3) talking to other people, 4) doing what you want to do with no thought of what she wants to do, 5) fixating on a song or something else entertaining going on at the venue, 6) bathroom break 7) becoming unexpressive and silent. You tap the brakes when she taps the brakes – if she taps the brakes a little, you tap much harder, to let her know you make the rules, not her. Generally, you should tap the brakes more with “bitchy” girls, but you need to read correctly. 

Even it’s going super well, tap the breaks occasionally to keep her guessing and to give her some breathing room. If you press the gas too hard, you can fix it by doing an emotional reset. For example, if you ask her to come to the next bar and she says no, I’ll say “ok, well I’m going anyway.” I then tap the brakes, do something different for a while, and then totally change the subject to something new. I build up the emotions again and then I say “ok, well I’m leaving now.” If she’s into you, she might follow the second time. If not, you’re chasing a dud.  

You should also be ready to bail at any time if she is negative, crazy, or refusing to let you lead (that means she’s not attracted), even its 4 AM and you thought you made it. Don’t let the sunk cost fallacy ruin your night. You must have a video game or book you would be happy to go home to. Never do anything where you have to rely on her to get in, or get a ride home, etc… Don’t do something that you won’t enjoy doing. Sometimes she won’t get emotionally invested – it’s ok, not everyone has to like you – find someone who does

**Come with the following things** Breath mints. Charged phone. Charger if you might need it. Working Uber. Baby pictures - nephew, cousin, whatever. Two, three short stories that are funny, the more self-deprecating the better. A deep story about your perfect day (mine is smoking pot and riding my bike around South Beach listening to Madonna).

**Get emotionally prepared** Read, watch or think about something intellectually and emotionally more important than women and keep these thoughts and feelings in your head when out. 

**Talk to 3 girls before you go to your real venue** There is a natural emotional “wall” that exists between people who are strangers. It’s the man’s job to break this wall down, but you need some practice so that your end of the wall is already gone. 
 
**Principles**

**Stay above the fray** Imagine you just got back from partying with supermodels in Miami and these peasants are lucky you are even in their bar. Don’t get mired in petty conversations, stupid chit chat and negativity. Never forget that you are better than everybody there. And don’t forget you have a bulletproof plan to bring her back that works if you would just do it. 

**You don’t have to be her dream man** This may not sound very inspirational, but the truth is that every woman is settling. Don’t drive yourself nuts thinking about whether you are good enough for her. Whether she likes you is none of your business. Go in, enjoy the interaction, and if she keeps talking to you, that means she’s fine with you. Think about yourself, not her. 

**Disinterested interest** Humans connect on an emotional level and a rational level. Your rational words should show interest and enthusiasm but you must communicate the “emotion” of “I’m just talking to you to be nice, I would maybe rather be somewhere else.” Take the pressure off of her and just allow HER emotions to grow by not getting emotionally invested. And until she emotionally invests, DO NOT STOP YOUR MISSION. She should feel like you might walk away at any moment. Disinterested interest, however, does not mean be low energy or do not escalate – on the contrary, escalate and emit high sexual energy, just make her feel like are not totally emotionally committed. 

**Double meaning and plausible deniability** You must constantly escalate, but also use “double meanings” – words and actions can be interpreted as interest and/or escalation, but also not. This keeps her guessing and gives you plausible deniability in case she feels pressured or indecisive. Say sexual things, but in a way that could possibly interpreted as just a joke. Example: Her: Are you trying to have sex with me? Me: I’m not sure, let’s see whether you mess this up. 

**Go deep** Talk about deep stuff but don’t become her therapist or let her suck you into the vortex of her negativity or craziness. You are the lifeguard standing on the edge of the crazy pool, not another person drowning with her. Shift from silly to serious and back again effortlessly. Silly topics: 1) what’s your DJ name? 2) What super power would you want? 3) Everybody at the bar is secretly a paparazzi there to take pictures of you, but they are just playing it cool. 4) Let’s get drunk and go overthrow an oppressive government in the third world tonight. Serious topics: 1) How you have strong boundaries and don’t let people cross them, 2) How you are independent and do things alone, 3) how you are childlike and “nobody is really an adult”, 4) How you believe love is unconditional and not based on any particular attributes the person has, 5) How you love to live in the moment rather than have material things, 6) How you have a plan for world peace 7) How you love your job/hobby/whatever. Don’t discuss her exes, your exes, any other guy she is dating, or shit you will definitely disagree on. Call her out if she says anything fucked up like “I drink and drive.”

**Don’t** Don’t ask her for anything. Definitely don’t beg. Don’t let her feel like you are intimidated, awed or obsessed with her femininity or appearance. In fact, make sure any compliment about her appearance is done with extreme disinterested interest. If she does something overtly sexual to throw you off your game, use disinterested interest and double meaning to make her feel like you still may be interested, but the pussy can’t control you. Don’t give her anything she doesn’t deserve. Don’t pay for anything unless she pays for something first or agrees to pay (i.e., she agrees to buy the next round). Don’t let her dictate the conversation, especially if she wants to talk about stupid or boring shit. Don’t agree with her if she says crazy or stupid shit. Don’t validate yourself to her. Don’t brag.  

**Compliments** Only compliment her if she did something actually objectively impressive and you are actually impressed. 

**The steps** 

**Keep doing shit** Motion creates emotion, so always be doing something when you’re out. You’re buying a drink, you’re finding your friend, you’re texting somebody. Women can subconsciously sense when you’re on a mission, and the moment you just stand there dumbly or show that she can throw you off your mission she loses attraction. No matter how hot or famous she is, don’t let her perturb you, change your emotional state, or alter your behavior. Until she gets emotionally invested enough in you, she has to feel like you would rather be doing something else and you are just talking to her to be nice. 
 
**Say hi to everyone** Make eye contact with everyone. Say hi to every girl you see, with only extreme exceptions (she’s clearly there with a guy, etc…). Wave if she’s far away. The warmer her reaction, the more conducive she is to being approached. But keep doing what you’re doing as you’re saying hi. If you’re going to buy a drink, keep your body in the motion of buying a drink.  The worst possible thing that can happen is that she gives you a weird look or looks away, and this usually only happens if she’s there with a guy. No matter how unattractive you are, on a biological level it’s hard to say no to a happy person saying hi to you.

If you’re in a social crowd with people you know, talk to everybody, men and women, so you don’t look like some creeper that just wants pussy. In fact, in a mixed crowd of friends talk to the head alpha male and then introduce yourself to the girls almost as an afterthought. But eventually introduce yourself to every girl there – it’s only polite. 
 
**Approach** If she shows interest, approach, but keep doing what you’re doing. Sound like a contradiction? It is, but women’s feelings are contradictory. If you’re buying a drink, keep buying the drink as you are “approaching.” Good opening lines: “hey how are you,” “what’s your deal,” “you’re too hot to be here,” “how was your day?” “what brought you out tonight?” Stay warm and keep a big smile: you are a happy retard. Tap into the emotional “tone” of the moment? DJ’s awesome? Say something about it. Funny guy dancing in the corner? Say something about it. Keep it positive unless you can figure out a way to make a negative funny or positive. 

**What to talk about?** The beginning conversation is less about the subject matter rather than proving to her you’re not a creep or stalker. Ask her what she’s doing at the bar, give her a compliment, make a joke and then just talk about whatever comes up naturally. 

**Eliminate duds as quickly as you can** Who is she there with? Her boyfriend? Eliminate. Is she being negative? Bad mood? Being a jerk? Eliminate. Her friends? Where are they? What’s her plan for the night? If she’s leaving in 10 minutes, eliminate. Wait until it’s appropriate to ask these questions, but you need to know these answers before you waste too much time on her. Also, be careful to not get distracted– many girls, even those who rejected you previously, will suddenly get very friendly if they see you with another girl. If you spend too much time on these girls, you WILL screw it up with your primary mission. 
 
**Take the power position in the conversation** Whoever is more physically comfortable has the power position. If she’s sitting and you’re standing or if you’re contorting your body to talk to her, she’s in the power position. You must absolutely demand (without words) to speak to her face to face, have your own space, and feel comfortable. If you’re sitting, don’t offer her the seat. Take a step back every once in a while to make her feel like she is crowding you, not the other way around. Be calm. Speak slowly. Think before you talk. Don’t get sucked into her emotional vortex. 

**Be the opposite of a jealous, controlling, judgmental douchebag** Introduce her to all your friends and anybody else important at the bar. Introduce her to the “alpha male” of the party to show you’re not afraid of him (if she decides to fuck him, she wasn’t that into you in the first place). Be super nice to bouncers, Uber drivers, etc… If she starts being a bitch, give her a serious look and tell her “he’s just doing his job.” Random guy comes over and starts talking to her? Great, he’s now your best friend and you should try to include him in the conversation as much as you can until he freaks out by how nice you’re being and runs away. Talk to all of her friends in 1-1 conversations and compliment them. If one of them is being a bitch, ignore the bitchiness as if it doesn’t exist. Try to read her friends and see how they feel, if one is skeptical focus on him/her the most. If it looks like they will veto you, get her number and bounce. 

**Keep escalating emotions** Humans constantly want stronger emotions. If we eat a cookie, next we want 2 cookies. Give someone a bump of cocaine, next they want 2. Etc... If you provide a flat, consistent emotional experience, she will lose interest, so you must provide stronger and stronger emotions. Human emotions are also dynamic. It doesn’t matter that you were tingling her feels at 10:00, you need to bring new tingles at 10:05.  When you hit an emotional peak, say something “bond-y” (I’m glad I met you, this is such a fun night, I am so good at finding awesome people) the first time, get her number the second time, go for a kiss when it’s appropriate. Read the situation. 

The man must dictate the emotional tone, but it also must match her emotions. If you don’t match her emotions, you won’t connect emotionally, but if you let her dictate the emotional tone, she is controlling the interaction and not you. Your best bet is to show her you can do any emotions she does but bigger, more pure, and more positive. Don’t bring out your weird, edgy or offensive side until she’s bought into you and knows you’re not a creeper. Say real shit to show you’re not putting on a façade (I lose my wallet all the time, etc…). 

**Hook her** At some point in the conversation, establish that you guys are “together.” If she’s showing interest, say something like “I’m really glad I met you tonight, we are definitely going to hang out.” Don’t say anything too grand like “you’re my girlfriend now.”. After you hook, you can press the gas harder and tap the brakes more often. Depending on the situation, you may have to hook sooner – if you’re in a big group of girls and/or guys, you need to hook early. 

**Take the plane off, fly, and then land it** Women want to fuck but are too afraid of rejection to approach guys or push the interaction, so you have to do it. You must show you are reliable and can pull off the whole process with no weirdness, awkwardness or making her feel shitty. Make her feel like the entire night is planned out and she can just stop thinking and enjoy the ride. Act like you know what you’re doing and that you’re a professional (girls say they hate players but awkward, unconfident guys are worse). Act like you know the game. Act like you don’t need to manipulate or cajole her. Think three steps ahead and have a plan for the whole night. Transition everything smoothly - if you are going to the bathroom, tell her you’ll be back (unless you need to slam the brakes for some reason). Don’t ever let her feel like you abandoned her. 

**Back at your place**

If she’s ready to fuck, throw her on the bed and fuck her. If she needs some emotional escalation, put on a movie and cuddle up next to her. Watch enough of the movie to make her think that you might really just want to watch the movie, have some non-sexual conversation, segue to deep, emotional conversations, and then at an emotional peak, kiss her. If she’s into it, stop a few times, keep chatting, and then go for a kiss again. After two or three false starts, start undressing her and/or rubbing her pussy. Sometimes really emotionally damaged girls don’t want to kiss, but will respond if you start rubbing their pussy, so act accordingly. 

If she turns you down, confidently acknowledge the situation (I sometimes jokingly say “I’ve never been turned down for sex ever”, etc…), and then do a complete 180 emotionally, changing the subject to something completely non-sex related (hey you wanna watch a cool video on Youtube?). After enough time has passed, escalate the emotions again and then when you hit an emotional peak, try again. If she turns you down 2 or 3 times give up. 

If she wants to have a long conversation about whether she should or shouldn’t have sex with you don’t engage. I usually say something pithy and end it at that (“I am not going to judge you and who cares what society thinks.”). If she’s still struggling with it, tell her “I’ll give you some time to think about it” and then go back into a non-sexual, deep conversation, hit an emotional peak, and then go for it again. If she says something like “you do this to a lot of girls” give another pithy response and don’t let her dwell on it (“I am flattered you think girls want to fuck me. Not every girl makes bad decisions like you do.”).  

Have your own condoms that are big enough. After you are done, dispose the condom in an environmentally-friendly way, making sure that you don't lose any jizz. Pull out if you think it may have come off. 

**She won’t go home with you?**

Get her number. After you leave, text her something later that night like “great to meet you tonight, let’s hang soon!” Two days later, text her about some random thing you guys did or talked about, but don‘t ask her out. Two days after that, invite her out but phrase it like this “I am going to be at X place at Y time. Come join.”

**Last word**

All of this writing is useless. It’s all true, in my opinion, but what’s important is being there in the moment and feeling and breathing that energy. You can’t go in with a script. This is all stuff that you need to know but don’t expect it to happen overnight – you need to get caught up in the moment. But at the same time, you need to do what’s right, not necessarily what you feel. 

Go to my website: http://www.woujo.com

Follow me on twitter: http://www.twitter.com/woujo3Yes, it was obviously unsuccessful, yes my words were a mess, yes I didn't expect it to go well. But I'll take what I managed as a massive win and especially as someone who has been painfully awkward around women for as long as I can remember. Onwards and upwards.

(I'm from the UK, fwiw)These are the best of my blog posts in pdf, epub and mobi formats. I'm not asking for anything in return except glory. :)

It is titled "Tony D's Greatest Hits. 2011-2012."

I teach pickup and dating full time, so I have a few ideas on the subject. Enjoy! Thanks for reading. I hope it helps you get those women you really want. My blog is http://www.absoluteability.com


(update*** This book is now available on Amazon.com)After I posted on r/tinder a few weeks ago I got about a dozen messages asking me to tell them what I was doing with online dating.  So here it is.
Disclaimer : May be mixed results
This profile was created 4 months ago and I am currently in a college town with approximately 90,000 people total.



FIRST THINGS FIRST : Know thine enemy

In this case, figurative enemies are two things : Tinder algorithms and subconscious dislike of you from people.  To disarm the algorithm, only swipe right on people who you think swiped right on you.  When I swipe right, 80% of the time it is a match.  This is not due to me being extremely attractive,  simply know the type I tend to attract and therefore swipe right on the individuals I think I will match with.  This tells the algorithm that you are picky and it will show you to more people.  Do not swipe right more than 1 out of 4.  If it comes up with 4 people in a row who you would like to swipe right on, close the app and reopen, this will cause the order to shuffle.

The next part of Know Thine Enemy is to identify what will attract the desired demographic.  Take pictures accordingly and put things in your profile that fit this demographic.  For example, the demographic I desire is thus : college student women who are typically bisexual, ex-mormon or partially christian, indie type that thrifts and hikes and does artsy things.  Therefore I take photos that would appeal to the majority of these women.  I will post an imgur link below with my photos (censored) as examples.  These are not all current ones, but photos I have used in the past with great success.
In your bio/profile, do not write more than a couple sentences, keep it lighthearted and play to your strengths.  For example : I as a person am not very humorous or funny, so I do not put any kind of jokes or humor in my bio.  Instead I state what I am looking for in a lighthearted manner and talk about a few things I am interested in.  Screenshots of this [here](http://imgur.com/a/kILVDHf)



PHOTOS : Capture and select the right ones

Use no less than 3 photos, and no more than 6.  There are a million and one guides to taking and choosing high quality photos so I will skip all of that jazz and instead focus on what to be in the photos.
Your first photo is ideally from shoulders up to over your head.  Smiling, good lighting, clear face (no masks) and straight on angle.  No messy rooms, no bathroom selfies.
Ideal first photos [here](http://imgur.com/a/qsXE24V)
Second photo should be a body shot in a setting that fits your theme.  For me, this is wearing a daisy chain crown [here](http://imgur.com/a/G1GDuzC) with my scarf in motion.  After those 2 main ones, do photos in different outfits, different setting, preferably ones that showcase yourself doing the things you talk about and (presumably) engage in.



NEXT THING : Play to your strengths

If you are a software developer, know that the types of people you attract will likely be one or more of several types : They are interested in your intelligence and intellectual skills, or your (perceived anyway) money and the stability it provides.  These are not an end all be all but it should give you an idea.

Using me as an example again, I play to my strengths of artistic talent : I create pottery, I sing, and I did competitive ballroom dance.   I mention these in my bio (not all of them, you need some mystery remaining so they can "discover" and feel enthralled) and usually get messages about these.
If you are an avid mountain biker, then people that are into you will (likely) be athletic as well, probably in a different way but still in a relatively similar mindset.  Take these people mountain biking on easy trails, compliment their quick learning, and get something to drink after.
I personally like to take a girl swing dancing to a club in my city, whirl her around for a few hours, then grab ice cream next door while she is breathless and gushing about your twirling abilities.



TEXTING : Strategies

This is the main thing I lack.  I absolutely abhor texting, especially people I am not intellectually close to, and therefore am not proficient at starting conversations in an intriguing way.  Hopefully someone else can give you better direction on this than I.
What usually ends up happening is I say one of 2 things : If she looks like she is the type I want I say "what is up pretty bitch I like your style", and I say it exactly like that, no punctuation or capitalization.  This is to align with how they will likely text.  Again, this is part of Know Thine Enemy.  The other thing I say, which I use if they don't look like they would be receptive to the other is this : "Hey you're real pretty, but you would be even prettier with clay on your hands.  Come make pottery with me ?"  The best way is if they text you first.  This has a much higher success rate.

Ask them about the things they love, but do not say "what do you like" if you can help it.  Instead, try to extrapolate what they like from what is in their pictures and profile.
Regardless, people like to talk about their passions.  Be a good listener by asking follow up questions, offer opinions but not as often as you would like to.  If they ask you a question, be sure to respond with an open ended answer.  Don't be afraid to offer a differing option from them, as is shows confidence in yourself.  I always state it like so : Honestly I'm not really into [activity or musical artist or whatever it is] but it [they/he/she] seems pretty cool.  What would you say if you were to try to convert me ?

When you compliment a person, make sure to do it by : 1. Make the compliment about something they choose or choose to accentuate (example : a girl with dyed hair or a nose ring, or overalls) and 2.  Make it in a lighthearted manner, as being too serious will subconsciously turn them off.

Last thing on texting is this : if you text too much before the first date it takes away from the all important mystery and discovery.  You need them to "uncover" things about you and be excited about it.



IN PERSON DATES

Hygiene is something I won't go into, as this topic has been exhausted as well. Read somewhere else for this.

Personally I will never go on a date with a person who I don't immediately click with in the first 6-10 messages.  I also refuse to do anything for a date that is passive.  Instead of going out to get food I suggest we go grocery shopping to buy ingredients then cook it ourselves and eat.  Instead of going to a movie I offer an informal pottery or dancing lesson.  Physical movement releases endorphins and will create an overall more positive experience for your date, and will consciously or subconsciously associate you with those feelings.  If you have a picnic basket or blanket, go shopping and buy artisan bread, spreadable cheese, fruit, chocolate or a dessert of choice, and wine (or substitute).
Go somewhere shady and free of bugs, arrange things neatly and spread the cheese for them and offer first.  Pour the drinks for them.

Preferable first date ideas : 
Dance club, lessons are good
Cooking together (don't forget the taylor swift)
Painting together outdoors or in a university or somewhere similar
Picnic outdoors

Basically it doesn't matter as long as the emotions felt are both lingering and positive.

Break the touch barrier (easy if dancing) as soon as you can, but absolutely no kissing in the 2 hours unless it fits the situation incredibly well, such as a perfect spin into dip while dancing.  Take her hand and guide the brush if painting, take her hand and help her down a ledge if hiking, take her hands and shape them correctly while holding a chef knife.

Like with the texting, ask them about the things, people, and places they love.  Talk about it with them, and talk some about the things you love as well.  Do not interrupt for anything, and be diplomatic with your words.





I think that's everything, been typing this for a good hour and a half so if I'm missing anything let me know, or if you have questions feel free to ask them
The only proof I have that this works and is from me : [click](http://imgur.com/a/2ZIfLqK)



TLDR : the steps
1.  KNOW THINE ENEMY
2. TAKE AND CHOOSE THEMATIC PHOTOS
3. PLAY TO YOUR STRENGTHS
4. TEXT ENGAGINGLY BUT MINIMALLY
5. SPEND TIME PHYSICALLY MOVING TOGETHER AND OPTIMALLY CREATING SOMETHING
6. Above all, be communicative and open, be bold, confident, be receptive, diplomatic, and charismatic.

Again, questions are welcome.

Edit : wow this formatting is really awful, it was fine in my notes I swear.
Edit 2 : Use photofeeler.com (free) to test how smart, trustworthy, and attractive your photos make you lookAlot of you may know this by now, I would hope if you're in a sub like this but if not here's a great piece of advice that never fails. 

In the early stages if you have never noticed, some women love to compliment other men, compare you to them, etc. This is a HUGE opportunity for points with her or a great way to turn her completely off from you. Acting as if it it doesn't bother you will look really good in her eyes, but getting jealous or mad will surely give you a lost opportunity. 

Here's an example from my experience. I've been dating a Russian girl for a few months now and she does it to me every now and then although she does it less now that she knows it doesn't phase me. The other day we went to have lunch outside with her friend, with a guy singing. At one point she noticed the tip jar and said I'm gonna go put my number in there. I was looking at my phone as if I was completely oblivious knowing what was gonna come next. "Would you be mad if I did that?" I looked up and jokingly said "no, because I'm perfect and no man will ever take my place in your heart." She rolled her eyes and then looked over at her friend and said "See this is why he's perfect for me." It made me feel really good and it will make you feel good also. Don't ever get jealous guys. It's a sure way to dry a girl up real quick and usually for good with you.

Edit 1- for everybody saying I'd never let someone do this, she's toxic, etc etc... At this point with us it's an inside joke. She did it too me one time when we barely knew eachother, and I jokingly responded about having hoes. Since I passed it the first time it's just been an inside joke for us since. We have a good understanding that neither of us are together, and just dating. She can do whatever she wants with whoever and the same goes for me. What's there to be mad at?As a teenager and younger man, I always wanted to know what to say to get women to like me.  The more I interacted with women, the better I got at talking to them.  As of lately, things have turned for the better... and I don't even need to say a word.

It's not what you say to women to get them to like you, it's about creating sexual tension with strong, masculine eye contact.

I've mentioned this speaker before, but I was watching a video with a guy by the name of Brian Begin who talks about stepping into tension.  About a year ago, I been sharpening my eye contact, being that it's more intimidating to give good eye contact for most people.  When you have good eye contact, you can literally say "Good morning" to a woman and it will be more potent than telling the most interesting story about a fight with two girls outside (for those of you who use to watch Mystery videos).

Instead of trying to talk to a girl you like, start giving good eye contact.

What is good eye contact?

Give her a look like "I think you're attractive, but I'm not thirsty".  Your average guy who likes a woman has what I call "Needy eyes".  He has a look of "I think you're so beautiful.  Please like me".  If she likes you or not doesn't matter right about now.  You want her to feel tension with your eye contact.  You want your confidence to be conveyed through your eye contact.  When you're good at this, she may approach you!

Women are attracted to men with a high level of confidence.  You could be an introvert who likes sitting by himself, however, when you have such a high level of confidence that you can look a woman in the eye and feel comfort in that tension, she will start to become interested in you.  So, if you say, "Good morning" to her, she may feel tingles because you are now talking to her.  When you pass by, she will make herself available to you.  If you work with this woman, you may notice that when you walk by her area, she will make sure that she's close enough for you to acknowledge her.  This could be a greeting, it could be a look, it can even be for her just to be closer to you and admire you.

This is very subtle and you could miss it.  However, when you operate on this level, you will be able to tell if a woman likes you from the smallest subtle hints.

* She makes herself available to you.
* She tries to catch your eye
* If you're not looking in her direction, she may talk loud or speak to the person in your general area so you can acknowledge her.
* When she looks at you, SHE starts to have "needy eyes".  SHE will give you a look of "I think you're so hot.  Please like me?"

You probably had women do this to you and you missed it.  When you can pick up on these subtleties, you're at an unfair advantage with your game.  This level of the game you start to become fearless with women.  No matter how hot she is, you will enjoy bringing on that sexual tension through your eye contact.  She may not think much of you at first, but over time, she will start to become attracted to  you because you're creating that tension and it's having a positive effect on her.Heads up this story is 100% true and I couldn’t make this up if I tried.
I was out with a friend at the bar and he told me kinda out of the blue I need to fix my posture. He pointed it out by showing me I was slouching and saying he knows I am confident but I don’t show it. I fixed my posture and literally within 30 seconds I not only felt better but had a girl ask to play cup pong with me. Straighten up guys, it really helpsI had this comment saved from a year ago and thought it belonged here

Original Comment: http://www.reddit.com/r/AdviceAnimals/comments/p1p7g/you_should_tell_her_dude/c3lubti

Quote for easy reading:

"Okay, look. I get it. Girls are tough. Being in love with one is tougher. But man the fuck up.

You want to know how to get the girl? Stop falling in love so easily, you fucking idiot. Unless you've been locked in a basement with one chick for the last three years, I guarantee you've been ignoring all the amazing women you come into contact with on a daily basis because you've got your head up your ass over this one particular chick, and probably because she just happened to be nice to you. And what that means is you aren't into her because she's a cool person - you're into her because you think she gives you something you need. Validation, maybe, a feeling of wholeness, a feeling that you could be what you want if you just got this one. Last. Piece in place.

Fuck that, dude.

Listen. You want to know when I started getting women? When I figured out what I was about. When I figured out what I was good at, what made me unique as a human fucking being. It has nothing to do with them. It has everything to do with you.

"I like you." Fuck that. Ask her out. Say, "Hey, you want to go on a date on Friday? See a movie?" Because how the fuck is she supposed to respond to "I like you"? "Oh, cool, I like you too. I guess we can just sit here liking each other then. Awesome." Jesus Christ, dude. Bring something to the goddamn table.

I mean, who are you? What are you proud of? And don't give me some whiny bull shit about your low self-esteem. If that's the problem, stop trying to get women and figure out your own shit. You want to know what real love is? You want to know what endures in a romantic relationship? It's two people who know themselves well enough not to need another person recognizing that they want to be with another person.

Who are you, son? Be still and know. When you know, and when you do the shit you do and be the motherfucker you are, you will find somebody. And your eyes will be open because you won't need that ONE person. You will be secure enough to find someone that is equally secure in the knowledge of who they are.

Goddammit you fucking asshole, did you even consider Sarah? Or Heather? Or that girl who sits in the back row of class and doesn't say much, and so you never knew how well she sang, or the fact that she's been playing piano since she was six years old? HOW FUCKING COOL IS THAT? Do you know what it's like to be with a girl who sings, motherfucker? It's amazing! And you won't ever know that because you're too hung up on some chick who's just as insecure as you are, and who won't date you because she's too scared people will judge her by her boyfriend.

Jesus. Fucking. Christ. I'm so pissed off because I fucking WAS you, man, and because I wasted so much time looking to women when I should have looked to myself. The sooner you really understand that, the sooner you start to know who you are, the sooner you'll find out how many amazing women there are, and how lucky you'd be to get to know some of them.

Getting this hung up on one girl is like refusing to go to dinner with your friends unless they go to La Hacienda. "I only like Mexican food," you say. "I only want Mexican food. I don't even believe there ARE other things to eat, because I'm too fucking blind and stupid to get over my own obsessions and fears." Well guess what, motherfucker? Pad Thai is the shit, and if you never pull it together enough to realize that, nobody's going to fucking cry for you. We're going to eat your goddamn dinner.

You hear me? You ignore all these other beautiful and amazing women, you continue to be some insecure little boy about this shit, then the rest of us will meet those women and show them the time of their lives, because we ain't scared. We know who we are, and we're on the front line not giving a fuck. Rejection ain't shit but words. You don't understand that, you deserve to have your heart shit on.

I've been you. It sucks. Know thyself, motherfucker, and the ladies will want to know you too."
Went camping today for the week and fortunately they have a pool and a karaoke bar.

Saw one girl that looked around my age alone at the bar. So i sit next to her and a few moments later i hit her up asking a few questions about the camp and if she liked it here since she came from another country.

After this she got up and left almost instantly😂

To be fair i am still new to this but i regret nothing. I think it went preatty well anyway. I guess i failed so many times i don't fear it, i already expect failure no matter how smoth or attractive i try to make myself.

Thanks for wasting your time reading my crap guys, couldn't have asked for better company🍻Hey all,

Just a little piece of advice on something that’s helped me massively with getting over neediness: turning all phone notifications off!

The problem with notifications, is that they train you to be reactive instead of proactive: you pick up the phone because your phone commands you to; not because you want to / make time to. In turn, this trains you to act on the whims of the people you’re talking to, including that hot chick you’ve been dying to get to your house. They take half a day to respond and BOOM, there you are within 2 seconds because your phone dictates you. This makes you look needy and devoid of shit to keep you busy (read:  boring).

WhatsApp, insta, FB, snap, tinder, turn it all OFF and embrace the freedom. So what if you respond a little late. Take back control!Analysing what happens with 1 girl is frankly a waste of your time. The community is flooded with messages about what to do with this one girl and how she's special or the situation is unique. If this is your mindset, you will not succeed in getting good with women. You may get the odd woman but the majority will stay out of reach. 1 girl tells you nothing other than what that 1 girl likes. It's only a scarcity mindset that is stopping you from realising this and ditching that girl.

10 girls is a trend. What I mean by this is that this is the smallest sample size you should pay any attention to. What works with one girl but doesn't work with the other nine, might be worth reviewing because that one girl may be a weirdo. So you do it again with another ten girls to see what happens. If you're getting some more bites and good reactions, you could be into something.

100 girls is reality. 100 girls sucks at the beginning. 100 tells you what you are. That's your mirror to the world and that's how the world sees you. Sometimes the worst thing that can happen to a guy is getting laid by that unicorn girl. Because then he thinks he's figured it out and keeps working off that formula. But take a step back and look at what 100 girls are telling you. No guy has figured out one girl and uncovered the keys to the kingdom.

What 100 girls told me:

- Don't talk as much on dates
- Prioritise myself
- I am not like other guys
- Less is more
- Where my strengths lieThere's a short cut to having success with women, and no it's not what most people preach. This doesn't even require you to go to the gym, work on yourself, or go to bars (not that these things aren't important.

First off, just take a look at most people. Who do they hang out with? That 1 friend from highschool, maybe 2 coworkers, and then a friend of a friend who is now our friend. Most people are content with this and don't really venture further than that.

As a kid making friends is easy. "Hey want to be friends?" "Fuck Yea!" (not actual words of an 8 year old. As an adult we take what we get, and don't really work on growing that. Having a good social circle is one of the most underrated things adults don't focus on. If you had a strong social circle, 5 guys 5 girls even, where every other weekend you all went out and did something, be it karaoke, going to a bar, rock climbing, anything really. You tell everyone to bring a friend along, then a few things happen.

1.) You have an awesome group that always wants to do fun stuff.

2.) There's potentially someone there you have chemistry with OR they bring someone else who you connect with.

3.) People on the outside want to be part of this fun tribe you've created.

So if you're feeling a little frustrated, and you don't have an awesome dating life, or aren't having that much fun in life in general. Start by taking a good strong look at your social circle.

Quick Tip:

To build your own awesome group. Go to a meetup/ facebook event/ networking event and introduce yourself to people with the sole purpose of making friends.T hen invite them all to an event you're hosting. Be it a house party, karaoke, or even an out door day event.

Take the initiative and be proactive.  


  


( P.S I'm part of an awesome facebook community where we discuss dating and self development tips. Feel free to join, ask questions or even give advice to someone else who has a question [https://www.facebook.com/groups/moaforum](https://www.facebook.com/groups/moaforum) )Some background to set the story: I'm a 25 year old dude. The most relevant characteristics about me are that I'm an engineer, a nerd, an introvert. I'm decently attractive (but pretty close to average) but I've never hit on a girl in my life really. I've had two long-term girlfriends (5 years and 3 years) that kept me from this. I went through an incredibly hard breakup 5 months or so ago with the latter and felt the desire to distract myself and prove to myself that I could get girls if I tried.

I've been on dates with 20-30 girls at this point, took notes on how to improve on all of them (from setting it up through the date), and have gone from having a hard time setting most of them up and striking out on the majority to being able to get dates on any given day (for the fun of it, I went on 8 dates last week just to see what it'd be like to have a date marathon). I only go on dates with attractive girls (7+), end up having sex with about 1/3rd to 1/2, usually on the second date (about half of the remaining I don't like and don't pursue, the other half don't like me or it just doesn't work for whatever reason).  

One of the interesting things I've found is that the typical Tinder advice you read everywhere (be sexual, don't use it like a dating app, etc.) mostly didn't work for me. Some of the advice is solid and is similar to the below, but some of it is different. 

Below is a set of things that ended up working *for me*. I suspect that other people with similar characteristics (good at solo conversation, introverted, attractive career/money/lifestyle, not so attractive that they can just say/do anything) will have similar success.

**Your profile**

* Be normal, don't tryhard (don't put your height, overtly brag, etc.). That said, it's good to have something that demonstrates value in a subtle way. Instead of putting "i have a great career" or "I have a badass car", saying "I'm a <career> living in <area>" or "my <car> is my favorite thing in the world". Your bio is the place for this, not your pics (don't show off status in your pics). A silly sentence or two works fine.

* Avoid selfies. This is a recurring theme I hear with every girl I talk to.

**Getting dates on Tinder**

* I always read that being overtly sexual and/or flirting is the best way to get sex or dates on Tinder. This didn't work well for me. Tinder isn't a hookup app anymore, and a lot of girls just think it's creepy/tryhard/desperate/etc.

* Don't use pickup lines. This doesn't work. Also it's dumb

* Don't ever open with a general greeting "hi", "how's your day", etc. This is boring

* Instead of the above, just look at their images and bio (avoid shared likes unless it's something really obscure), pick something that either (a) is funny or (b) establishes a connection between you (like a shared vacation spot or activity) and make a short comment. For example, this girl's name sounded like Paul Mitchell (the shampoo) so I just said "<name>, pretty sure that's a shampoo.". This isn't an 'opener', there's no psychology behind it - it's just something I thought would be fun to say, so I said it. Not only is this effective because it's a normal introduction that prompts a reaction, you'll have fun using the app and when you have fun doing something it's exuded in every aspect of your communication. Just say whatever, it doesn't really matter. *You don't need good lines, you just need to be interesting enough to respond to without doing something (awkward/uncomfortable/too forward/creepy) that disqualifies you*.

* I couldn't get moments to work. I get likes on them but they didn't really translate into anything. I've also tried to use them for impromptu meetups (swipe right if you're free tonight, etc.) to very little success.

* Convert a conversation to a number quickly. Then convert text conversation to a date quickly. As a rule of thumb, I exchange 3-4 messages on Tinder, say we should meet up for drinks, and then ask for number so we can text. After 1-2 texts, I propose a time and place. Any fewer than 3-4 messages makes you look desperate, any more than 3-4 with the strategy I use risks it turning into just friendly uninteresting banter and is also quite frankly a waste of time. You can qualify it with "I tend to forget about this app..." or "I hate talking on this app" if it doesn't flow naturally in the conversation

* Don't ever, ever, ever compliment a girl's looks. Not at the start, not after you've been talking or texting. This is a tempting and safe fallback to try to prevent conversations from slipping into friendly banter, but just don't do it. I won't try to understand the psychology behind why this doesn't work, but it just doesn't.

* When I joined Tinder I thought it was for impromptu meetups, like same-day or next-day stuff. So I tried to meet people same-day or next-day. That sometimes works, but I've had more success after moving to schedule something for a few days (2-4 is probably the best) in advance. Just ask if she's free, for example, on Wednesday at 8pm for drinks at <place>.

* Some people say you have to respond quickly and keep the conversation alive and convert to a number before the convo dies. This isn't true, it makes it less fun, and I've actually found the opposite (that girls seem more responsive if you don't seem glued to Tinder and my responses are better when I'm not forcing a response)

* The day of, make sure you check-in and make sure you're still on for the day. Otherwise the girl will be worried that you'll flake and increase her chances of flaking

* Have fun! I love picking a random bar and going out by myself some nights, ordering food and a beer, and chilling and messaging people on Tinder for an hour or two. It's actually a really enjoyable way to wind down.

**The date**

* Don't do food, don't invite girls directly to your place. Pick a chill bar/lounge within walking distance of your place. Sit at the bar so you can turn to eachother, which feels more intimate and allows you and her to physically flirt. Don't sit across a table or in a booth or whatever.

* I've had more success the classier/more dressed up I look. I throw a blazer on over a casual button-down and dark wash jeans. Make sure you pick a classy bar if you do this, if you go somewhere divey you'll look like a chump.

* For me, I had way more success when I stopped trying to create chemistry and just focused on strong eye contact and having an engaging conversation. You can flirt if it feels right but don't force it. You don't need to do anything spectacular here, just try to connect with the person. Or don't. Just have fun.

* At the end of the date when you're leaving, you'll get a sense for what she wants to do. If she wants to go home with you she'll probably just walk out with you and leave where you guys are going open-ended. I typically just ask if she wants to keep hanging out or if she has go to, and if she says she wants to keep hanging out I just walk back to my place and she follows. It took me a while to stop making this transition awkward.

**Random notes**

* Looks matter less than you'd think. At the start of my effort, I had probably 20% of girls want to go on second dates with me. I could set up 1-2 dates a week max, if I tried. At this point, 100% of the last 8-10 girls or so have wanted a second date, and I can reliably set up 4-5 a week if I feel like wasting all my money and time. My looks didn't change. The way I talked and presented myself did.

* Take notes on each date of 1-3 things you could have improved - these end up being personal areas for you to improve based on your weaknesses. Over time, those things should stop appearing on your list as you improve them. For example, early on, I noticed that I was very low-energy, and my dates reflected that. I noted "high energy". A couple of dates later, I noted that I often avoided eye contact. I noted "eye contact". Before each date, I take a look at the list and make a conscious effort to do them. They've started to become natural and it's made a big difference, and now I have a list of 5-6 things to refresh on (on my list right now: high energy, eye contact, take opportunities to connect, be less serious and more cheeky, talk less and get her to talk more)

* This is a completely different game. I have a friend that can pull girls at bars and clubs but can't get anything on Tinder. I can't get girls at bars or clubs but I kill it on Tinder. It'll take time to adjust, so don't expect to instantly become Tinder-god.

* This one is personal choice, but don't go out with only the intention of having sex with girls. Only go on dates with girls that seem interesting in some way and do it for the conversation and the connection. If you don't, you're not going to enjoy it, it'll make you feel empty, and your desperation will pervade your confidence and demeanor. 

* I don't know why but I tend to pull like 60% Asian girls. My thought is that Asian girls like tall white guys with good careers more than other races. Oh well, I like Asian girls.

* Flakiness increases proportionally with how ratchet their photos are and inversely with how far out the date is scheduled. Spend your time accordingly.

* There are actually high-quality girls on Tinder! Most of the girls (90%+) I've met are college-educated and there were a couple I would legitimately consider dating long-term. I have lasting friendships with several of them now. Your photos and bio will select the type of crowd you match with.For the men who want magic bullets and a secret word to get women in bed, you have outed yourself as a man who is not getting laid.  I know because I looked for these things when I was struggling with women.

You don't improve yourself to get women, you improve yourself to give yourself to improve the quality of your life.  The women you get along the way is a by-product of self-improvement.  

Let's say there's a man who is very "good-looking".  I'm talking women are throwing themselves at him.  He knows and understands this so he doesn't feel the need to work.  The women he gets with will provide for him.  He doesn't feel the need to upgrade his own life, the women he gets with will do that for him.

When you rely on women for resources, you are at their mercy.  They will start dictating what happens with the money.  Then they will start disrespecting you.  

No matter how attractive a person is, they start to look normal after a while.  Then you will notice things about them that turns you off.  Then their looks aren't important to you anymore.

For the men who say "you just have to be good-looking", know and understand this because whatever a man lacks, women will look for in other men.  This is one reason why a woman could have a boyfriend and two other guys on the side.  It's to fill in the gaps of whatever her boyfriend lacks.  If her boyfriend is always busy, she's gonna try to find an "orbiter" who can stroke her ego and make her feel good.  If her boyfriend is broke, she's gonna look for a man who can buy her shit that her boyfriend can't afford.  If her boyfriend is horrible in bed but has a lot of money, she's looking for some new dick on the side!

When you focus on overcoming your personal issues and baggage, increase your income, and can give women multiple orgasms in a single day, all of a sudden you won't struggle so much with getting women.  You may notice more and more women trying to get you to become their boyfriend.  With the lack of quality men (as far as women are concerned), you will be her choice.

Just because you are improving yourself doesn't mean women are gonna jump in your lap.  Your confidence is gonna attract them, but you will need to make the move.  You need to learn  how to qualify women.  Truth be told, just because she's hot and she likes should not be the qualifier.  That is something you need to figure out on your own.  You need to have requirements that women must have or do in order for you to make them your girl or just a fuck buddy.  This puts you in a position of power.  The goal is to be fair, but congruent.  Her looks aren't gonna get her off the hook compared to a lesser hot woman.  Her looks gets her through the door, how she treats you and carries herself is what qualifies or disqualifies her.##After hours of research, I had found what I thought to be the perfect pickup line. I walked up to a beautiful girl and said, “Hey, I thought you were cute, and I had to say hi.”  She smiled, said thank you, and we talked for a couple minutes until she paused and said, “It was nice to meet you,” and walked away. I never saw her again. 

I’ve read dozens of books teaching men how to attract women with lines, tactics, and tricks. But after 10 years in the game, thousands of approaches, and yes, a good number of “lays” – I’ve found that attracting women isn’t something you can force. In fact, the harder you try to get a woman to like you, the less attractive you will be to her. 

When that girl from the above example rejected me, I could have blamed it on the line I used. But truthfully, no matter what I said, the result would have been the same. This is because attraction isn’t something you do, it’s something you are.

Of all the times I attracted a woman, not once did I attract her because of some technique I used. Every single time, I attracted her because of who I was. 

There’s a saying, “The self is always shining through.” Basically, no matter how hard you try to “make a girl like you” using some tactic, it won’t work because using a technique to attract a woman is in itself a form of overcompensation. 

We only use techniques because on some level we don’t believe we’re good enough by default, so we try to make up for our inadequacy with a line or a trick(1). 

I can’t teach you how attract a specific girl using techniques, but I CAN teach you how to be an attractive man who naturally draws women in. 

There’s no quick-fix. Becoming the most attractive version of yourself requires that you invest both time and effort in yourself. But the end result is easily worth it. Over-time - by following the 5 tips in this article - you will become exponentially more appealing to the opposite sex. 

&nbsp;

#1.	Develop your Self-Confidence

&nbsp;

It’s no secret that self-confidence is attractive, but what is it, really? If asked, most people would say, “Self-confidence is belief in yourself.” And that’s true, but there’s a key component missing in that definition. 
Self-confidence isn’t just belief in yourself, it’s the belief that everything will turn out okay when you attempt something.

Self-confidence doesn’t mean you expect every girl to like you, it simply means that you’re okay with the consequences of taking a risk, even if the girl doesn’t like you. 

When we lack self-confidence with women, we think that rejection is the worst thing that could happen to us. That fear causes us to filter ourselves in conversation, to adopt defensive body language, and even to speak with a weaker vocal tonality. 

Our inner lack of confidence causes us to behave less attractively. The more confident you become, the more attractive you will be because you’ll stop getting in your own way.

How do you actually do that? Well, how do we become confident in anything? Take driving for example. We become confident drivers by giving our brains proof that when we take the wheel, disaster will not ensue. 

Every time we drive - and we live to tell the tale - we become a little more confident in ourselves as a driver. 
The same applies to dating. Every time you take a social risk, and come out the other side unharmed, you will become a little bit more confident.

For example, the more women you approach, the lower the stakes will feel when you walk up to a girl, because you’ll become comfortable with the possibility of getting rejected.

What this means will vary from person to person. For many guys just starting their journey, the first step to developing self-confidence will just be getting out of the house, for others it will be something bolder.  
As you develop your self-confidence, you will become more attractive to women. Fortunately, if you utilize tip 4, the process of confidence building will largely take place automatically. 

The most important take-aways from this are that you can’t fake confidence, and that it will take time to develop – BUT your level of confidence is completely under your control and improving it will make you more attractive.
Further resources on how to become more confident: 

- https://medium.com/@aghayden/charisma-is-the-most-appealing-quality-an-individual-can-have-6997168b8571 This article titled how to be more charismatic applies just as well to self-confidence and gives you an in-depth how to guide on letting go of your social insecurities.
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pj6qhHYLeMU& This video goes into detail about the mindset of confidence with women. 

&nbsp;  

#2.	Have Standards

&nbsp;

The more women you’re willing to reject, the more attractive to women you will become. This is counter-intuitive, but it’s true.

If there is one thing that turns women off more than anything, it’s neediness. A guy acts needy when he is so desperate to be with a girl that no matter what she does or says, he would still sleep with her. 

Neediness is suffocating. It shows that you take getting with a girl way too seriously and that you see yourself as incapable of getting another girl of her caliber if you wanted to. 

Most of the guys I’ve met who have trouble attracting women (and there are many) have a problem with neediness. They see girls as a means to an end. They will happily sleep with any girl because that makes them feel like they “won”. 

Men with this mindset don’t meet women to connect with another human being, but to get a sense of accomplishment from sleeping with a girl. 

These guys don’t have standards for themselves. They see a hot girl as a prize to be won, so they are desperate to get her. Her personality is irrelevant. Her values are irrelevant. 

When you see women as mere sex-objects, it’s impossible to have a real human interaction with them. And, naturally, a man who sees a woman as a human being is much more likely to attract her than a man who sees her as the fleshy equivalent of a gold coin. 

The best way to eliminate this neediness that derives from seeing attractive women as prizes is to develop standards. Instead of being the guy who will do anything to get with the hot girl, you want to be the guy who’s interested in the hot girl but hasn’t decided if he wants to sleep with her yet. 

Just like confidence, this can’t be faked. Pretending that you have standards by disqualifying a girl or negging her won’t make her see you as a high-status guy. You have to develop actual standards.

A good place to start is to make a clear list of what you won’t accept in a woman you’re considering dating (in whatever capacity). For reference, here’s a few of the things I won’t accept in a woman:

-If a girl has any kind of drug addiction, I’m out. 
-If she’s unhealthily narcissistic, I’m out. 
-If she has a negative mindset, I’m out.  
-If she is uninteresting, I’m out. 

When I’m interacting with a woman, I’m screening her for the above traits. She might be a perfect ten in appearance, but if she’s narcissistic and uninteresting, I’m not going to sleep with her. To do so would be selling myself short. 

The only reason I would sleep with that girl is because it would give me a sense of ego-gratification. I’d be doing it, so I could tell my friends about, not because to do so would actually be enjoyable. 

In my experience, at least, sex is better when you actually like the person. Physical attraction is important, too, sure. But I’ve been with extremely beautiful women in the past who I didn’t have any chemistry with - and it was crappy. 

Writing a list of the things you won’t tolerate in a potential sexual partner and rejecting women who don’t meet those standards is a powerful strategy for becoming more attractive to women. (Btw, it’s also useful to write a list of the things you do want in a partner.)

When you’re interacting with a beautiful woman and you’re willing to reject her depending on what she does and says, the entire dynamic changes. Instead of acting like a guy who would do anything to get laid, you will act like a guy who has an abundance of options. 

Your non-neediness will make you infinitely more attractive than all the desperate guys pining after her. But this starts with taking a moment to write out what you want (and don’t want) in a girl you’re considering having a sexual relationship with. 

&nbsp;

#3.	Improve your Appearance

&nbsp;

Looks matter. The better looking you are, the higher percentage of women will make it easy for you to pick them up. At the same time, no matter how unattractive you are, some percentage of women will be attracted to you if are confident, non-needy, etc. 
(and that percentage is probably higher than you think).

There are two important misconceptions about looks that must be cleared up:

1. Waiting to get in shape before meeting women is a silly idea. 
2. Your looks matter, but they don’t exist in a vacuum.

&nbsp;

A lot of guys realize that looks matter, so they decide that once they’ve got their looks “handled” they’ll start approaching women. This is problematic because it can easily turn into a form of procrastination. Your appearance is something that you can constantly improve, but you’ll never reach a particular point where you’ve “made it”. 
Furthermore, improving your looks won’t make game easy. I’ve seen numerous good-looking guys fail at game. These guys expect their looks to do all the work for them, but truth is you still have to be very confident and assertive to succeed with women. 

The vast majority of guys don’t have the confidence necessary to take a woman home, and that’s something you can only develop through practice. Thinking you look good helps, but it’s not magically going to make you comfortable with social risk taking –(if only it were that simple).

Improve your appearance while also improving your social skills. It’s not one or the other, it’s both. Focusing on your looks while neglecting to actually interact with women is a recipe for failure. 

Social skills, confidence, and physical attractiveness are all important when it comes to dating, don’t sell yourself short by improving one and neglecting the others. To do so would be as silly as learning how to shoot in basketball, but not how to dribble or pass.

That said, you can make a staggering improvement in your appearance in the course of a single day. Get a high-end salon haircut. Buy some clothes that fit well and don’t make you look like you live in your mother’s basement. 
Simply dressing better and having a sense of style will make you more substantially more attractive. It’s not going to make up for a lack of confidence and experience, but it’s a good start. And really, 95% of guys in the seduction community have plenty of room to improve their style.

I’m no expert on fashion, but here are a couple resources you can look at to get started with:

-	http://masculine-style.com/rugged-refined-and-rakish/
-	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FiAubtXLnFs

&nbsp;

Obviously, when it comes to improving your looks, style is only half the battle. There’s no reason not to be in good shape. If you’re not already working out regularly, the easiest way to start is to go to the gym with a friend of yours who’s already in good shape. 

Having a gym buddy will help keep you accountable to working out even when you don’t feel motivated. Plus, if your friend is in good shape, they’ll be able to help provide you with guidance. 

If you don’t have a friend who can help you, there’s an unlimited number of fitness guides you can download. Find someone you resonate with and trust and follow their plan. If you have trouble being consistent, get a trainer to hold you accountable and provide guidance. 

&nbsp;

#4.	Treat Dating Like A Skill

&nbsp;

Whatever you want to accomplish in life, there are certain elements that are outside of your control. 
- If you want to be a doctor, a low IQ is a disadvantage that’s outside your control. 
- If you want to get rich, having a poor family is disadvantage that’s outside your control. 
- If you want to date beautiful women, factors like your height, race, etc. can be disadvantages that are outside your control. 

Dating coaches who say factors like your race and height don’t matter are lying. Sure, they matter, but they’re out of your control: worrying about them is only going to hurt you. 

When you tell yourself, “Girls don’t like Asians,” you’re going to see your interactions with women through that lens. If you walk up to a girl, and she rejects you, you’re going to say, “It’s because I’m Asian. If I were white that wouldn’t have happened.”  

This narrative becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. When you’re interacting with a woman, and you expect her not to like you, you’ll act different than if you expect her to like you. Your insecurities will show up in your behavior, and when she rejects you, you’ll think, “It’s because I’m Asian.” Then you’ll become even more insecure, women will like you even less, and so on. 

You can’t change your race, but you can change many of the other factors that create sexual attraction. 
The guy who wants to get rich but has a poor family can work twice as hard as his competition, and within a few years he can get to a point where he’s making a six-figure income.  

Similarly, a short Asian guy with a below average face can succeed with women IF he works twice as hard as his competition and focuses on the factors that are under his control. His level of self-confidence is under his control, his style and fitness are under his control, and his ability to take social risks is under his control. 

Look, with the above example, I said that the guy with a poor family could make six-figures, I didn’t say he can become a billionaire. Being a billionaire probably requires a certain amount of luck, the right family, being born in right time and place, the right genetics, etc. 

But anyone can make six-figures with enough time and effort. The same is true in dating. If you’re naturally a four on a looks scale, I can’t promise that you’ll be able to date Victoria’s Secret models, but you can still bat way out of your league and hook up with attractive girls. 

By treating dating as a skillset, you can date higher quality women than you would otherwise. If you fixate on whether you can get “perfect tens” you’re just going to cause yourself frustration. 

We have these fantasies, whether it’s to be a billionaire or to sleep with “10s”. These fantasies stifle us because they’re so far outside of our reality. Worry about pulling “10s” when you can already pull “9s” easily. 
Treat dating like a skillset by taking it one step at a time. Don’t spend much time learning how to build attraction when you still have crippling approach anxiety.

I know a guy who’s great at getting women attracted to him, but he always chokes by leaving the interaction before anything sexual can happen. He would massively improve his results if he focused on leading interactions forward by inviting the girl to the dance floor, to another area, etc. 

I know another guy who is great at opening girls, but he’s so quiet they don’t pay attention to him. He would gain so much by working on his volume.

I know a third guy who is great at dating girls who aren’t particularly attractive. But he won’t even approach girls who he thinks are pretty. He’s unnecessarily limiting himself to only date women that are far worse looking than he is!

I could give countless examples like the above. No, these guys can’t change their race, but they can learn to lead interactions forward, to speak louder, or to approach more attractive women.
 
In dating, there countless factors that are under your control. Worrying about the things outside your control is silly when there are so many things you can proactively improve on. 

Don’t think about your race, think about your confidence. Don’t think about your height, think about your inability to approach attractive women. 

Treat dating as a skill, and you can improve your results dramatically. Treat it like something entirely based on your genetics, and you’ll just drown yourself in self-pity.
 
&nbsp;

###Skill Only Comes with Practice

&nbsp;

The other key to treating dating like a skill, is to practice. If you spent 5 hours a week reading about how to pass a basketball, but never went out and played the game, people would think you’re an idiot. 

Yet it’s common for guys to spend dozens-  if not hundreds - of hours learning about how to attract women, without going out into the world and practicing. Intellectual learning is only useful if you’re spending most of your time in the real world getting real feedback.

Imagining what a good basketball shot looks like is completely different from taking the actual shot. Similarly, imagining what a good approach looks like is completely different from doing the approach. Information is only helpful to provide some guidance, it can’t do the work for you. Only real practice can.

It’s a lot easier to read about picking up women than it is to actually do it. I know this as well as anyone. When I first learned about the seduction community, I spent over a year watching videos without doing a single approach.
Was it helpful? No. If anything, my social skills got worse because I became so overanalytical. Learning how to attract women without practicing is just as absurd as trying to learn any other skill without practicing. 

Treating dating like a skillset is difficult. It takes patience, time, and effort to do so. Here are some resources that can help you if you get stuck: 


1.	https://www.amazon.com/Trial-Transform-Dating-Eight-Weeks-ebook/dp/B06XV14VDN/ref=sr_1_3?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1521851329&sr=1-3&keywords=real+social+dynamics. 
2.	Skype Coaching. A good coach will help you stay motivated and learn faster than you would otherwise because he has a good sense of how to learn this skillset. 
A.	https://www.toddvdating.com/online-coaching/ Todd is very experienced and a great analytical thinker. With his popularity comes a high price tag, though. 
B.	https://rptheory.lpages.co/transformative-coaching/ First session is free, so you can get a sense of whether it’s going to be helpful to you without having to pay anything. 

&nbsp;

# Conclusion: How to be More Attractive to Women

&nbsp;

There you have it, how to be more attractive to women. Each of the four tips can change your life individually, but master all four and you won’t believe the successes you’ll have. 

Reading is how to do this is the easy part, becoming more attractive to women is a long-term process. Remember, anyone who tells you it’s going to be easy - that you can use some “hack” to succeed with women – is more interested in making money than in helping you improve. 

Changing your life is hard, but what’s the alternative? Approaching women can be painful, but not nearly as painful as it would be to settle for a woman you’re not impressed with because “she was the best you could get”. 

Fortunately, most of the factors that make a man attractive to women are under your control. If you’re willing to treat dating like a skill, you can master it.


References: 
1.	This isn’t to say you should NEVER use a technique. They can be useful to get a feel for a principle of social dynamics that you don’t naturally utilize. For example, if you’re a nice guy, it could be useful to practice using some push-pull to get a feel for what being polarizing means and to get comfortable with being less agreeable. The technique isn’t going to attract women on its own, but it might help you get over your insecurities/limiting beliefs. 
Just that, don’t even ask out if that’s too intimidating right away

Talk to that cute girl at Target, the gas station, the library, the mall, the bar, etc

Just fucking get used to interacting with other humans, vary the length of the talk, sometimes longer, sometimes a light compliment and go away, if you see the conversation is going really really well and you two have chemistry, ask out

But don’t make it your main goal, just the mere cold approaching and small talk should be a victory

That’s how your warm up and lose your fucking anxiety

I just did it a lot today, feels greatAfter reading No More Mr. Nice Guy by Dr. Robert Glover, I became quite 'woke' about ways in which I deny myself and disrespect myself. I decided to start putting myself first more, and valuing myself in new small ways each day. Here are some of them.

1. At my climbing gym, a common occurrence would be that I would get up to approach a route or the water fountain at the same time as someone else. I would always give way to them with a hand gesture. I recently started holding back from that act, and allowing them to allow me to go first. Rather than submitting myself to them right away.
2. Forgiving myself for imperfect days. When I went to the gym, and didn't quite climb so well, or compete as well as I thought I could, I would just be proud of myself for showing up, and treat myself to a beer for that accomplishment alone. The old me would start to quit things after one or two so-so days, but I'm not doing that anymore.
3. Not texting back after mediocre dates/half ass yeses. The old me would text a girl back no matter what after a date, even if I was not super interested. Or, for example, a girl I asked out recently said she was "kinda seeing someone but not seriously". I chose to not pursue those, and to come from an abundance mindset. To paraphrase models, "fuck yes, or no".
4. Cooking my eggs and coffee perfectly every time. I love having coffee in the morning, with a pour over, and eggs in my ramen. I used to make them super inconsistently, some days the coffee would be perfect, others too bitter. Some eggs perfectly cracked, some botched. Now I make a point of making it correctly every time, I know how to after all. And I enjoy my breakfasts and dinners all the more because of it.

Since I've started this, Ive been going to the gym far more consistently, making more friends, and feeling better about myself over all. So, fellow recovering nice guys, anyways in which you are looking out for yourself more these days?You probably had an unusual or somewhat rough past, that cannot be denied. I'd venture to say that you were told quite often growing up that you are not enough or had life circumstances that made you out to be small. That childish naive attitude and free flow got beaten down and crushed by bad people, bad circumstances, and the overall imperfect storm. 

Now, you doubt yourself. You feel that you are not good enough. Well, the post is not here to give you the motivation crap of you doing anything you set your mind to. Motivational seminars have not done it for you at all. Your confidence is to a point where life has beat you down so poorly and you have been told time and time again that you are not good enough.

Not good enough for a pretty girl, not good enough for a great job, not good enough for opportunities that others get, and not good enough to have cool friends. A motivational seminar is not going to do the trick for you but hopefully, this epiphany will.

Read below:

https://millennialbachelor.com/2020/08/23/to-any-guy-out-there-having-confidence-issues/Let's say you've been talking to a girl and **you ask her what she does for a living.** She says *"my job is <insert job>":*

**Now a lot of guys would respond with** *"Oh cool, do you like that?"* This might seem like a reasonable question to ask but it usually results in a one-word answer of "yes" or "no." Which is a lot tougher to work with and keep the conversation going.

**A slightly better response might be** *"Oh cool. why did you choose that?"* This question is pretty deep so if she is outgoing and career oriented I'm sure it could be a good question. But if she is shy or doesn't like her job then this question might throw her off and typically the answers I get from this are some form of "I don't know." Very tough to work with if you are trying to keep the conversation going.

**The best response imo is** *"Oh cool. How did you get into that?"* **The how question invites her to tell a story and doesn't require her to do any soul-searching.** Here its impossible to give a one-word answer and the tone is a little less judgemental. Typically from this, I get girls who will say "Oh well I majored in <major> and from there I transition to <internship> and then to <job>." This response gives you a lot more to work with if you are trying to keep the conversation going and a lot more for you to talk about.

There is no exact science to conversations but if you want to start having better ones with girls (or really anybody) **I would recommend using "how" questions more.**


If you found this helpful you might like my YouTube channel, https://www.youtube.com/c/TheSingleGuyIn this interview clip, Matt Damon talks about the epiphany that he had early on when auditioning for acting roles.

[Matt Damon Interview Clip](https://youtu.be/TSL328VQ1oc)

When you view the other party as someone who is actually rooting for your success, it helps alleviate your anxiety. This directly applies to approaching people and starting conversations. When you realize that they are rooting for you to be an awesome person whose presence would enhance their lives, then there is less to fear.Unless you’re looking for commitment, dont waste too much time on one girl that isnt receptive. Dont be afraid to move on to the next girl. Theres millions out there to meet after all!I want you to try something.  For 90 days, don't watch porn, don't masturbate, don't have sex, and don't go out and try to approach women.  What do you think will happen?

"I'll lose all the progress I've made at getting women."

It's actually the opposite.  When you're not busy chasing women, you're busy improving yourself in other areas of your life.  You may start working out if you don't already.  You may start trying to build certain good habits.  You may do things that will push your comfort zones like Intermittent Fasting or taking cold showers.  You'll notice that you'll start doing activities that will increase your testosterone.  When you increase your testosterone, you'll become more attractive to women.

So one day you might be at the park, but this time a woman might come up to you and ask you where did you get a certain food you're eating... even though she can see the bag where you got it from and the place where you got it from is right across the street from the park.  She just wanted to break the ice.

You won't need to learn how to "open a set" because all you will start doing is going up and talking to women without even thinking about it.  When you take porn away and tell yourself, "The only way you're gonna bust a nut is after a certain amount of days and it has to be with a human woman", your brain will start rewiring itself to make this happen.  You'll notice you're talking to women more without an agenda because you're trying not to have sex for a certain period of time.  You'll start looking at women with more confidence because you understand that women are attracted to confidence and, subconsciously, your brain is making you do things to increase a woman's attraction to you so you'll have a higher chance of giving the body what it wants... an orgasm.

Pretty soon, you'll be the guy who other men envy because you have a lot of women trying to get your attention.  You'll have women attracted to you... even though you're not giving them too much of your attention.  While other men are trying to get a girl, she's too busy trying to attract your attention instead.It was a very simple approach and I just wanted to post about it to give all of you guys that still haven't *tried* a little bit of encouragement. Because **even if all you do is smile, shake a girl's hand and asked for her name, you've probably made her day and you'll get more experience.**  Anyway, here is a small experience from a female perspective.  It was really eye opening for me and I wanted to share.

----

I was texting someone as I passed by him, he immediately jumped in line with me and asked if I'd heard the funny advertisement in the store (In Barnes and Noble employees do "ads" for the cafe).  I had no idea what he was talking about, but it snapped me out of my phone. 

I blinked at him a few times and he kept walking next to me as if he was leaving the store as well (I'm sure he wasn't).  "No, I wasn't paying attention," I replied.  I asked him what it was, he stumbled around it, and over his words, obviously not prepared for the question.  But he just laughed it off and *said that the next time I'm in Barnes and Noble and hear a silly announcement to listen up and think of the crazy guy named Alex.*  

Up until now, it just seemed like a passing encounter so it didn't put me on guard so none of it made me feel uncomfortable.

As he reached out his hand and said his name, he paused, waiting for me to say mine.  It seems like it's an instinctual response to say your name in response when greeted with a handshake and someone else's name, so I told him and he said it was nice to meet me and I told him to take care and we started to walk away. 

**THIS IS WHAT CAUGHT MY ATTENTION**

After we'd taken a few steps away from each other he turned back around, and said, "Hey, let me buy you a cup of coffee?"  I really couldn't at the moment because I was in a rush so we ended up talking for a minute and somehow we ended up exchanging phone numbers, he asked if he should call or text which I appreciated.

*BUT*, stepping away for a second gave me just a quick second to smile and think, "Huh, he was nice." And just as soon as I had that thought is when he made his request.  Had I not been in a rush, I definitely would have taken him up on the offer.  

**tl;dr** Even if you attempt to make a brief connection and get a girl's name, it's probably going to make her day.  Don't be a chicken shit, just do it. :)

**EDIT:** I'm really shy about posting this, I don't really have a lot of point to it other than to give some people a different perspective and hopefully encourage someone to take a chance today. :)

EDIT 2: I have no way of knowing if he was actually a practicing PUA or just a confident guy, but what he did still made enough of an impact on me that I thought I would share, since my experience was positive and I wish more guys would approach me exactly like this.  Even if I wasn't interested, it still would make my day.Just a small tip that helps immensely. It may have been said before, but if so, here's a reminder.

Every time you're out and feel a bit uncomfortable in a social situation, or you're between sets and not talking to anyone for a minute you get that temptation to pull out your phone to appear busy... DON'T DO IT. 

Instead, try looking around and count the number of people who are on their phones and smile to yourself, because you are already demonstrating higher value than they are. That should boost your confidence enough to re-engage in being social. 

Whenever I leave my phone in my pocket, I end up meeting people, and I usually close at least one girl by the end of the night. Your email/internet connection is a crutch, and it holds you back. 

As even more incentive, while you're counting who is on their phone, find a girl in that group and go talk to her. If she's on her phone, she's in serious need of someone to relieve her anxiety and will usually be very grateful for an approach. Even if she's just standing with some guy nervously checking his phone, if you walk up and give her that charming, cocky smirk and introduce yourself, you'll seem like a real man to her compared to the guy being anti-social on his phone. 

Force yourself to be present and approachable, women will notice.So for context I matched with this girl on a dating app , I’d say she’s a solid 8-9/10 . Shes done some paid product promotion Instagram  but doesn’t have a huge following but posts a lot.
So anyway I got her number and her Instagram.  I google her Instagram and accidentally stumbled upon her Twitter  so I have a little look and she frequently posts thoughts and what not from her day on there. any way that’s  just a bit of background that will become relevant in a moment 

So I asked her out for some drinks she said yes, we set a time and place . About 2 hours before the date  I’m in the shower I get a message  that she wants to reschedule . I open it read the message then finish my shower and respond about 8 mins after reading it .  I kept the response light didn’t make a fuss and said sure we can reschedule and asked if she had a day in mind.  I then continued with the rest of my evening.

About an hour later my curiosity peaked so I had a look at her Twitter , imagine my surprise to find  that a mere 6 minutes after she had messaged me about cancelling she had posted on Twitter essentially saying how she hates it when a guy gets upset when she cancels  followed by a “lool”
This post was before I had even responded to her text … so how she managed to come to the conclusion that I was upset is beyond me ? 😂 She literally made up a story about a guy (me) getting upset  and posted it to Twitter before I even responded to the cancellation.

So what are your guys thoughts what’s going on here? Thought this was quite interesting .In other words girls should not be the result but the side effect. Focus on yourself, improve every aspect of yourself: Physical, Mental, Emotional and Spiritual. Once you do this nothing will prevent you from achieving your goals.There are three types of compliments. Here are an example of each of the three:

"I like your dress."
"That is a nice dress."
"That dress looks nice on you."

Notice the subtle difference with each 3. The first one is complimenting yourself. The second one is complimenting the dress. The third one is complimenting the woman.

It is a habit to use the first or second one because it takes the pressure off of us. But it also loses much of the impact on the woman receiving the compliment.

It's a subtle difference but one I recommend incorporating in your complimenting routine.When you interact with women they will subconsciously size you up. Women get hit on all the time and they need to be able to weed out the "low value" men and attract the "high value" men. After years of being hit on by lots of men, women have naturally developed the ability to quickly determine whether a man is worth their time or not. 

The list below is made up of things that you should NOT do if you want to create attraction in women and avoid "turning women off".

1) Seeking Validation and Approval From Women - Most men interact with women in hopes that the women they interact with will validate and approve them. So, their behavior becomes manipulative and this is gives women a reason to put up a defensive wall when men try to approach and talk to them. 

When you interact with a woman you have the opportunity to stand out from most guys by taking your "mask off" and having a "real" interaction with her. What this means is you should let go of the urge to impress the woman, and just have a genuine interaction with her. 

Forget about trying to be the cool guy or the funny guy. Just be present to the moment and let go of expectations or attachment to the outcome.

The problem with seeking validation and approval from women is that it communicates a form of manipulation that women are well aware of. 

Women know that men will pretend to be nice or act like they have all these things in common with them because they want to get in their pants. Men will pretend to be confident, cool, or successful just to impress them. 

What you need to keep in mind is that you are not the first man that a woman has interacted with. She has experience interacting with tons of different men, and she has the ability to detect subtleties in your behavior that communicate "this guy is full of shit". 

So, instead of trying to be the perfect guy when you interact with women, "let go" and just be real. Be who you truly are and don't apologize for who you are. If the "real you" is unable to connect with the woman you're interacting with, then it means you're not compatible with that woman and you should move on to another woman. 

2) Fear of Rejection - Most men are so afraid of rejection that they won't approach a woman in the first place. However, the fear of rejection is something you have to deal with both before and during the approach. 

Once you muster up the courage to approach a woman, you still have to maintain that courage throughout the entire interaction with that woman. When you interact with a woman she will subconsciously pick up on whether or not you're truly a confident guy or if you're just putting on a front.

Feeling the fear of rejection is not the problem, the problem comes when you let that fear control you. There will be points in your interaction where you will need to risk possible rejection in order to move the interaction further. 

If you let the fear of rejection hold you back from taking risks within the interaction, the woman you're interacting with will notice that on a subconscious level and that communicates to her emotional weakness.

Most women are looking for an emotionally strong man, so you need to embrace rejection as a part of life, and don't let it hold you back from leading and taking risks in your interactions with women.

3) Avoiding and/or Not Maintaining Eye Contact - When you see a woman you find attractive and she looks back at you, the last thing you want to do is look away. When you look away, you communicate weakness, and you communicate to a woman that you're intimidated by her beauty.

What you should do instead, is hold strong eye contact with her and smile. Maintaining strong eye contact and smiling at a woman communicates confidence and social intelligence. Most men have a hard time holding eye contact with women in the initial approach and throughout their interactions with women. 

By maintaining eye contact when you're talking to a woman you will stand out from most men and communicate that you're comfortable in the presence of a woman.

4) Decreasing In Value - When a woman interacts with you, she is subconsciously paying attention to how much value you have. 

There are the obvious values that us men can communicate such as looks, money, and wealth, and then there are other values such as leadership, dominance, personality, and preselection to name a few. 

Each time you communicate with a woman you have the opportunity to increase or decrease your perceived value in her eyes. 

When you interact with a woman and she notices that your value is decreasing, she will begin to lose attraction for you. If your value continues to decrease over a long period of time, you will eventually turn her off completely. 

If your goal is to attract beautiful women in your life and keep them in your life, then you need to increase your value daily and communicate your increased value to the women you interact with consistently.

5) Giving Your Power Away - One of the fastest ways to turn a woman off is to give your power away to her. Letting a woman boss you around, letting her call the shots, and not standing up for yourself is not an effective way to attract women. Women are attracted to powerful men. 

If you're a powerful man, you should maintain your power when you interact with women. 

I know guys who are tough around their friends and don't take shit from anybody, but if you put those same guys around women, they start acting like little pussycats. All of a sudden they will start agreeing with everything the woman says, and they will try to be polite and nice. 

If you want to create and increase attraction with the women you meet, you should never give your power away. Know your values, and what you stand for, and don't back down when a woman challenges you. Women will challenge you to see if you're mentally and emotionally strong enough to deal with them, and if you submit to their challenges then you will communicate weakness.

6) Weak body language - One of the ways women can determine whether you're a man of value or not is through your body language. The way you carry yourself speaks louder than words. 

If you walk around with your head down, avoiding eye contact, shoulders hunched, and a frown on your face, you will communicate that you are a low value man with no self-esteem. 

Women are very good at noticing subtleties in our body language that communicate weakness and submissiveness. Your body language is an outside expression of your beliefs and thoughts. If you let negative thoughts and doubts take control of your mind then it will show in your body language. 

Just keep this in mind when you interact with women. Women are constantly observing your body language and in most cases it communicates more to a woman than what comes out of your mouth.

7) Being Timid and Unsure Of Yourself - When you interact with women it's always best to own what you say and own what you do, even if what you're doing might seem wrong. For example, if you make a silly joke and the woman doesn't laugh, you should own the joke and continue the conversation. The wrong thing to do would be to apologize for making the joke, or stop making jokes because she didn't laugh. 

You need to know who you are and accept yourself before any woman will accept you. If you're going to do something, do it 100% and don't hold back. 

If you want to approach a woman then approach her. If you want to talk to a woman about sports, then talk to her about sports. If you want to ask a woman on a date, then ask her on a date. 

Don't wait for the perfect moment or take actions in a sheepish manner. Be decisive. Know exactly what you want to do and go for it 100%. 

Not every woman is going to accept your advances but at least they will respect you for going for what you want.Holy shit, it's been a while! I moved back to America, got a job, smoked a ton of weed, and basically ignored self improvement the entire time. I got rusty. I stagnated. Then I realized I hated my job, and got another job based around Japan again. My new job involves lots of travel (good!) with a relatively static social group living together, including many cute girls (better!). I stepped up to the plate...

...and immediately crashed and burned. I went through all the rookie mistakes: One-itis. Nice Guy Syndrome. The Pedestal. Chasing her. Buying gifts. And most damningly, forgetting that my mission must trump all. It's like I thought I could ignore the gym for a year, then jump right back in and squat 400. NO. SIR.

So I got my ass handed to me righteously. I got dark. I got sad. Then I got up, and I got to work. Back to the gym. Back to my music. Back to my studies. Back to seddit. It feels great to be on the horse again. It feels like the clouds parting and the light shining through. It feels like seeing a good friend after years apart, and that friend is The Truth.

I am thrumming. I am alive with excitement and hope. I know that failure is temporary, as long as I am willing to get back up, to keep moving, to learn, and to act on those lessons. All that negativity I felt earlier was valid, as a lesson. But I am not condemned to be that negativity, to live in that darkness. I have all the tools to keep growing and glowing. They have always been there, even when I was blind to them, willingly or unknowingly.

I do not need to stumble and grope after women, perpetually stung by the cold winds of their indifference, or at best barely comforted in the meager glow of a lukewarm romance. There are women everywhere, and there is only one of me.

I am the prize.

I will build a temple of myself, a glorious monument to achievement, passion, ambition and dedication. I will decide the course of my life, and persevere with my own interests in mind. I will not need to chase my dreams, for they rest firmly in my hands. I see proof of them with every authentic action I take.

I am the prize, and because I know I am the prize, I do not fear rejection. Women cannot reject me. They can only reject themselves from the glory of my company. If she does not like me, she was never meant to be to my liking, and I thank her for not wasting my time. There is no woman worth compromising my authenticity, for the second I do so, I am no longer the prize.

I am the prize. It may be frustrating at first, not to throw myself at every opportunity for sex. But I am worth more than sex. I deserve more than sex. I deserve a woman who excites me. I deserve a woman who respects me. I deserve a woman who intrigues me. I deserve a woman who inspires me. I deserve a woman who cares for me. Why?

Because I am the prize. How do I know I am the prize? I prove it every day, every moment, with my actions. I strive, unceasingly, to be the best version of myself. I strengthen my body. I sharpen my mind. I explore the world with an insatiable curiosity. I do not allow mediocrity to seep into my life. I do not allow others to choose my identity or decide my destiny. I make mistakes, and I laugh at them, because laughter is one of the best things there is, and then I learn from them, because a mistake is just a lesson clothed in temporary failure. I have one life, and I will not disrespect the infinite improbability of my very existence by squandering it daydreaming about what could have been.

Simply put: I demand excellence of myself—why shouldn’t I demand it of women? Love is crucial to life, but life is so much bigger than love, and only a big life, a life filled with adventure and effort and passion, will be large enough to hold love and keep it burning, without crumbling under its weight or being consumed in its fire.

I don’t worry about them, and when I do, I remember not to. I worry about me. Why? Because.

I am the prize.

**EDIT: Wow, I didn't expect this to blow up at all! I'm very happy to see others get inspired and GET TO WORK! For the haters, I can understand how this seems arrogant or narcissistic, but this post comes from a place of humility. I thought I could be The Prize without doing the work, and life served me a huge slice of humble pie. Woe unto he who shirks doing the work. To better yourself, you must understand your faults. So I owned up. I started doing the work. I realized that doing the work is the source of all that is good in a man's life.**

**Being the prize is not about unreasonable self-aggrandizement. It is about commitment to becoming a better person. It is about taking PRIDE in having the strength and perseverance to make that commitment. If you choose, day in and day out, to walk the difficult, righteous path of being better than you were the day before, then I salute you. And you deserve to feel damn good about yourself, to feel valuable, to feel sexy, and to feel like women would be lucky to have you.**I’ve been spending some time with this one girl. I guess we hit it off and she invited me to her place. Must’ve been keen because she invited me over again 2 days later. Anyways, since I’ve been seeing this girl, 4 other girls have hit me up in the DM’s. One girl said she was looking over our old messages during iso, and the others replied to a story I posted on Instagram. It’s like girls are attracted to guys that don’t give them their attention (something that’s preached about on seddit)

It’s kind of frustrating. My dating life was dead for about six months and now all of a sudden it’s been non-stop. Gotta ride the momentum though and not get one-itis!Hello bois,

Did my first approach today. Was kind of cringe but I'm hella proud of myself. She was working at a grocery store and I noticed her. Walked by and chickened out talking to her. Went to another area of the store and told myself to stop being a pussy. Worked up the courage to go back over by her again, walked passed basically chickening out, and then I just said "hey I was walking by and liked your shirt, and I wanted to meet you." Had some small talk, I  think she was into me at first but then I was interrupting her at times and was in my own head. At the end I asked for her number but she said she had a boyfriend. I take that as a rejection but I don't mind, I'm just proud that I did something that scared the aboslute shit out of me.Have you ever met someone so uninhibited it makes you uncomfortable? 

Someone who makes you feel like they really shouldn’t be sharing the embarrassing personal anecdotes they’re lobbing at you within five minutes of meeting them? 

A lot of times it’s a person whose blood-alcohol level is 3x your neighborhood panhandler’s. Sometimes it’s not. Some people either have it in them naturally or they’ve conditioned themselves to become exceptionally comfortable sharing their innermost insecurities, addictions, and imperfections.

Whatever the reason for their behavior, these are the people you remember.

I’m going to be honest. I don’t remember people who are polite, inhibited, or afraid of a little controversial conversation. People who act like they’re perfect even though no one (including themselves) actually believes it. I remember the ones who wear their faults on their sleeves. The ones who are honest with themselves and aren’t afraid to share both the “acceptable” and “unacceptable” parts of themselves. Brutal honesty leads to fun, memorable interactions. It leads to deep and meaningful connections. And it can lead to an insanely seductive persona, in both men and women.

Let me use a guy I met in Shanghai as an example. Let’s call him “Rob.”

The man was a savage.
Right from the get-go he was spilling his guts out. 
Within an hour of meeting him, I’d learned all about his various relationships and how a few of them ended in brutal heartbreak.
He gave me the low-down on his current girlfriend (“she’s a crazy bitch!) shortly after. 

When I asked what his impression of China has been as an American man, he was hilariously and brutally honest. He claimed that China is: “A man’s paradise. The women adore us. And even though we fuck all of their women...the men love us.”

He was unabashed about his love for substances.
Within twenty minutes of meeting, he was describing his various drug and alcohol addictions. We were practically complete strangers. It was wild. Socially inappropriate? Yes. But very funny.

The man could talk. He’d dive into everyday subjects for 20 minutes at a time, going off on subjects as simple as his personal garden or even the chicken sausage he ordered at a diner. His over-the-top descriptions and grandiose plans were half-inspiring, half-unbelievable. As in I didn’t actually believe them. But they were intriguing. That’s more than you can say for most people. They really made you wonder about what else he’d have cooking in the near future.

That kind of excitement and passion makes you want to be around a person. His lengthy descriptions gave vivid meaning to everyday occurrences I probably wouldn’t even have noticed. His overly crude jokes made me feel like I could be comfortable being as open and filthy as I wanted to be. It was refreshing.

He was also hospitable as fuck. A lot of times guys (myself included) think that if you “don’t give a fuck” it means you have to be rude to people. That you can’t be genuinely kind or caring. That couldn’t be further from the truth. “Not giving a fuck” doesn’t mean you don’t give a fuck about people. It means you are the way you are and you don’t give a fuck whether they approve of you or not.

Am I telling you all this because I met some dude who made over-the-top jokes and didn’t give a fuck? Not really. I’m writing about him because he reminded me of the part of myself I’m always searching for. The part of me that comes out when I’m “in the zone.” He had a certain quality everyone who’s good with women has. It’s a little hard to describe but I’ll try.

There’s something in every one of us that’s dying to escape. A repressed, free-spirited part of us that’s begging to get out. It bubbles up from time to time, usually when we’re in an insanely great mood. It can come out after a big success at work or when you win a big bet. It can come out when you’re at a music festival, theme park, or when you’ve had the perfect amount of alcohol and you’re feeling on top of the world. The few who can release their innermost and truest self on a regular basis are the ones who become masters at attraction and dating.

I’m not saying it’s me. I’m far from being fearless on command and having zero inhibitions about approaching strange, beautiful women. But I do feel like I’m getting closer. And it comes from bringing out your inner “Rob.” The part of you that comes out when you’re feeling great and you can’t be stopped. The part of you that doesn’t give a fuck what anyone thinks, because you have an ultimate self-confidence that can’t be disturbed.

Women want a man who’s sure of himself. A man who knows who he is, what he wants,  and isn’t afraid to go after it. Why? Because that man can protect her. His courage, confidence and willpower are the signals of security they need to feel safe. 

Before you can get that amazing girlfriend, before you can start attracting women everywhere you go, you have to become insanely comfortable with yourself. The true you. Blemishes and all. 

EDIT: I know some people hate links but I've got more writing at www.honestpickup.com if anyone's interested. Not trying to promote, just want people to get as much free help as they want/need. Peace.If I don’t make the effort, I can expect to remain single. It’s as simple as that.

If I DO make the effort, even if I get rejected, I can still say that I tried.As every second passes by, as each and every breath you take you are closer and closer to death.

&#x200B;

Think about it.

&#x200B;

All of us have a finite time here on this earth. Some more than others.

&#x200B;

Hell you think you still have at least 30+ years of life left to do cold approach? That you have time to wait? Haha that is the biggest delusion that you have convinced yourself to believe.

&#x200B;

Let's say today you were in your head again and you prevented yourself from approaching that girl you see passing by. You think to yourself "Maybe I should approach." But you go back and forth in your head about the consequences of such actions. Time passes and the girl is 2 miles away now. You end up not taking the chance. The opportunity just passed.

&#x200B;

Tomorrow comes and on your way to work/school and BOOM you're hit by a fucking bus. Now your last few minutes are going to be filled with regret. **Amplify this by all of the times you played it safe and didn't take the chance.** Imagine the weight of that would be.

&#x200B;

What is certain is that tomorrow is uncertain. You could say "I'll be good enough to approach when x happens." X could be "when I get fit, when I am rich, when I improve my looks, when I get this one thing that will make me feel good enough to approach."

You're feeding yourself bullshit

That mindset has to shift and you have to believe with every fiber of your being that

**"I AM AND ALWAYS WILL BE GOOD ENOUGH RIGHT NOW."**

&#x200B;

You're not getting any younger, **go do the damn approach you fucking player!**Apologies this will be long, because I want to tell the story in full...

&#x200B;

I'm 30 years old and slept with 26 girls, and had a monogamous 8 year and 2 year relationship. Recently after breaking up with my girlfriend of 8 years I've found my skills with women have really deteriorated. I used to find it easy to get laid and suddenly it is challenging, probably due to the long relationship killing my ability to throw chat effectively. I'm not a pickup artist and I've never formally studied game.

&#x200B;

So starting about 2 weeks ago I've been practicing game while on holiday in Europe. I've been going out 4 times per week to clubs to approach girls (been out about 8-10 times in total), and also approaching girls during the day occasionally. I've been watching the TenGame series, but I've been making sure to spend a maximum of 10% of the time watching pickup videos and 90% of the time actually going out in the field. I've just been watching the videos of Julian actually in the field and trying to understand the vibe he projects.

&#x200B;

One interesting thing I've noticed is that the attractiveness of a girl has no relation to how well the approach will go. Super hot girls aren't any more rude when you initiate a conversation than unattractive girls. So I've been just approaching any girl I find attractive basically, and not trying to pick girls who are "in my league" or whatever.

&#x200B;

I made out with a hot girl a couple days ago, but last night was my first time getting laid with a hot girl the same night after cold approaching her. So here's the report:

&#x200B;

Last I caught a taxi into Madrid with some friends and brought a wristband that gets you into 4 different clubs.

&#x200B;

First club is completely dead except for a couple making out on a chair, and a hot bartender. I talk to the bartender for a bit, just asking when the club gets busy and random shit. I tell her I'll write a good Tripadvisor review for her if she gives me a free drink and she does. We talk shit for a bit and then I talk to my friends again.

&#x200B;

There's no-one in the entire club but the couple making out so I approach the guy and tell him we're including him in our group because the club is dead so we all need to be friends. He doesn't speak much English but we all introduce ourselves and have some chit-chat. I'm not going to be a dickhead and hit on his girlfriend, so after the conversation gets boring I grab my friends and we go to a second club.

&#x200B;

Second club is much busier. I'm at the bar when I notice a hot girl standing next to me. I see her look over at me so I immediately look at her, and ask her about whether her wristband is the same as mine. Just a really generic situational comment but we get talking for a while. She's from LA, I joke around with her about whether she's a Trump supporter, tease her for a while, and the situation feels flirty. There's a few pauses in the interaction so I just chill and don't try to fill the silence, to demonstrate that I'm comfortable with a small lull from time to time.

&#x200B;

Her friend comes over so I immediately handle the interruption by introducing myself and throwing a bit of chat at the friend. But her friend quickly drags her away to go to the bathroom together.

&#x200B;

I see a hot South American girl with a guy who has a neck tattoo, so I immediately walk over and compliment the guy on his tattoo, ignoring the girl. He thanks me but doesn't speak much English, and then I go rejoin my friends. I didn't think anything of this interaction but surprisingly this was the interaction that led to me getting laid.

&#x200B;

My friends are talking to some hot black girls so I walk in and join the conversation. We do the introductions and I joke around with them about the US because they are American.

&#x200B;

I notice one of the girls is left out of the conversation, so I walk up to her and say "Hey I need to ask you a really serious question". I walk past her so she turns away from the group and I followup "If you were seeing a guy how many dates would you need to go on with him before you'd feel comfortable eating chicken wings together? I mean spaghetti is a second date food, but chicken wings are fucking messy".

&#x200B;

The conversation immediately goes well and we are flirting and talking about relationships and basically sexual chat. We're standing sort of in the dance floor so I'm moving back and forth as I talk and doing push/pull, teasing her occasionally, and touching her a lot when I make points. It's kind of like I'm dancing around her as we chat.

&#x200B;

She asks for my WhatsApp and I joke around as she puts her number in my phone "Of course you Americans got the +1 prefix", etc. She suggests we go back to the first bar so I grab her hand and walk out the club, motioning her friends and my friends to follow.

&#x200B;

On the way out of the club I see the first girl from LA I approached and so I introduce the black girl and we have a bit of a chat. She tells me she's going on a bar crawl I can join later if I want.

&#x200B;

We all walk back to the first club and as I approach the door I see this super hot tall catwalk girl walking up to the club who rejected me the night before. The night before I opened her on the street, and we spent about 30 minutes chatting and got a drink together, but then the conversation went really sour and she just started seeming hostile - so I ended up ejecting to talk to other girls, figuring I'd accidentally offended her or something. I call her catwalk girl because she's a model who does catwalk stuff and is quite tall and just classically beautiful.

&#x200B;

I point at her "You again!" and walk up and hug her smiling. For some reason she's no longer hostile at me, and is actually being friendly. I introduce her to the black girls and we all go in the club.

&#x200B;

In the club catwalk girl starts dancing and she's just so goddahm sexy. It's really hard to avoid staring at her while she dances because she's doing all these hot moves, but I don't want to be like the rest of the guys in the clubs standing around making eyes at her. We are sort of grinding a little from time to time as we dance, and laughing with each other. But I just get this feeling that she's not really interested in hooking up, and just enjoys the attention of dancing while all the guys in the club stare at her and try to talk to her. So I just dance with her but without hitting on her, focusing more on talking to the black girls as I dance around.

&#x200B;

Then all of a sudden up walks the hot South American girl who was talking to the guy with the tattoo earlier. She gets my attention, and asks me if I'm gay because her friend like guys and he wants to have sex with me. I'm relatively muscular from working out at the gym, have decent dress sense, but I'm not otherwise a good-looking guy as I'm starting to go bald, am of average height, and just have a normal facial structure. I actually feel kind of complimented that this guy wants to fuck me based on looks alone.

&#x200B;

So I tell her that her friend is an attractive guy, and if I was guy I would be keen, but I'm into women. Then all of a sudden she grabs me, kisses me on the lips, and runs off. And when I say runs off I mean like she fucking sprints away.

&#x200B;

Everyone in our group is looking on in shock and laughing, so I shrug it off and make a comment to catwalk girl and start flirting with her again. I notice some hot girls come over and dance near us, and I get the distinct feeling that they want me to approach them, and are standing near me on purpose for this reason. But unfortunately I fail to act courageously and don't try to open them, my one regret of the night.

&#x200B;

Catwalk girl, the black girls and my friends all go outside to smoke hash, and catwalk girl says she's going home, while everyone else is going to a different club. So instead of going outside I take a walk to the back of the club to find the girl who kissed me. I don't smoke weed because it makes me anxious and would definitely throw my game off, but my friends all smoke the stuff.

&#x200B;

I spot her at the bar so I walk past her, then turn and say "Hi" and smile. I hold out my hands and she grabs them, so I pull her in to talk, but she immediately starts kissing me again. I kiss her back a little then push her off me and ask her name, where's she's from, etc. I don't know if there's a pickup principle behind doing this but it felt like the right thing to build some more general rapport instead of just continually making out.

&#x200B;

I put my number in her phone and get her to WhatsApp me, and I tell her I'm leaving the club, but I want to talk to her again later, so to text me if she changes clubs. We make out a bit more then I break it off and go outside.

&#x200B;

Catwalk girl is standing outside and all my friends are mobbing her for some reason, basically just ignoring all the black girls while they hit on catwalk girls. The black girls look kind of pissed, so I pull some of my friends aside and tell them to pay more attention to the black girls because catwalk girl is going home and it looks a little desperate to mob her.

&#x200B;

Then I talk to catwalk girl and just straight out ask her "what happened yesterday you seemed upset at the end of the night. Honestly I thought I offended you?"

&#x200B;

Then she just starts getting all fucking deep about how she is unhappy, and has depression from being bullied, and she covers up her depression by going out and trying to look happy, but sometimes the depression comes through and people think she's a bitch.

&#x200B;

Suddenly my mind is blown when I realised I didn't really get rejected the night before. Actually I just assumed the worst, and let my ego make me think it was all about me, when really she was just going through some mental health shit. I mean this girl is a fucking catwalk model and she is insecure still to this day from people bullying her while she was a teenager. Goes to show that you can't assume beautiful = confident in a women.

&#x200B;

Now we are having a deep conversation about mental health and happiness. It's not flirty and I don't think it's leading anywhere, but she's super hot and I'm enjoying the conversation so I sit down next to her and chat to her like I would to a guy friend.

&#x200B;

As we talk I notice the girl I hooked up with leave the club with her gay friend and walk past me. She glances at me but I pretend not to notice and keep talking to catwalk girl. Catwalk girl eventually calls an Uber and so we get the black girls and go to the a third club we haven't been to yet.

&#x200B;

On the way to the third club I text the girl with the gay friend to let her know I'm switching venues, and she tells me she's at the venue we're going to. Sweet!

&#x200B;

We walk in the venue and it's about 2am, so I realise it's time to start trying to actually bang a girl. There's plenty of girls I could still approach, and I could try and bang one of the black girls, or perhaps join the pub crawl the LA chick suggested, but I have a feeling the girl with the gay friend is my best option.

&#x200B;

I grab one of my friends, and ask him to come with me to occupy the gay friend. I find her in the club and we approach, and quickly we are making out again.

&#x200B;

I take her to the corner, and sit her on my lap and we start chatting and making out. I'm trying to build rapport and find out about who she is and where she's from, so it's more than just random making out.

&#x200B;

Then she gets a text and tells me her gay friend found a guy to fuck, and that has made it difficult for her to have somewhere to sleep.

&#x200B;

I instantly sense this is the time to strike, so I say "let's go to mine, you can stay there" and she nods and starts making out again. I call over my friend and ask him to get the house keys from whoever has them and to WhatsApp me our AirBNB address. He immediately understands the situation, and runs off to get the key and msg me the address for the Uber.

&#x200B;

He comes back with the keys and I take her hand and walk her straight out the club. As we exit we see her gay friend sitting down. Fuck, maybe he's failed to find dick and will stop her from leaving. I say hi to him in a friendly excited manner, and he just smiles and motions for us to leave. I secretly say a prayer that gay friend finds some dick tonight, because I'm so grateful he just wing-manned me like that. I love that gay guys don't try and cock block you.

&#x200B;

I'm making casual conversation with her at this point, trying to just be a little playful. I realise it's going to take quite a while to get home, at least 40 minutes because there's a huge walk to the Uber spot, so I need to be careful to keep the vibe.

&#x200B;

I keep being playful but asking personal questions to build rapport, and every time the conversation gets more serious I make it playful again.

&#x200B;

We eventually get the Uber and make the drive back to my place, arriving about 45 minutes after leaving the club. She still seems happy and keen, so I take her upstairs and motion the toilet to her if she needs to go.

&#x200B;

While she's in the toilet I quickly make the bed and remove all the dirty clothes and other shit from my room, basically making it chick-friendly.

&#x200B;

She finishes in the toilet and comes out and sits on the bed. I kiss her a little, then stop and ask her if she needs to set an alarm or put her phone on charge first. She says yes so I put her phone on charge, set an alarm for when she needs to wake up.

&#x200B;

I kiss her a little and lay her down on the bed. She seems very happy, and I can gauge at this point she isn't too drunk and that she's basically consenting to sex, so I take my shirt off, then take her pants off. I give her head for a little, then we both fully undress and fuck.

&#x200B;

It's really good sex, and after it's over she falls asleep on top of me while I'm still inside her.

&#x200B;

I lay there with my flaccid penis inside her as she gently snores, contemplating the fact I just got laid for the first time ever from a cold approach, and also the concerning fact that I've just had unprotected sex and ejaculated in a girl I've only known for less than 3 hours. In the excitement of successfully picking up I've completely forgotten that this kind of behaviour probably requires me to start using condoms. Oh well, let's just hope for the best this time.

&#x200B;

The next morning she initiates sex when we wake up, and then I order her an Uber to get to work. I text her a bit about how I had a good time, and we've been flirting ever since over WhatsApp. I'm leaving the country today but I'm definitely going to try and figure out a way to fuck her again soon because she's hot and cool - but next time I will definitely get some condoms first.

&#x200B;

I guess the lessons learned I've from this experience are:

&#x200B;

1. This cold approach game stuff really works, you can definitely get laid from cold approaching, and the physical attractiveness of women is fucking irrelevant when it comes to approaching them. The fucking hottest girls will make out with you, and the ugliest girls will reject you harshly. Beauty tells you nothing about how the approach will go.
2. I feel like all my interactions that go really well have a certain self-amusing "vibe" which comes from the way I feel about myself and my confidence in the moment. When I cultivate this self-amusing vibe I seem to naturally say all the right things.
3. It's massively helpful to approach a lot of guys at clubs for short conversations. If I hadn't approached the gay guy to compliment his tattoo I wouldn't have fucked his hot South American friend. It pays massively to just be social in general rather than ONLY focusing on approaching girls I find hot.
4. Just because I get rejected or blown out doesn't mean it's all about me. I thought I fucked up somehow, but actually the hot catwalk girl just had her own issues going on and the next night she was super friendly again.
5. I think the best strategy for clubs seems to be to spend the first part of the night getting in lots of conversations and identifying which girls I have the best vibe with to fuck. Then the second part of the night should be spent picking one of the girls I had the best connection with and focusing only on her.

&#x200B;

Thanks for reading and please give me any advice you can. What I did right, what I did wrong, whether I'm on the right track, etc.

&#x200B;

I'm going to be going out, throwing chat, and cold approaching a lot more in the future. I feel like it's just way better than all the other approaches to meeting women, because it cuts out all the bullshit involved with using dating apps or trying to meet girls through friends.Beginner Guides & essential material:

[Beginner Blueprint](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/21nw5f/my_beginner_blueprint_classic_information_in_the/)

[Complete Noobie / Beginner Guide To Game](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/aoy9hn/complete_noobie_beginner_guide_to_game/)

[COMPLETE guide to game](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/5vjrmz/my_complete_guide_to_game/)

[How To Approach a Girl You Don't Know](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sqj0Bo3-A0A)  (video)

[A Handy Guide on How to Ask a Girl Out, Yet Save Face for Both of You If She Isn’t Interested](https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/bm802o/a_handy_guide_on_how_to_ask_a_girl_out_yet_save/) (added 1/22/20)

[How to talk to women 101](https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/br2fik/how_to_talk_to_women_101/) (added 1/24/20)

[Guide to Perfect Eye Contact](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/8qykcm/jeans_joes_guide_to_perfect_eye_contact/) (added 1/26/20)

[Body Language](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mPHFIE1xoX0)  (added 1/27/20)

[Small Talk Cheat Sheet](https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/b8uarr/i_made_a_small_talk_cheat_sheet_for_a_client/) (added 2/21/2020)

&#x200B;

Recommended reading:

How to Be a 3% man by Corey Wayne

No More Mr. Nice Guy by Dr. Rober Glover

Models by Mark Manson

the Book of Pook

The Manual By  W Anton

The Way of the Superior Man - David Dieda (added 1/27/2020)

[https://pualib.com/](https://pualib.com/) (added 3/4/2020)

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Mindset:

[The Definitive Guide To Abundance And Scarcity With Women](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/aelenz/the_definitive_guide_to_abundance_and_scarcity/)

[Quick tips for combating neediness and overthinking](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/cjdojv/quick_tips_for_combating_neediness_and/)

[Don't try to get her interested](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/dnjzzo/dont_try_to_get_her_interested_attraction_is/)

[Can't get over that girl? Do you feel obsessive? Have a friend who is obsessed with a girl? Can't get over something in life?](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/40icdn/cant_get_over_that_girl_do_you_feel_obsessive/)

[Read This If You're Scared](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/2ssy1v/read_this_if_youre_scared/)

[The girl is not the goal. The goal is to become a happy, driven, successful, self-assured man](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/6cy7ii/the_girl_is_not_the_goal_the_goal_is_to_become_a/)

["She / he is out of my league" - 3 Tips](https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/dusrl4/she_he_is_out_of_my_league_3_tips/) (added 1/24/20)

&#x200B;

Building Confidence:

[10 Simple Exercises To Build Rock-Solid Self-Belief & Charisma](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/b6ku32/10_simple_exercises_to_build_rocksolid_selfbelief/)

[My guide to building confidence for those who have none](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3q6kqa/my_guide_to_building_confidence_for_those_who/)

[How To Have The Most Confidence You've Ever Had In Your Life](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/daf1aw/how_to_have_the_most_confidence_youve_ever_had_in/)

[35 Reasons Why You Should Stop Worrying & Just Be A Man Who Hits On Girls](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/au2cwo/35_reasons_why_you_should_stop_worrying_just_be_a/)

[3 Body Language Tips To Instantly Look More Attractive](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5rXnrq3L2N0)

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Style, Grooming, Fitness:

[Man's Guide To Looking Attractive (Collection Of Best Free Resources)](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/3cju8z/mans_guide_to_looking_attractive_collection_of/)

&#x200B;

Openers:

[Easy and effective opener](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/2in8vn/easy_and_effective_opener/)

&#x200B;

Flirting:

[6 Simple Flirting Examples That Create Sexual Tension (Without Being Sexual)](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/9wf1uh/6_simple_flirting_examples_that_create_sexual/)

[How To Flirt As An Introvert](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j4b5T-RAgec) (video)

[Super-Simple Flirting Method](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_k55geMKkU&t=2s) (video)

[How To Flirt Without Being Creepy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vbg6JFSY23M) (video)

[The Science of Flirting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5cQoGNEcc5Q) (video)

[Flirting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HWDGrUQr-60&t=74s) (video)

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Texting:

[Why Your Text Game Sucks](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1gnind/why_your_text_game_sucks/)

[Text Game](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7OZebLs6v7o) (video)

 [Person Texting Guide](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/ft1wiu/how_to_text_girls_guide_personal_tips/) 

&#x200B;

First date:

[How to Setup a Date](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/8etu8x/how_to_setup_a_date/)

[How To Have A Killer First Date Every Time](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/e4nd0h/how_to_have_a_killer_first_date_every_time/)

[What To Do On A Date](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bF8BWhqUGA) (video)

&#x200B;

Escalation:

[DiCarlo Escalation Ladder: Concise and Emphasized](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/hlmra/dicarlo_escalation_ladder_concise_and_emphasized/)

[Physical Escalation (With Example Exercises To Practise)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RRMh9UjQngA) (video)

[First Time Tips](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F_hGkcrgtdc) (video)

[Kissing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XEu5DZW4WJY) (video)

&#x200B;

The answer to your question (FAQs) :

[The answer to 50% of the questions on r/askseddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1qjfxt/the_answer_to_50_of_the_questions_on_raskseddit/)

[12 things that annoy me about this place](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1tk6tq/12_things_that_annoy_me_about_this_place/)

[Please Stop Confessing to Your Crushes](https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/e4quxi/advice_please_stop_confessing_to_your_crushes_ask/) (added 1/24)

[How can I find women efficiently?](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/4wzj81/how_can_i_find_women_efficiently/) (added 2/3)

[Where do I find women](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskWomen/comments/r27z4/need_advice_where_do_i_find_women_interested_in/) (added 2/3)

&#x200B;

Overcoming approach anxiety: (added 2/23)

[How did you guys get over approach anxiety?](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/cutote/how_did_you_guys_get_over_approach_anxiety_i/)

[My Golden Rule of pickup and how it helped me overcome approach anxiety.](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/b2eu1d/my_golden_rule_of_pickup_and_how_it_helped_me/)

[Killing Your Ego: The #1 Trick To Solve Your Approach Anxiety](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/9sey82/killing_your_ego_the_1_trick_to_solve_your/)

[How I overcame approach anxiety](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/b2x7hn/how_i_overcame_approach_anxiety/)

&#x200B;

Tips:

[Life hacks/Pro Tips/Bro Tips](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/ovn0w/life_hackspro_tipsbro_tips/)

[Quicktips I find Important](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/s3kgi/quicktips_i_find_important/)

&#x200B;

Motivation: (added 1/24)

[Most of the people you date will be emotionally unavailable](https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/cjlmt5/most_of_the_people_you_date_will_be_emotionally/)

[For men: honestly, you gotta go for the kiss.](https://www.reddit.com/r/dating_advice/comments/dr0i0l/for_men_honestly_you_gotta_go_for_the_kiss/)

[Nothing you read will make you feel better](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/ewjq6s/nothing_you_read_will_make_you_feel_better/) (added 2/23/2020)

[Matt Damon's Insight On Why You Should Not Fear Rejection](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/ealsre/matt_damons_insight_on_why_you_should_not_fear/)  (added 2/23/2020)

&#x200B;

Other important material:

[Learn to Love Small Talk](https://www.reddit.com/r/socialskills/comments/9tutjl/how_i_learned_to_sort_of_love_small_talk_or_at/) (added 2/21/2020)

[10 ways to have a better conversation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1vskiVDwl4) (added 1/27/2020)

[Never Run Out Of Things To Say To Women:Keep The Conversation Going Forever.](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/4seyc9/never_run_out_of_things_to_say_to_womenkeep_the/)

[How to tell if a girl likes you](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/aa8704/how_to_tell_if_a_girl_likes_you/)

[Getting Laid Will Not Solve Your Problems](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/dr5y7y/getting_laid_will_not_solve_your_problems/)

[simple exercises that improve your game](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1fsqz9/seddit_lets_compile_a_list_of_simple_exercises/)

[How to Be Invited Into Social Circles](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/77f4qq/how_to_be_invited_into_social_circles/)

[How To INSTANTLY Know If a Girl Likes You](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rFpEMJwUuKE) (video)

[Late Bloomers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uYLuo7S88tc) (video)I swear to god if she smiles at you and I mean directly at you while looking you in the eyes, she is surely atleast a bit interested. I just realised that and all it would've taken was a "hi" and smile back. I just smiled back tho and thought of a clever pick up line -.- all it took would've been a "hi and where are you traveling to?" (I'm at an airport)

I will now make this a rule for me: if she smiles at me I have to immediately say hi and smile.

I can come up in the process of saying hi and introducing myself with what I can follow up. But if I don't say immediately hi I won't at all and the whole convo is just in my head.

I will also do this if I don't think she's pretty in my eyes. It's practice and I don't have to ask for her number.

EDIT: just got off my plane and I'm blown away by the upvotes and comments :D gonna reply to y'all nowWe’ve all seen this post, “I’m texting this girl, it’s going great, then she disappears, what happened? What do I do?”

For some reason this reminds me of 18th Century medicine. “I’ve been sick, and I started taking this medicine that made me feel a lot better, and then I kept taking it and now I’m more sick than before, what happened? What do I do?”

The problem is that you were taking soluble arsenic, which works as a stimulant and in very small doses can cause sick people to feel much better. The problem is that it’s arsenic and will kill you. What do you do? You don’t take the damn arsenic.

Same thing with text game. Your text game goes down hill not because you weren’t doing it well, but because it’s text game, and that’s just what text game does. It builds a quick spike of interest, but ultimately kills it.

Try to see text game from the girl’s perspective. A guy you met and kinda liked sends you a text message. It’s funny or interesting, and you’re excited to hear back from him, and you respond. Replies go back and forth, it’s all good, but at some point you’ve got to get on with your day. It’s becoming a chore to keep responding to every nagging message and that guy who you thought was cute now seems like he’s starved for attention. You know that if you reply he’s going to reply, and the whole thing will just keep going.

So as a girl what do you do? Odds are you just start ignoring his texts. Either you ignore them mid-conversation or you end the conversation but when he texts you again a few days later you ignore that because you know what a giant time sink texting with him will be.

**Logistics**

The key to good text game is to see texting as just a logistical tool. It’s not for conversation, it’s not for trying to build attraction, it’s not for showing how smart and clever you are. It is there just to arrange face-to-face meetings.

Ideally you will only send one fluff message before you start arranging your next meeting. Set a hard limit at two, and don’t be afraid to skip the fluff and go straight for the meetup.

This is a tough lesson for many guys to learn because it takes them out of their comfort zone. They’re used to communicating through instant messaging, it’s how they socialized with their friends growing up, and it gives them the time and space to ask for advice from other guys. On the other hand, talking face-to-face with a girl is foreign, it’s hell on the nerves, and you might say something stupid and screw it up.

Too bad. Attraction is built in person, not on a little two inch screen. Trying to develop text game is not a substitute for developing genuine social skills.

**But I Know Someone With Good Text Game!**

Yeah? So do I. It happens. There are also tons of documented cases of people in the 1700s being treated with arsenic and fully recovering from their disease. That doesn’t mean it’s a good idea for you.

You can work on texting to round out your toolbox, but only after you’ve mastered the fundamentals. Have you conquered approach anxiety? Can you regularly get a set to hook? Isolate? Venue change and number close? Manage obstacles? Do you have a good rate of converting numbers into Day 2s?

If not, you’re not genuinely trying to perfect your game, you’re just trying to avoid doing the hard work of interacting in person. And I can sympathize with this. I’m a (semi)pro writer and my skill level with writing absolutely blows away my talking. They’re not even in the same league. It doesn’t matter how good my writing is though. It can be the rarest most highly refined stuff out there, but it’s just rare, highly refined …arsenic, and it will never perform as well as some generic mid-grade penicillin. It’s just not the right tool for the job, just like even the greatest text game will never be a substitute for the clumsiest experience opening sets.

**The Great Time-to-Anxiety Converter**

The last thing I want to say about this is that you need to beware text game because of its ability to wreck your life. I regularly see guys agonizing over what to text. They’ll spend hours trying to get those 140 characters just right, consulting with dozens of people and creating draft after draft. Presidential speech writers won’t spend that much time on a single line for the State of the Union.

The medium of texting is just far too conducive to converting your time into anxiety. In person you get about half a second to think, you say something, and if it’s not perfect you know what happens? Generally nothing. It’s never as bad as you think, and she’s busy worrying if you think what she’s saying is stupid. And if you did say something completely boneheaded? You get instant feedback instead of worrying about how she took it and asking all your internet friends how they think she took it, and should you send another text following up, how long do you wait, do you acknowledge the stupid thing you said, blah blah blah.

Just think about the more productive uses for your time.

[Edit: All this applies to Facebook as well.]

If you found this useful, I'm working on a blog to collect all the stuff I've written on pick up: [Stop Beta Shit](http://stopbetashit.com/).I'm not saying you use reddit to meet girls because you probably don't.

I'm talking about the upvote/downvote system.

Because what I noticed is that the most helpful posts don't typically get the most upvotes.

What gets the most upvotes are feel good posts, posts that make you feel nice and tell you that you're good enough or "ra-ra posts" just spouting motivational nonsense and then when you go through life taking those words to heart you get confused as to why you're still not getting what you want even if you're supposedly enough.

At least on platforms like youtube or facebook, people can't tuck something away just because they dislike it. In fact engaging with a post on those platforms at all even if its a hateful engagement makes the posts visible to more people. 

Unfortunately Reddit isn't like that so I recommend not judging posts based on the number of upvotes and maybe sort by "New" instead of the default "Hot posts" and actually take the time to read and understand what kind of impact the advice will have on you in the long term instead of appreciating a post just because it gives you a temporary ego boost.I know this sound shit to others and I am not bitter person, but this is the pill we need to swallow and we somehow need to learn it the hard way.

- No matter how attractive you are, no matter how mysterious, how alpha male/female, how non needy or how amazing you are it doesnt matter if there's no SPARK.

- You can't just win someone's heart, no matter how patient and persistent you are if she/he is not INTO you.

- You can't be the someone they want the most.

- Sometimes it's best to give up on someone and move on 

And I tell you what?.. There is no wrong with that, and it's normal. We just can't accept it. We tend to change to be someone we're not. And that's not growing that's pretending. 

Well "you can't make someone love you" is not always the case and I want to know your thoughts too.I'm not going to go around claiming I'm some sort of god of dating or one night stands or whatever. I'm far far from it. But the few successes I've had have been super straight forward after retrospection. 

Basically every time I've been doing well for myself, dating and being an attractive person has been super easy.

Because caring about yourself, and building yourself up gives you confidence. 

I want you to imagine two scenarios. 

The first scenario you're about to ask a girl out. The first scenario, you're not doing anything this weekend. This girl has the potential to save you from your meat clubbing marathon and Escape From Tarkov binge session! You really got to make sure you don't mess this up. Are you setting up the correct frame? Is your posture good? Are your hands in your pockets like that "pro alpha seduction body language technique" you learned. Are you coming up with a witty enough neg? Oh boy don't fuck this up. You can finally be happy, this is your shot! Shit, you haven't even really been listening to her you've been so concerned with your posturing and determining where shes at on the HB scale and trying to AMOG. Oh god dont mess this up you NEED her!!

Now how fucking nerve wracking is that?

Second scenario. You see the cute girl, and you want to ask her out. However, this weekend you've already got plans to go white water rafting with friends, you've got a judo tournament you're competing in, and your band has a gig they're going to perform in. Honestly, you're already going to have a blast this weekend, and you don't even know if you'll be able to fit her in your schedule, so it doesnt even really matter. In addition to all this you've been working out and feel pretty good, so you naturally stand with confidence and you don't have to worry about all this technical game bull shit. You dont need to put on a show and impress her. As a result of not really caring or needing her to he happy, you show extreme confidence, can joke around, and take a lot of pressure off of her. Besides, odds are you'll probably run into a lot of other girls this weekend anyway. 

Trust me, I've gone on both paths. Second one is way better. 

There is a reason they say "mend a better garden and butterflies will come".

Its also the reason Mark Manson says, "The less invested in yourself you are, the more needy you are around others, and the more needy around others you are, the less attractive you are." (or something like that)

So take care of yourself guys. It will make everything dumb easy.We often talk about game, pickup lines, text game , handling rejection and so forth. We rarely talk about body language. Guys,  body language is very crucial in seduction. 90% of communication is non-verbal. The tone of your voice, gestures, posture, eye contact, facial expressions and other aspects of nonverbal communication are important.Correct Body language can make you an interesting individual and even make you look attractive to a certain extent.

 Start being conscious of how you use your body language when you communicate with chicks. Going to gym and being fit can improve your body language  and how you express yourself. And daily meditation can help you with being present and stop overthinking. 

Notice how girls can use body language to seduce you and reel you in. Her voice turn baby-ish, she squint her eyes. Thats feminine body language. If you are a guy, portray masculine body language.Relax. Stop fidgeting. Hold your head high. Slow your movements. It gets better with time. You got this!!!*This post was primarily written as a reminder to myself, but I figured it'd be a good idea to share it with this subreddit.*

I’ll say it: Texting sucks.

I’ve read different texting strategies from various PUAs, but until I get a grasp on the situation, I’m going to utilize the old texting model I used on my ex.

**My Text Game Strategy**:

**The Opener**:

Let’s say I have a great conversation with a girl and I snag her number.

What I’ll do after the initial interaction is I’ll send a pinging text. For example, “Hey \[name\], it was nice meeting you ;)”

**Body**:

After that, I’ll have a flirty back and forth conversation for a short while; enough to keep the number warm, nothing more, nothing less.

**Close**: 

After the flirty banter, I’ll use a Yes Ladder, find out her schedule, before going for the close

**Interim**: 

Let’s say she’s busy for the next few days and the earliest she can meet is three days from now. What I’ll do is wait two days, before pinging value into the void. It could be a meme I found on google, a text of what I did today, etc. 

As long as I get her remembering who I am and the emotions associated with me, I’m good.

Once she responds to the text, we’ll have a tiny bit of flirty banter.

**Miscellaneous Notes**:

* Don’t schedule a date on Friday or Saturday. Girls usually have shit going on then
* The best days for dates are Sunday and Thursday; Tuesday, Wednesday are good too
* If a girl flakes (ie. “I have to take care of my niece”), don’t reschedule, but instead respond with, “Aight no problem, I’ll text ya when I’m free next time”There's a reason why the #1 advice in this sub is to **move on**. When a woman isn't interested in you there's not much you can do about it. If you are able to change her mind it may not because she sees that you great guy, but she ran out of current options.  Women are extremely complex and can be difficult to read, so you have to look at the suttle and sometimes no so subtle hints on when it's time to move on.

&#x200B;

1. **Short replies or no reply**. When women reply with a short answer they don't want you to be able to reply. They want you to get bored and stop messaging them. Many guys are persistent and continue to search for topics until they land on a decent conversation, but of she not trying to add the conversation then it's time to stop and realize she's not interested.
2. **"I'll let you know"** this is one I'm most familiar with. When I first started dating and was inexperienced with women. "I'll let you know" gave me a lot of false hope. Until I realized this pattern I would keep texting women and notice them pulling away. I thought they still wanted to date but in reality, they were losing or had already lost interest. I'm busy and I can't are excuses/soft rejections. No matter how busy someone is they will make time and/or reschedule.
3. **"No thanks"** this is another polite rejection. If she doesn't want to accept something from you because she doesn't want to feel like she owes you anything. If she says no thanks when you ask to hang out or on a date then she's not interested. If she doesn't want to accept favors from you then that's not a good sign.
4. **Mixed signals** if she's hot and cold or indecisive. one day she might want to talk all day and the next she might ignore you. If she doesn't show consistent interest or keep you guessing if she is she's probably on that interested in you.  When women like you they make it easy for you. You don't want to be wasting time and energy on someone who can't decide if they want to be with you or not.
5. **"I think we need to get to know each other better"** if you ask a woman on a date she says this then she's not interested. the point of a date is to get to know each other better. She's not comfortable enough to be around you. You can try to build more comfort and ask again, but more than likely she's not interested.

Being persistent isn't always a good thing when it comes to women. Sometimes as men if feels like we are dog chasing our tails unable to catch it. Women that are interested don't push you away. Women that are genuinely interested help conversations keep flowing, they get excited when you ask them on a date, and they don't make things harder.

As men, we shouldn't get mad or bitter about rejections and not being able to get the women we want. We must respect the right to say no and understand we won't able to everyone's type. Compatible and attractions aren't on-off switches. You can't just say one thing or do one thing that will automatically make her attracted. Women have more options than ever nowadays and you must understand that you also do. Until you realize it's a numbers game that takes experimentation, along with some trial and error, you won't make it very far with women.Of course, every person has a different list of thigs they find appealing - short vs tall, light vs dark, fat vs slim etc.  But here are some sweeping generalizations of what women want. 

1. Everyone prefers health and hygeine in a partner.  No matter your body type or size, good health is attractive.  Poor hygeine and unwashed clothes are alwyas unattractive.  

2. Women like to be told that they are attractive, in the right setting.  On a date, for example.  Not at the bookstore.  Don't lead with that. 

3. Some Women like "bad boys".  There is always an appeal in forbidden fruit, I think. 

4. Feminism hasn't ruined anything except your ability to be shitty to women without repercussions.  Be a man.  Be the man you are, be kind and respectful and treat the woman in front of you like a person instead of a thing.  It's easy. 

5. Confidence and competence are attractive traits to MOST women.  You don't have to be a "Chad" about it, and in fact those dudes always seem like they're ocercompensating.  But it's ok to say "I'm a really good cook and I'd like to make you dinner some time. "  That's hot.

This was written on mobile in a gas station parking lot.I did it and it felt awesome!

A little about me: I’m 23 yo, decent looking and I’m into streetwear, so not really the shirt and chinos dude. Just so you guys have an image in your mind. I’m decent with girls, but not really a player, yet! 

So the other day I got tired of dm ing girls, pretty much got tired of the internet and the way internet goes with dating and I decided to cold approach a girl today!

I was with my friend and saw a group of 3 girls ahead of us, we tailed a bit and I told him I’ll go and meet the girl in the middle, for a moment I wanted to do it but they stopped and we went by, I looked back at them and said fuck it and went there and introduced myself to that girl, a cute brunette. She was very surprised and said she was not used to this, a guy coming to her like this. We small talked for like a minute, a few jokes but then she said she had a bf. I said I wont ask her for her phone number then, but maybe she can give me her instagram, she said no, but it was nice and I made the whole group of girls have a big smile on their faces.

I felt so damn good after that, even tho I didn t get her contact. 

PS: sorry for my english*Personality is fluid.*

One of the key fundamental concepts of becoming an attractive man is that *you* is a fluid concept. This is one of the first lessons in the movie "Hitch". You are not shackled to who you think you are. You have no responsibility to be the person that you were yesterday or even the person that you were 5 minutes ago. You can become whoever you want at any point in time. Just because you're not good with women or people does not mean that you can't become a sociable ladies man.

*Kill the boy, become the man.*

The process to change who you are can be painful. When you change a fundamental part of yourself you are literally killing your old self. Your body is in conflict with who you *are* and who you *are* *becoming*.

When I began day game it literally caused me pain. I felt like my mind was tearing itself apart overwhelmed with the new stimuli. I would go out and gradually expose myself to new stressors. I used a program to overcome approach anxiety that looked like this: ask 5 strangers for the time, ask 5 attractive girls for the time, ask 5 strangers for the location of a coffee shop, ask 5 attractive girls for the location of a coffeeshop, compliment 5 attractive girls, compliment 5 attractive girls and stay in the conversation. I then continued to approach girls until I felt comfortable.

Each step I felt like I was tearing away a mental barrier. When I went home at night after a day of approaching girls I literally felt like my mind was at war with itself. This lasted up until I approached roughly 30 girls.

With every knew stressor you expose yourself to you will experience pain. Your mind will tell you "this is not who you are". It doesn't want to change. It wants to keep you nice and safe. Eventually though the battle will be won and your mind will accept who you have become as the *new* *you.*Sex education in school is fucking worthless.

Guys don’t really talk about the finer details of sex w each other - if they do it’s usually some exaggerated machismo bullshit 

Porn is a twisted fantasy 

So most of us think girls just want to be jack hammered and have to learn through trial and error and a few of those educational videos nobody wants to admit they watch 

So if you could back and give your younger self some wisdom you’ve acquired now, what would it be? 

I’m talking mostly about how to give pleasure rather and make it more enjoyable for bothSo I’ve had a huge crush on this chick for a while - real bad case of oneitis. Fake scenarios in my head, idolizing her, - the whole gambit. She’s real pretty too, probably like a 9/10 and with a awesome personality to boot. I noticed something different with us today, we both got drunk (which is probably what stirred all of this), but basically I let go of her for a while and decided I didn’t have a chance and instead I should just focus on having fun. In the process, I guess a few chicks started hitting on me and she ended up seeing. This prompted her to go into overdrive and start climbing all over me, putting her head on me, the whole deal. We ended up staying awake until 6 am just talking about our life stories and she ended up admitting she had the same thoughts about me, thought about the same made up scenarios, and so on. Obviously at this point I knew I HAD to ask her out so I did, and not surprisingly she said yes.

That’s not the point of this story though. The point is, I never would of had this chance or experience if I didn’t stop putting her on a pedestal, if I didn’t stop validating myself with her opinions of me, if I didn’t just decide to have fun and see where the wind took me. So morale of the story is stop caring, for real. She’ll see it, and she’ll want to be a part of it. Make your life as interesting as possible, live for yourself, and everything else will fall together after.

Just thought this story ended up capturing the essence of this subreddit. Unfortunately, this wasn’t a lesson I could learn from here. It was something I needed to learn myself. But I hope this inspires someone to take the plunge too.

Thanks, seddit.

**UPDATE:** For anyone still curious.. I lost the password to this throwaway a while ago. Just kinda remembered it today when I was browsing this sub. Went top posts for this year and scrolled down a bit, low and behold heres my post.

8 months later, we are still dating. And yes for the people who asked. We have had sex, usually everyday... Funny thing about that though. Our relationship has turned long distance since the school year has ended. We are exactly 10 hours away by drive and she has flown over twice, and is coming once more in two weeks (in the span of the 4 months summer vacation our uni gives us). I have flown over once. Each visit is about a week and some change.

Relationship is very strong, she is super loyal, was very inexperienced before me (had to teach her how to give head haha), and she is head over heels for me as I am for her. We hardly fight, and when we do we never get angry, more so both of us trying at all costs to work through it safely. I just received a hand written letter from her today, containing some pictures she wrote on the back of. One of the pictures was one she took of us together the night I wrote this when she was climbing all over me hah. Kind of reminded me to update you all. Some of ya won't care but I thought i'd give this happy ending and even happier one.

I love this girl.Been to Oktoberfest today. Had a girl talking about her fuckboy at the schnapsbar without me ever mentioning sex. ( Only been naturally touchy, physical and showed some intent) 

Turns out, she was thinking about fucking with me the whole time. 

That reminded me of a concept out of some book I read:
Whenever people bring up a subject out of the blue, it's something they've been thinking about and in some way link with you.

On my way to the next party, cheers to all of you.I just wanted to share this here since it has worked well every time that I've done it.

When adding your contact information to a girls phone always take a picture for the contact photo. Take a selfie of you and her together so she'll remember what you look like. This also helps her recall the (hopefully) enjoyment she had in your company when you met.Met this girl online and went out with her today. She lived in Miami Beach which is a very busy part of Miami and a nightmare to drive through. Picked her up from her place and decided to go to a bar that I thought was in the same area. Turned out it was 30 minutes away. So I'm in the car with this girl I don't even know and it's awkward because I can't make eye contact while talking to her since I'm driving. I can tell she's attracted to me though because she's constantly giggling and smiling. We get to where the bar is now we gotta park. Parking in this part of town is awful. It's the weekend so virtually all the spots are filled to the brim. Finally, a parking spot a few blocks away from the bar.  I decide it's better to find a bar nearby instead of walking far on a hot day. I find this nice seeming cocktail bar on my phone. We start walking there. As we're walking I take initiative and hold her hand as I feel like she likes me. She happily reciprocates. We get to the bar and head inside. We sit at the bar, there is nobody there. We figure they'll come out and serve us since the place wasn't locked. Turns out they're not open. We leave and head to the bar I originally meant to go to. On google, it seemed like an upscale trendy modern bar with neon. Inside the place, it was an urban, rugged, classic American dive bar. Cool place, but anything but low-key and quiet like I was hoping for. Looked like it hadn't changed since the 80s. The place was crowded and extremely noisy. There was a game going on today as well. You can imagine how difficult that would make things. Found a seat for us at the bar. My date asked for a mojito and the bartender joked that there was no such thing when you're at this place. My date settled on just some water. The bartender said she couldn't have water if she wasn't ordering alcohol. I gave her mine. The bartender then said that bar patrons who aren't ordering anything aren't allowed to sit at the bar. I pay for my drink and then suggested to her we get the fuck out of there. I decide to just wing it and find anywhere that seems quiet and not too busy so we can just sit and get to know each other. I suggest we maybe grab a bite at this little Mexican joint. I order nachos and a corona and thankfully they have drinks that she likes so she gets a margarita. I pay for everything. We sit outside and finally we can talk and relax. The conversation was going very well and she seemed to really like me. After some time I decided this would be a good time to finish the date. I walk with her and we start heading to my car. As I'm walking I start thinking about kissing her. I Just need to find a good place. The part of town we were walking in was very crowded so it seemed like we wouldn't get good privacy. I figure I'll just wait until we get to my car. On the way to my car, there's an empty alley. Finally, I have a good place to kiss her. I stop in my tracks, let go of her hand, tell her she's really cute, and go for it. She seems a little hesitant and asks if I'm really sure I want to do this since she's sick. I don't want to put too much pressure so I ask her if she wants to. She immediately starts making out with me. The kissing was wonderful. Very passionate and fulfilling. She wasn't afraid to use some tongue either. I drive her home and she tells me she had a really good time and wants to see me again. I happily obliged. I could've tried to go all the way but it didn't seem right for a first date. It's not something I really do

The date started out with many problems as mentioned earlier. Internally I was furious. It was frustrating how badly things were turning out. Externally I gave the appearance that nothing was going to shake me and I had a backup plan for every problem. It seemed to really work to my advantage. I'm proud of myself for keeping it together despite how frustrating things were and that I could figure out my next step when there were problems.Despite the decades of effort to tear down masculinity, nothing can change what women are and always will be attracted to. **Strong, capable, doers.**

These women are out there hoping that the men in their lives step up and become the men they have envisioned. They want you do find your balls somewhere, go up to her, say hello, lead the interaction smoothly and make a move. Trust me when I say that they are probably rooting for you more than you are rooting for yourself because if you actually do go up to her, make a great first impression, lead things properly and make a move successfully all whilst projecting yourself as a high quality man, **she gets the most out of it**. She gets a guy who is a diamond in the rough, literally a rarity nowadays.

For guys it's hard to understand the dating experience for women, I've been a fly on the wall for lots of conversations with my female friends and it's always the same. They are frustrated with the endless supply of absolute trash they have access to but are even more frustrated at the lack of high quality men going around.

Men nowadays will do anything to avoid the simply going up to women and starting something. We are so weak and pusified that we fear the intimidation of other men, we fear the opinions of others, we even fear failure in the form of rejection.

You get one run at life to carve out your little corner and plant your flag, to go out and get what you want, at any point you can have the chances of that happening snuffed out. **How the fuck are you going to do that avoiding fear, rejection, pain and discomfort?**

I implore all of you to look to history and at the countless men who had their lives cut short because of war, misery and other catatraphe's. Men who never got the chance to live life on their terms. The men who would laugh at you from beyond the grave for squandering and wasting your life being a coward.

When are you going to wake up and get after it? when you are at deaths door? when it's too late?

You keep gambling on tomorrow coming but one day it won't, one day you won't be able to put off asking her out, one day you won't be able to put off telling her how you feel, one day you won't be able to put off saying hello. **You will be dead and tomorrow will never come**.

**If she is interesting enough to make you want to say hi, for the love of god just go do it. Fuck techniques, fuck overthinking, fuck planning it out. Be bold enough to do it as yourself, to go in and face the discomfort, the nerves, the anxiety and still proceed**.

**Rejection and failure will be far more easily swallowed when you connect it to your finiteness. Knowing that you at least tried.**

P.S: This is a bit of a ramble but I felt all of this come from somewhere deep and felt the need to put it out there.Emotional investment marks the difference between chasing a girl and being chased by a girl. 

As powerful as this concept is, it’s a subtle idea that few men understand. But **once you learn how to get women to emotionally invest in you, your dating life will completely change - you won’t be picking women up, they’ll be picking you up.**

&nbsp;

##What Is Emotional Investment?

&nbsp;

We become emotionally invested in someone when they represent a potential source of value to us. 

This investment magnifies when we are uncertain whether we can get that value (I.E. You want to sleep with a girl, but she gives you mixed signals).

We can break down emotional investment down to four main factors:

- Your superficial value (fame, physical appearance, etc.).

- The value of being around you (the emotions you make her feel).

- The sense that you are less invested in her than she is in you.

- The effort she puts in to get value from you (I.E. sex or approval).

(The first two factors are explained in the following articles: https://www.modernseduction.com/everything-you-need-to-know-about-sub-communication-the-secret-language-of-sexual-attraction/ ,https://www.pualingo.com/emotional-value/)

&nbsp;
##The Sense That You Are Less Invested In Her Than She Is In You﻿

&nbsp;

When you’re talking to a girl, there is, of course, physical space between you and her. 

Less obviously, there is also emotional space between you and her. 

If you were to get too physically close to a girl before she’s comfortable, she would naturally want to retract and get some distance. The same is true if you take up too much of a girl’s emotional space.

You’ve probably met people in your life who take up too much of your emotional space:

- A family member who tells long stories without noticing that you are bored out of your mind.

- A friend who talks for five minutes before letting you get a few words in edgewise, only to then talk for another five minutes straight.

- A homeless person who started talking to you, and even though you politely hinted you didn’t want to talk, they kept going without noticing.
﻿
﻿The above are all examples of what it looks like when someone takes up too much of your emotional space. These people do not leave you any room to invest in the interaction. This has a repellent effect.

At the same time, you’ve also met people who gave you plenty of emotional space. 

Perhaps you have a friend who shows genuine interest whenever you talk to them and they always seem to want to hear more. 

This person makes you feel listened to and interesting. They allow you to invest in the interaction. This has a magnetic effect.

A great way to determine whether you are giving women enough emotional space is to pay attention to the ratio of talking to listening. Are you talking 80% of the time? Are you talking about half the time? Do you listen more than you talk?

If you find that you talk significantly more than the women (or people in general) you interact with, that’s a sign you may be taking up too much emotional space. 

Of course, don’t judge this by one interaction (some of the women you approach will be shy or reserved), look for the overarching pattern.

(Here's hidden camera footage of myself taking a girl home, it's a great example of leaving emotional space for a woman to invest: https://youtu.be/QnE1QJk0eJM)

In reality, seduction isn’t something you do to a girl, it’s more like a dance that gradually escalates in intensity. 
First, you spark her interest. Then you give her the chance to spark your interest. **You’re not picking the girl up, you are both picking each other up.** 

Yes, she wants to meet a man who is attractive and interesting, but she also wants a man that makes her feel like she is attractive and interesting.

Understand: giving women space to invest in you is a way you can offer value. Sure, you can offer value by being dominant, confident, and sexual. 

But you can also offer value by making a girl feel like she has positive qualities. The simplest way to do this is to listen intently to what she says while also asking further questions to understand her beliefs. Simply showing a girl that you’re interested in her opinions can be incredibly charming.

Another helpful tactic is to leave a pause after a girl finishes speaking. Oftentimes, you’ll find that when you thought someone was done talking, they actually had more to say. Simply leaving space for the other person to keep talking will get them to invest more in the interaction.

Furthermore, leaving pauses creates a vacuum effect. When a conversation dies out for a moment, an uncomfortable tension builds. 

If you don’t fill in the conversational void, the woman will feel an urge to do so herself. This shifts the dynamic so that she’s the person who is contributing more effort into the conversation, and thus, she is investing.
In general, adopt the mindset that you are interested in who the girl is as a person and that you want to learn more about her. Women want to chase you, but they can only do so if you give them emotional space. 

&nbsp;

##The Effort She Puts In To Win You Over﻿

﻿&nbsp;

Women are subconsciously aware of the following when interacting with a man:

- What does he want from me?

- What do I want from him?

On one level, she is aware of how much you want to have sex with her and how much she wants to have sex with you.

On another level, she’s aware of how much you want her attention and approval, and much she wants your attention and approval.

**The more a girl wants the above from you (attention, approval, sex) and the less she thinks you want those things from her, the more emotionally invested in you she will become.**

&nbsp;

##How do you create this effect?

&nbsp;

By not giving away everything you have to offer.

If you create a dynamic in which a girl feels that she needs to win you over, she will start chasing you.
Remember, when you’re interacting with a woman you find attractive, there should be an unmistakable sexual charge. But this is most powerful when she is uncertain whether the feeling of desire is mutual, or if she is alone in experiencing it. 

If a girl thinks that you might not be interested in her, she will start chasing your approval.
Women get hit on all the time, but they rarely meet a man who exudes sexual energy, while also making her wonder whether or not he is attracted to her. 

This mixture of hot and cold (nonverbally you are communicating desire, verbally you are communicating disinterest) is frustrating for a woman, it’s like an itch that she can’t scratch. 

This makes her try harder and harder to get your sexual approval, and the longer you withhold it, the more she wants it.

For instance, I was at a club recently and approached a girl by saying, “You look like you should be a librarian.” (This line subtly implies that I don’t think she’s physically attractive.)

However, while I was speaking, I looked at her dead in the eyes with an intent that was clearly sexual. She responded by saying, “That’s the best pickup line I’ve ever heard. You’re really charming.”

I replied, “My mom tells me I’m charming too.” (Comparing her to my mom implies I’m not attracted to her).
Then, this girl attempted to touch my shoulder, but I backed away and said, “Sorry, we need to leave three feet for the holy ghost.”

She replied, “You’re funny.”

I said, “My mom also tells me that.”

At this point, she leaned in and said, “You shouldn’t bring your mom into this conversation. I want to fuck you later, and being compared to your mom is not exactly a turn-on.” (women will rarely say something this direct, but it does happen on occasion when you push the right buttons.)

When a girl shows interest in us, our default instinct is to reciprocate and to start chasing her. 

This makes it so that she cannot keep investing, and if anything, you can come across as needy (why do you get so excited when a girl shows you approval, is this something you’re not used to experiencing?)

**Do the opposite, let women wonder whether you’re attracted to them or not.**

When a girl who likes you can’t tell whether you’re interested, she will start chasing you by complimenting you, touching you, making strong eye contact with you, and in some cases even making an overt sexual remark. 

She knows she’s sexy, but she doesn’t understand why this charming guy doesn’t seem to see her that way.
Understand: the most exciting part of seduction is the chase. 

This is why pickup is almost exclusively taught to men. As a man, if you want to get laid, you have to approach women and take the lead - sex doesn’t get thrown at you wherever you go. 

Because of this, the thought of getting laid is exciting. 

Women, on the other hand, get sex constantly shoved in their faces. There’s no challenge in picking guys up, and therefore, there’s no thrill in it. 

Fortunately, **you can flip this dynamic on its head by being the one guy that doesn’t make himself completely sexually available**. Once you do this, the idea of sleeping with you becomes exciting, there’s now a reason to chase you.

This strategy is only effective once a girl has decided you have sexual value. If you walk up to a girl and immediately start implying that you’re not interested in her, it’s unlikely she will care: this isn’t about creating attraction so much as it is about increasing investment once attraction is already there.

**Attraction makes sex a possibility, emotional investment makes it practically inevitable﻿﻿.**

The most powerful way to show a girl that you may or may not be sexually interested in her isn’t through some technique or gimmick, it’s through having strong boundaries.

Partly, this means being willing to reject a girl based on what she says and does around  you (for instance, if a hot girl says shallow, obnoxious things, you should be willing to walk away because you don't want that kind of person in your life).

**But it also means you should react to a girl’s words and actions at face value rather than reacting to them based on how you feel about her.**

As an example, let’s say a girl you’re attracted to were to say, “Black guys are so annoying, I really wish they’d stop hitting on me.”

If you were reacting to her based on your emotions towards her, you’d probably agree with her by saying something like, “That must suck.”

Essentially, you are filtering yourself through the lens of, “What can I say to make this girl I’m attracted to approve of me?”

If, on the other hand, you were reacting to this girl’s words at face value, you would likely say something like, “That sounds extremely racist. Why would you say that?”

The second statement would likely offend the girl, but paradoxically it would make her respect you more than the first statement - you’ve just shown her that your approval isn’t given, it is earned (or unearned).

As another example, if a hot girl says she likes Pokemon, and your first thought is, “I didn’t know you were such a nerd,” say that.

When you’re attracted to someone, you may feel an urge to filter out anything that could come across as controversial or ‘mean’. But **paradoxically, if you’re willing to express contentious opinions, girls will be more likely to chase you.**

If you are only saying what you think a girl wants to hear, you’re giving her the impression that you will approve of her no matter what she says. 

Instead, make your approval genuinely conditional. When a woman acts in a way that is not in alignment with your values, tell her so. (At the same time, if a woman does something you respect or admire, tell her so.)
Having boundaries means being willing to speak out when someone behaves in a way that opposes your values. Don’t be cruel or get emotional, simply offer an opposing opinion.

Having strong boundaries is difficult because it means potentially alienating people, and while this may happen, it will only truly alienate people who you weren’t compatible with in the first place.

Of course, boundaries can be too rigid. If you feel the need to tell someone they are ignorant because they have different religious beliefs than you, that’s less about boundaries and more about ego. 

It’s important that your boundaries are based on genuine values you hold like open-mindedness, self-determination, and positive energy.

For example, if a girl says something very close-minded, “Black guys are annoying,” “Republicans are selfish,” Democrats are idiotic,” I will assert a boundary by challenging that statement - without being cruel about it.

Similarly, if a girl says something negative, (I.E. she says she’s getting bad grades because she doesn’t have enough time to study), I will challenge her statement (I.E, there’s always time to study if you’re willing to sacrifice some of the time you spend on entertainment. I might say, "Watch, let me see your phone." I'll then go to her settings and show her how many hours she's wasting on her phone).

It can help to write down what you value in your interactions with people (men and women alike.) This might include the examples I gave above, but values are subjective, I cannot give you a list of values that you should have, they are based on your own beliefs and experiences.

Once you have a clear idea of what you value, you can write a list of things you will set boundaries for (I.E. negative energy, narcissism, overly simplistic thinking). 

Knowing what you want and don’t want in your social interactions will make it much easier to effectively set boundaries.

This will, in turn, allow you to show women that you are not yet another guy who approves of everything she does and says simply because she’s attractive, you are a guy who values his own beliefs more than the approval of some random girl. And if she wants your approval, she must earn it. Therefore, she will be incentivized to chase you, and by extension, to invest in you.

&nbsp;

##Conclusion

&nbsp;

Emotional investment is powerful, to say the least.

Most men operate from a flawed paradigm: they see attraction as something they must create by doing things that will impress a girl. Sadly, the harder you try to impress someone, the needier you will seem.

Adopt a different paradigm. Understand that women want a challenge, they want a guy who doesn’t make himself overly available.

The moment a girl seems to be enjoying your company, let her start investing in the interaction. 

Give her the opportunity to fill in any conversational gaps, allow her to do half (if not more) of the talking. Then, deepen her investment by making it clear that you have strong boundaries. Be willing to disagree with her, let her know that you’re willing to walk away. 

**Once you’ve established this dynamic, she will no longer see herself as the prize that you’re trying to win, she will see you as the prize that she’s trying to win.**

**If you liked this article, you can find more of my content on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4kTcVi-b_9qQnMCRG9WggA**

**I also post live infield on Snapchat (approaches, number closes, etc.) Username = Averyghayden**Panic.

You’ve just spotted her at the other end of the grocery aisle. That girl from the other team at work. *What was her name again? Shit, I can’t remember.*

You only ever speak with her at the coffee machine… mostly about the weather and whether or not your weekends were good.

You quickly look the other way. *Maybe she hasn’t seen me yet.*

You like to avoid awkward interactions. They make you anxious. But what’s so awkward about them? Why are we afraid of a little chit-chat?

**How to snap out of an anxious mood with a co-worker**

The above example is awkward because we’re meeting Coffee-machine Girl in a new and unfamiliar setting. We know how our espresso interactions go, but we don’t know how this grocery-aisle interaction is supposed to go. We haven’t had time to prepare, and we panic about what to say.

The above paragraph is the Elephant In Your Head.

It’s using pretty much all of your brainpower, but you ignore your Elephant and say something like this instead:

*Oh heyyyy, how are you?*

*Oh heyyy, I'm good. How are you?*

(Ggyyyhhh this is awkward... <lump in throat> )

*Yeah I’m good. Just getting some groceries.*

*Cool, me too. What are you buying?*

*Ahh, some noodles, and some veg. What about you?*

*Nice, ahh, I’ve got some chicken.*

...

*Cool, well I’ll see you at work.*

*K, see ya.*

<facepalm>

It’s awkward because your words are incongruent with what’s in your head. You’re anxious because you’re ignoring your Elephant.

You **(1) didn’t expect to see Coffee-machine Girl here** and you **(2) don’t know what to talk about**. THAT’s what’s going on in your head, right? So say that. In a fun way.

*Hey, how’s it going? It’s (1) so weird seeing you outside of work. My (2) brain's trying to work out what to talk to you about.*

*Heyyy, haha. Yeah, it’s so strange.*

You’ve acknowledged that you’re a little uncomfortable. She’s accepted your feeling about the situation. The Elephant In Your Head is happy.

The anxiety comes from hiding that you’re uncomfortable. From resisting it. Now that you don’t need to hide it anymore, the anxiety fades.

*You know what I just realised… we talk at the coffee machine every few days but I know like nothing about you, except that you drink coffee… and eat asparagus (looking into her basket).*

*Haha, and it looks like you eat chicken. Lots of chicken. What do you want to know?*

Whenever you’re anxious because you can’t think of anything to say, acknowledge your Elephant. You’ll notice the difference. He stops rampaging and gives you your brainpower back.

**How to snap out of an anxious mood in a job interview**

You’re at a job interview. The interviewer asks, *“What makes you the right fit for the job?"*

Panic.

You’ve got **(1) so many responses** that you **(2) don’t know which to choose**... What's **(3) the correct answer**?!

That’s what’s going on in your head. That’s your Elephant. But you ignore your Elephant and rattle off a list of the same generic skills as the interviewee before you:

*I have experience managing people. I have great communication skills. I learn from my mistakes.*

The interviewer is no closer to knowing if you are the right fit. Your anxiety prevented you from actually answering the question and connecting with the person, because you’re too busy pretending your Elephant doesn’t exist.

Give your Elephant a soft pet on the back. Like this:

*Why am I the right fit? I have (1) so many reasons that I’m (2) not really sure where to start. What (3) do you need most from the person you hire for this role?*

*Good question. It’s a sales role, but we also need you to be able to talk basic tech with the developers to help improve our product. Because we don’t understand what they’re saying half the time.*

*Oh, I’m your man. I used to be a total nerd. I spent my teenage years building computers and taught myself basic programming when I was 13. It’s not on my CV but I know my stuff.*

Now you’re less anxious because you acknowledged your Elephant, AND you gave a kick-ass answer.

**How to snap out of an anxious mood on a date**

This is the last example. You’re on a date. You think it’s going well.

The sexual tension rises and that thought pops into your head: Kiss?

Panic.

**Does he/she want to? Is it too soon? What if they pull away? :/**

That’s your Elephant. You ignore it and waffle on about how good the burgers were.

The connection fades because your Elephant is running amok. You feel like you missed the moment.

But what if you soothed your Elephant with your words?

*You: I’m terrified right now, because I’m about to kiss you.*

*Future Lover: I don’t bite.*

You have your answer, and you’re not anxious anymore.

FYI: Not quite as sexy as pausing, looking into their eyes and just going for it if they hold your gaze... but lightyears better than NOT going for it because you’re too anxious.

**TL;DR**

Whenever you feel that familiar panic, stop charging through it in vain hope for the best. You won’t out-muscle your Elephant. Say what’s on your mind and watch your anxiety fade.

If you want more actionable advice like this, get your daily dose of communication hacks and people skills [here](https://beardstrokings.com/learn?utm_source=red-sedsocanx).Originally posted at https://www.reddit.com/r/IncelExit/comments/krddum/do_not_tell_frustrated_young_men_to_be_nice_it/

Telling a young man who is inexperienced with women that all he has to do to find a girlfriend is be nice (which is what I was taught) is actively harmful. That mindset will, at best, get him a lot of platonic female friends who see him as a baby brother. At worst, it will turn him into someone who is taken advantage of by manipulative women.

That mindset will frustrate and confuse him because it won't get him any results. That mindset inevitably turns him into a needy and desperate people pleaser who puts the women in his life on a pedestal. All he has to do to make women like him is to be nice to them, and give them gifts, and do things for them, right? Why isn't it working? Telling him all he has to do is be nice will turn him into an incel.

Let me be clear: I am not saying it is wrong to be nice, nor am I saying that being abusive to women will make you attractive. There's also something to be said for being genuinely kind to everyone in your life regardless of whether you are sexually attracted to them. But you have to learn how to talk to women you are attracted to differently than your sister or your mom. You have to learn how to flirt and seduce if you ever want to have sexual and romantic experiences with women. You have to learn to escalate in terms of touching and kissing and sex. It is actively harmful to pretend like these skills aren't absolutely vital if you ever want to not be an incel.

Flirting counts. Hairstyle counts. Fashion counts. Fitness counts. Lifestyle counts. They count because they separate attractive men from asexual boys. The good news is, all of these things are something you can take action to change. All of the important factors are things you can do something about. Factors like height, race, facial structure, and all the superficial stuff incels normally obsess over are relatively unimportant, which is good, because you can't do anything about those factors. Remember what Marilyn Monroe said: "If you can make a woman laugh, you can make her do anything."So today was a good day in its entirety. Woke up early. Went to the gym. Went to class. Had a great day at work. At the end of the day when going home. A thought creeps into the back of my head as it always does, "When will you approach damn it?" I kept walking looking around as many gorgeous women pass me by, and as each one passes by I can sense a resistance being built. I keep walking and out of the blue a gorgeous french girl with her mother approaches me and asks me for directions. This was odd because, I could see them walking up to me, and passing several people they could have asked for directions. She smiles and asks for directions. I tell her I've been living here for 8 years and I still don't know street names. I ask her where she is from and she says paris. I pretend like I mistake her mother for her older sister, and then follow with a compliment about how she looks youthful. And when she mentions that its her mother I say "oh beauty must run in the family". They were laughing and enjoying it but I could tell she didn't fully understand what I was saying lol. She then tells me "you're very handsome too". And I say thanks. At this point, I just know whats up and ask her if she wants to hangout some time and give me her number. She looks at her mother and her mother approves. As I continue walking, I can't believe what just happened. This 5'4" petite french chick approaches me a 6'2" well built guy. And scored a date with me. At this point, I begin to realize I'm really not taking on my role as a man. How will I care for my children and wife and face the troubles of the world if I can't even initiate interactions with women. 

I go home and take a 20 minute ice cold shower, pondering about the moments I let pass me by. And how no matter what happens the world keeps going round. I put on my shirt, style my hair, and splash on some cologne and headed out. 

I'm walking in the street and I can sense that approach anxiety creeping in again. I immediately see a girl on her phone sitting on a step and I sit right next to her and casually say "whats up" she says "nothing, I'm busy". I say "are you really choosing your iphone over me" she says "yeah leave me alone". I actually did not feel awkward or rejected at all I was just so happy to approach. So, I see 2 girls walking and they happen to look at me and I use this to my advantage and walk up to them and say "hey, I just ditched my friend over there cuz you 2 are gorgeous. they laugh and one of them says "thank you! who was that, that wasn't your girlfriend was it?" I say "She wishes" and they laugh and I put out both my arms and say "SO! where are we going" We continue walking to a club, and as we were walking I really didn't know how to escalate or do anything, because I was basically with 2 best friends, so it was hard. 

We enter the club and both of them hold my hand and pull me between the crowd, like they didn't want me to go anywhere. They take me to the bar and buy me a drink. A gorgeous girl next to me sees this. I notice her watch which I recently bought the same one for my sister, and just grab her hand and look at her watch and say its nice. She smiles, says thank you, and asks me where I'm from as she plays with her hair. I can easily tell she is attracted, and after exchanging names, I ask who she is here with. And I happen to know she was with her friends because she was in a group earlier. She says "by myself." Now I know she is really down. I remain calm and tell her "Come on we're going outside to talk, I can't hear you in here" (Its so funny as I'm going through this, I remember all those pointers from Julien and Tyler of RSD, leading, escalating, etc) She nods in the cutest way and says "Ok" as I hold her hand to take her outside. We go outside and I take her hands and put em on my shoulders and we get closer, and I just look into her eyes and smile and she can't take the intensity so she laughs and puts her head on my chest. I say her name and tell her to look at me then I go in for a kiss and my god was it amazing. I got an erection immediately. At this point I feel like a total boss. I take her hand and put it on my bulge. And she giggles and I say "I've literally never gotten an erection from just a kiss, you must be good" (Of course little does she know that was my 2nd kiss of my life) She was really turned on and tugged on my shirt for a little more kissing action. I tell her lets go for a walk and she says she has to tell her friends and gets out her phone, and texts them.

 I see them right behind her and like a rookie I say "aren't those your friends?" She waves to them and they come over, I start to get a little nervous, because her friends are just as hot as she is. I maintain my cool and hug her and say "She's my best friend now" and I hold on to her and They laugh and continue to ask me questions. I felt a little weirded out because they were dominating me it felt, they were asking several questions and I was answering and it just didn't feel right. So I say "what is this an interrogation" she says "yeah" I brush it off. At this point I was almost certain I wasn't taking the girl home. And I didn't want to seem needy either. We continue to talk and I see those 2 girls I entered the venue with and signal them to come, and they come and I introduce them and introduce my girl as "my girlfriend" and she laughs and then her friends literally just yank her out of my hand and say "no she isnt!" 

Now I realize I got to take this challenge head on because me and her wanna clearly bang but her friends are stopping her. So I just casually say "listen, i know you guys are looking out for her but I really do wanna see her again at least" the girl quickly gets her phone out and takes my number down and gives me a call then puts her number in my phone. Then her friends start to be a little nicer and say "you're really nice but we are just having a girls night out and we're just looking out for each other" I tell her "I actually respect that, I have a younger sister and I would be really appreciative if her friends were anything like you guys" "I'm over protective and she hates it, but I have to be because she is my only sibling." This hit home for me lol, they all said "awwwww" and the girl that was giving me most crap hugged me and said that was sweet.

 Then I tell them "come on lets go eat" we all walk to a pizza joint and we are having a good time, and I start to play footsy with my girl and she was giggling her ass off while I was remaining calm and maintaing conversation with her friends. After we finish and walk out, I jokingly grab my girl and say "alright take care now" to her friends and they actually laugh this time, but yet again they persist and pull her back and then the girls hug me and say it was nice to meet me and wanting to add me on FB and all that. I just say "alright cool, it was nice meeting u guys", and I look at my girl and give her a kiss on the forehead" and  her friends say "awww look at u two love birds" Then I just walk away. Feeling so emasculated that I wasn't able to handle her friends. After about 20 minutes, the girl texts me and asks me to come over to her place, and I get down on my knees and thank the gods. I went over and didn't mention anything about being a virgin, I went down on her for a long time and she actually orgasmed, then I slipped on a condom and went inside of her and lasted 1-3 seconds (not even joking). We go another time and I last longer and then the third time was the best (for me anyway). She was enjoying it, but didn't orgasm like when I went down on her. 
I honestly can not wait for tomorrow to come so I can do my first day approach, guys I feel on top of the world now, I'm not going on reddit or the internet anymore after this FR, I just want to live life. 

TL;DR - Approached indirectly by a cute french girl, realized that I'm pussy, went out that night and approached the first cute girls I saw, got rejected on the first one. Didn't even care I was so overwhelmed by my courage. The rest of the interactions were all solid. And I hit it off with one girl, friends cockblocked, but she texted me later and told me to come over. 

Update: Went out today and couldn't do day game. FML. I'm going out at night to gain more momentumI have recently read the "No More Mr Nice Guy" book. After reading it, I was highly disturbed and realised there were many things that were wrong in the way I have been approaching life.

I realized that I had a serious lack of self-confidence that affected many parts of my life. For example, I used to live mainly passively and depended on the actions of others to do things. I have a lot of friends, that's not the problem, but I always feel dragged by their actions. In addition, I unconsciously always tried to get validation. I'd prevent myself from saying things or adapt what I'd say to people and I would get into defensive mod whenever criticised a part of me.

Things are that I have no reason to do that. Nobody is perfect and I really like who I am, I just don't understand why I haven't realised this earlier.

So, I have been much more active in my life recently. I have been proposing things to male but also female friends, including one that we will call Jane.

Jane has been a friend for 2 years but during these 2 years, she has known "passive nice guy" me.

During these last 3 weeks, I saw her 4 times: I went for a drink/meal with her, I went to her house, I went to city trip in city A and then to a city trip to city B.

The first 2 times I saw her, I hadn't read the book yet but I already started understanding that I didn't have to put her on a pedestal and to depend on her (I had things scheduled with other people).

The 3rd time I saw her (city A), we scheduled a city trip together and we chose the city together.

The 4th time we saw each other (this Tuesday), I scheduled a city trip ALL BY MY SELF to a city I really wanted to go. I told her she wasn't obliged to come and that I'd go anyway. During the day, we had a lot of fun, she hadn't slept a lot but she still came. I also started being more honest, instead of preventing myself from saying things that I thought she'd dislike, I just let go everything I had in my mind during our conversations.

Today, she sent me a message telling me, word by word: "I loved last time. I had nothing to prepare and I just had to follow your instructions."

I'm just at the beginning of my awareness but I made vital conclusions out of this situation:

1. Although some girls like to dominate in some aspects of life, they almost all look for a man that will have the upper hand, consciously or not.
2. You should be the only source of your happiness. Depending on people and putting them on a pedestal is very toxic, for you and for them.
3. Honesty is very important, which means not to lie but also not to say things in halves. It is more important to be liked and hated for what you are than just "accepted" for what you are not. Furthermore, the more honest you are with people, the more honest they will be with you.

All of this is possible once you stop having a toxic shame for yourself and become fully confident. I am still not confident at 100% and my next mission is to overcome my fear of approaching girls and clearly communicating them my intentions, verbally or not. Don't waste your time reading books.

In conclusion, 1) stop overthinking, 2) be confident, 3) stop caring about what others may think, 4) be the actor of your life. Once you overcome these issues, which will take time, you will start seducing girls. The next steps will be to communicate them your intentions, by being confident and **respecting them**. **Be a man, not a dick.**

A quote that I read in the "No More Mr Nice Guy" book for the road:

"In nature, the alpha male and the bull moose don’t sit around trying to figure out what will make the girls like them. They are just themselves: fierce, strong, competitive, and sexually proud. Because they are what they are and do what they do, prospective mates are attracted."

Edit1: the book name is **No More Mr Nice Guy: A Proven Plan for Getting What You Want in Love, Sex, and Life** by **Robert A. Glover**

Edit2: I was certainly not expecting all of you to relateDue to my inability to consistently face rejection, based off of fear, I release about 5-7 times a day. I guess for most of my life, I'd rather view pixels for pleasure instead of destroy my ego for the real thing. Today I decided to take a break from releasing after my workout. My libido skyrockets after I lift weights which in turns makes me want to go jerk off immediately after. The reason I stopped today is because I was planning on pulling the trigger of asking out this older woman I see maybe 2-3 times a week(I'm 23, she is most likely late 40s). We've been casually flirting for about 3 weeks and I've definitely got the feeling that she sees me as a hunk. I get nothing but extremely positive vibes from her, with her even sharing a lot of personal details. But my post-workout nutting has put a halt to me making a bold move (I normally go into her store right after I lift and stop at home). 

That little retention this morning sparked a flame in me. I wrote my number down on a little piece of paper with my name and then taped it to one of my dollar bills. I didn't even need any self-hype because my serious lifestyle of lifting has made me feel like a boss recently. Anyway, after I got into her line, it came time to pull out the bill with my number on it. I swear everything around me got muffled and my hand was shaking with hesitation when I reached for the bill. After some nervous shaking and the effects of the adrenaline were at full height, I pulled out that bill and said,

Me: "Can you tell me if this coupon is valid or not?" \*With a slight smirk\*

Her: "Oh, yes, yes." "You know what's funny, I was actually thinking about you this morning." 

I couldn't see her smile as she had a mask on but it's almost like she turned extremely feminine/submissive when I gave her that. I could tell by her body language and the eye contact she was making. So all in all, this is my beginner version of what short term retention did for me just now. I would have never did that if I had released before.Seriously. Your first goal should be to come off as a guy who's openly being himself. Those funny guys you meet? Most of them are far beyond that point or grew organically from an early age.

I have never NEVER in my years of meeting people and making friends, known any guy who just "became funny"
In fact. You might be surprised to find that girls will find aspects of YOU funny if you're simply being confident and congruent. They will giggle and laugh because guess what, everyone who's being themselves has some goofy aspects. Even you.

Guys who go push this funny guy game will always 100% of the time fall short because litterally anyone can tell a joke they heard on t.v. being funny is the LAST thing you should be going for. Focus on establishing natural energy levels first.Too many times I hear guys worrying about “being creepy” or “bothering her.” Too many times have I heard guys expressing concern that somehow, in our modern world, it’s wrong to approach, date and attract women.

Guys it is 100% to be an attractive man and to show your confidence to women. Don’t let society’s ideas get in the way of your success. Here are 35 reasons why it is OK to be yourself and attract the hot women that you want.

**1. It’s OK to Always Be Ready** – If you want hot girls. Be prepared. All the time. Hot girls appear at random times in unexpected places. It’s OK to be a well-groomed, well-dressed, attractive man interested in attracting hot women.

**2. It’s OK to Never Hesitate** – When a hot woman appears, approach her. Delay is sexual poison. Hesitation is sexual poison. So stop thinking. Get out of your head. It’s OK to be a confident, decisive man who walks over there and says whatever comes to mind.

**3. It’s OK to Approach for Fun** – Attracting women is supposed to be fun. If you’re not having fun, then why are you bothering? It’s a game. Treat it like a game. It’s OK to be man who steps up and plays the game.

**4. It’s OK to Approach for Practice** – Top players in any sport practice. Mastering the game requires practice. It’s OK to be a man who approaches girls just to see what happens. No matter the outcome, you practiced and that’s what matters.

**5. It’s OK to Approach in Front of Other People** – Other people are impressed when they see you approach a hot girl. They are impressed because they wish they could do it themselves. It’s OK to be a man who provides inspiration to others and leads by example.

**6. It’s OK to Be Rejected – You’re not going to die.** You’ll never see her again. Nobody will remember anyway. It’s OK to be a man who is unphased by rejection. It’s OK to be a man who actually ENJOYS it. Because a man like that knows that sex with hot women is just a matter of getting through a few rejections first.

**7. It’s OK to Be Rejected NICELY** – Tell her to “take it as a compliment,” and wish her a beautiful day.

**8. It’s OK to Be Rejected RUDELY** – Tell her to “take it as a compliment,” and wish her a beautiful day.

**9. It’s OK to Not Have Regrets** – Getting rejected is better than not knowing what could have happened. It’s ok to be a man who wants to live a life without regret. If you approach, you find out. No regrets. If you fail to approach. Regret will be your only company.

**10. It’s OK to Interrupt Her** – She’s NOT TOO BUSY. Women are not “too busy” when approached by confident men. It’s OK to show her your confidence and take a few minutes of her time.

**11. It’s OK if She Has a Boyfriend** – Hot girls always have guys around somewhere. Boyfriends come and go. If she’s attracted to you, put her in your friend zone. Keep in touch. Poke fun at her. Tease her. Tomorrow that “boyfriend” may be gone. And there you are.

Want to know how to pass ANY shit test she sends you??? Check [out this video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XATupxHRz_I)

**12. It’s OK to Make Women Comfortable** – Be comfortable with yourself. Be comfortable with the tension of interacting with a new person. Be comfortable with making lighthearted conversation. Doing this makes her comfortable. It’s OK to be the man who instantly puts women at ease.

**13. It’s OK to Always Know What To Say** – You can say whatever you want. You should talk to her like an old friend you’ve not seen in years. Total comfort. No filtering (like “is this good enough?” or “is this interesting enough for this hot girl??”). It’s OK to be the man who just says whatever is on his mind.

Want to know what to say to a girl when you first meet her, check [it out in my video here.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TYmdEpcsd5Y)

**14. It’s OK to be Spontaneous** – Change the subject. Change the venue. Take her on a wild roller coaster ride of emotions. Emotions are a sexual drug to women. It’s OK to be the man who deals in sexual drugs.

**15. It’s OK to Send Mixed Signals** – Show interest. Take that interest away. Be tough, then tender. First engaged, then aloof.  First give a compliment. Then give a tease. Mixed signals are mixed emotions which create intense attraction. It’s ok to be the man who mixes the Bad Boy with the Nice Guy.

**16. It’s OK to be Exciting** – Don’t be too interested. Don’t text too much. Make her want it. Make her look forward to hearing from you and seeing you. It’s ok to be the man who makes her CHASE.

**17. It’s OK to be Challenging** – Disagree with her. It builds sexual tension. Agreeing with her just to please is phony (and it doesn’t actually please). Agreeing so you can “get with her,” is underhanded (and it usually doesn’t result in you getting with her). It’s ok to be the man who challenges her, disagrees and creates tension. That is actually what she wants.

**18. It’s OK to be Authentic** – Being who you are is the most magnetic thing in the world. Pretending to be something else to “impress her,” doesn’t actually impress her. It’s ok to be the man who shows his true colors and wears his heart on his sleeve.

**19. It’s OK to Have Your Own Shit to Do** – Women don’t fuck guys who make her the center of attention. Women fuck guys with interesting lives, and who take women along for the ride in their interesting life. It’s OK to be the man who is busy with his own interests and passions. Because that’s what’s actually attractive to women.

**20. It’s OK to Learn New Things Daily** – Be smart. Improve yourself every day. Explore new opportunities in school, business and life. Women flock toward the man who becomes the greatest version of himself. It’s ok to be the man who FOCUSES ON HIMSELF.

**21. It’s OK to Intentionally Work On Your Conversation Skills** – There’s nothing wrong with improving your conversation skills so you can attract hot women. Just make sure attracting hot women isn’t the only reason for doing it. It’s OK to be the man who impresses people with his voice, passion and charisma.

**22. It’s OK to Love Your Body** – Your body is your temple. Live a healthy life. Get jacked. The muscles in your body make up a significant portion of “what you look like.” Show her. The more you get ripped, the faster her clothes hit the floor.  It’s ok to be the man who focuses on himself.

**23. It’s OK to NOT BUY HER A DRINK** – If you want to pass any shit test, do the opposite of what she requests. Do it with a smile. Do it with a tease.  Play with her. Make her work for it. It’s ok to be the man who doesn’t just “do what she says.”

**24. It’s OK to Dress Well** – Do you want to be “touchable?” The kind of guy who is always FRESH and CRISP? Doing that will make her touch you a lot faster. It’s ok to be a man who focuses on his wardrobe and grooming.

**25. It’s OK to be a Masculine Object of Desire** – Have a sexual presence. Have a sexual frame. Have a sexual walk. Have sexual eye contact.  You’re not around her to be her friend. You’re around her for sex. There’s no shame in that. Own it. It’s ok to be an object of desire that she wants to jump on top of.

If you guys want my free guide to creating the ultimate Sexual Frame that attracts the hottest women, [check it out here](http://dailymanup.com/smv-sexual-market-value-alpha-masculine/).

**26. It’s OK to Talk About Sex** – Make playful sexual references and innuendo. Talking about sex accelerates getting to sex. Women love to talk about sex with men they find attractive. It’s ok to get sexual. It’s ok to be the man who is completely comfortable talking about sex and making her comfortable talking about sex.

**27. It’s OK to Not Be Needy** – She is not the center of attention. You’re life is fulfilled without her. Fill your life with other girls. Other options.  More options automatically create less neediness. It’s ok to be a guy who fucks different women on a regular basis.

**28. It’s OK not to Give A Fuck** – Forget about small, petty, mediocre bullshit. Forget about what other people say and think. It’s ok to be a man who focuses on what he wants. To hell with the rest.

If you want to learn to approach ANY WOMAN then check out my video on [smashing approach anxiety here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3m_NJJDJVs).

**29. It’s OK TO GIVE A FUCK** – About family, friends and career. Show you’re a man with values. Show her you’re a man with integrity. Show her you lead a life that she’d be excited to join. It’s ok to be a man who GIVES A FUCK about important things.

**30. It’s OK to NOT THINK that Women are Sexy and Amazing** – Putting her on the pedestal has destroyed more opportunity for guys than anything else. The pedestal is the foundation of all failures. It’s ok to be a man who realizes that she’s just a person.

**31. It’s OK to Think that Women are Silly and Cute** – This is the mindset of a man experienced with women. They’re not sexy and amazing. They are silly and cute. They put colored powders and creams all over their faces. They walk around in ridiculous, uncomfortable shoes. That’s silly. And a little bit cute. It’s ok to be a man who is so comfortable around women that he sees them as silly rather than amazing.

**32. It’s OK to be The Source of Her Emotions** – Attraction is emotional. It’s not logical. Women are heavily impacted by the emotions around them. When she’s around you, the source is YOU. So give her the mixed, exciting, playful and challenging emotions she wants. It’s ok to be a man who makes her addicted to his emotions.

**33.** **It’s OK to Let Girls See You With Other Girls** – In person. Online. Everywhere. This is the “attraction equivalent” of getting “likes” and “5 star reviews.” When women surround you, EVEN MORE women will surround you. It’s ok to be a man who shows girls how many OTHER girls are in to him.

**34. It’s OK to be Honest With Your Intentions** –  If you’re looking for a relationship, I tell her. If you’re looking for fun, tell her. Honesty consistently gets you what you want. Hiding your intentions gets you nowhere. It’s Ok to be a man who is HONEST and UPFRONT with women.

**35. It’s OK to Be An Adventure** – Dating you should be fun. Being in your life should be an adventure. Create a reality that women are drawn to. A reality that makes them chase. It’s ok to be an ATTRACTIVE MAN that WOMEN WANT.

Go be that man.

BTW guys, I'm just launching [my YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCBSRA-mtCdIoQZcLpyp8VVw/), so if you're feeling my videos, smash that subscribe button.  It's much appreciated.  Lots of honey-getting videos coming out weekly..

[College Guys - Check Out This Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qoP1luCOiM)Stop thinking you're behind because others did it before you, and do not fret nor beat yourself up over lost opportunities. It's counterproductiveWanna know why beautiful women flake on you? Wanna know why they shove you right into the friend zone before you even approach them?  It's because you are putting more value in her than you are for yourself.  When men put beautiful women on a pedestal it makes the woman feel entitled to be treated like a queen, but don't feel the need to treat the man with respect and decency.  He is, however, showing her that she is more important  to him just because she's a beautiful women.  Once you stop interacting with women like this, you're gonna see a major change in your female interactions.  You'll notice that even though you're average-looking, women will treat you with more respect than a lot of these other men who chase her.

I wrote a post on this subreddit called [**How Changing Your Attitude Can Increase Your Attraction With Women**](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/fq5gk7/how_changing_your_attitude_can_increase_your/) , and it talks about how your attitude is the determining factor on if you're gonna be attractive to women or not.  Even if you don't look like a GQ model.

You see, the average man expects his looks to be the determining factor, but women get dick thrown at them from men on every rating on the scale from 1-10.  If you're the man who commands respect from her, you'll stick out and she will appreciate you more.

"Why would a beautiful woman want to respect me?"

If you ask this question, you are still putting too much value on the woman.  You should not be interacting with women until you place more value on yourself.  Women are not gonna want to sleep with you if you put more value on her than you do on yourself.  You've noticed that "selfish assholes" usually get laid by beautiful women, right?  These men value themselves so much that the women will feel compelled to place more value on these men.

Here's some things that you need to start implementing with beautiful women:

1. Don't be afraid to check them for blatant or subtle disrespect.
2. Be willing to be the first one to end the interaction
3. Be willing to reject her if she invites you to some "gal pal activity", like wedding dress shopping or keep her company while she gets her hair and/or nails done, etc.
4. If she flakes on you, don't ask her out again and limit your contact with her as much as possible.
5. If she's disrespectful on the way to your date, turn right back around, take her home, and leave.

There are so many things a man can do to establish himself as a man who deserves the utmost respect from women.  The less hesitant you are to check disrespectful behavior, the more likely you'll have beautiful women treating you with the utmost respect.

Don't do this because it attracts beautiful women, do this because you are a man of value.**Women will get moist if you look at them the right way.**

We all know that.  And we all know that the right way is: **confident, masculine, indomitable, soul-owning eye contact.**  There’s posts that say that everywhere.

But how do you condition yourself to have eye contact like that?  **How do you train yourself to make a woman melt, just by looking at her?**  Well, here’s the steps I learned to develop this skill.  Believe me, it works wonders.

***Step 1: Exercise Your Eye Muscles.***

What?  Yes, you read that correctly.  Your eyes have muscles attached to them.  Do you ever exercise them?  Probably not.  **Like most people, you take eye muscles for granted.**  It’s possible you’ve never even thought about something like this.  But why?  Why are these muscles neglected.  You think about all your other muscles all the time right?  **You go to the gym all the time right?**  You do presses and squats and curls till the cows come home.  But you can’t take 5 minutes to do some simple eye exercises when eye contact is one of the primary focal points in discussions about game?

**Look, if you’re going to exercise the rest of your body for peak performance, you should exercise your eyes for peak performance.**

So how do you do that?

**It’s simple.  Eye exercises are truly simple.**  You can do them standing or sitting.  Just face forward, and without moving your head, roll your eyes up (like your looking at the ceiling with only your eyes, not your head).  Hold for 3 - 5 seconds.  Then look down toward the floor.  Again, eyes only, not your head.  Hold for 3 - 5.  Then left for 3 - 5.  Then right for 3 - 5.  **That’s it.**  **Repeat the process a total of 3 times.  Do it once a day for a week.**

When you first try this, you might see little white stars floating around.  That’s normal and it will pass in a few moments.  Also, your eyes might actually feel “sore” later in the day.  Well yeah...don’t your biceps feel sore after hitting the dumbbells for the first time in a while?

**Like any exercise, start slow and don’t over do it.  Just do what’s comfortable. You’re not trying to roll your eyes back in their sockets.  You’re just stretching the muscles.**

The purpose of this exercise is two things:

1. It brings your attention and focus to your eyes.  That way, instead of just reading blogs about improving your eye contact, you’re actually doing something.
2. Exercising your eye muscles will give you better control over them.  Just like exercising the rest of your body gives you better control.  **Better control means slower, masculine, Alpha eye movements.**  Not twitchy, fluttering, beta eye movements.

***Step 2:  Start Intentionally Looking at People’s Eyes***

Think about everyone you’ve interacted with in the past week.  Even the past day.  Were you looking at their eyes?  Not sure?  **Well, ask yourself this question: “what color were their eyes?”**  Anybody.  **You don’t know do you?**  You probably talked to a dozen people (or more) in the last week and you probably don’t know the eye color of a single one.

**If that’s true, then how much eye contact are you really making?**

To fix this and condition yourself for better eye contact, do the following.  When you’re talking to people, start looking at them with the intention of seeing their eye color and remembering it.

Your boss, your neighbor, your roommate, your waitress, the lady in the checkout line at the grocery store.  **When you’re talking to them about whatever, take note of their eye color and remember it.**

When the conversation is over, recall the color to yourself.

You don’t need to remember their eye color forever.  Just recall it to yourself after the conversation, and then let it go.

Do this with everyone you interact with for a week.  Do it consciously as you come face to face with people.  After a week it will become second nature.

***Step 3: Stare at Yourself in the Mirror.***

Spend a week completing Steps 1 and 2 first.  Then start step 3.  Spend one minute in the morning and one minute at night staring at yourself in the bathroom mirror.  If you think that’s weird, just remember that bodybuilders literally spend hours in front of the mirror posing. **They have posing coaches.** Now that’s weird.

State at yourself in the eye.  Stare yourself down.  While you’re at it, put a smirk on your face like you’re the baddest motherfucker this side of the Mississippi. **Because frankly, you are the baddest motherfucker in your life.  And you should act like it.**  And badass, confident motherfuckers are what women want.  So practice putting “that look” on your face while you're making eye contact with yourself, **and it will start happening naturally when you’re making eye contact with women.**

***Step 4:  Look at Women You’re Attracted to, Until They Look Away.***

This step should be started AFTER a week of Step 3.  And here is the ABSOLUTELY MOST CRITICAL PART of this step:  **YOU CANNOT BE THE FIRST TO BREAK EYE CONTACT.**  A man breaking eye contact first is a total turn off to women.  It’s beta.  And it’s totally lame.

**This part will probably be hard at first.  You’re pulse will probably become elevated.  Realize that.  Accept it.  Expect it.  And fucking do it anyway.**  You want to get laid don’t you?  You want those perky tits bouncing in your face before next weekend don’t you?  Well then look at her until she looks away.

**AND SHE WILL LOOK AWAY.**  **That is almost a given** (I’ll give you an exception below).

The question is, will she look back?

Here’s how it will go down.

1. If she looks away, and doesn’t look back at you.  You’re task is complete, and you can go on about your day. (If you chose to approach her anyway, that’s fine, but that’s not the point of this exercise).
2. If she looks away, AND THEN LOOKS BACK AT YOUR EYES, even for a second.  That’s the DOUBLE TAKE.  And you always approach on the double take.

**Write this down and hang it someplace you will see it: “I always, and I mean ALWAYS, approach on the double take.  No exceptions.”**

You walk right over there and introduce yourself.  Every time.  **Even if the girl isn’t that hot.**  And here’s why.

**You’re conditioning yourself.**  **You’re committing to the muscle memory of your legs and feet that when you see the double take, you approach.**  That way, down the road, when you get the double take from a 10, you don’t fuck it up.  Those trained legs and feet unconsciously walk right over there, no thought or hesitation involved.

Practice Step 4, basically until you’re getting all the pussy you want.

Here’s the exception to “SHE WILL LOOK AWAY.”

It’s happens occasionally that a girl will not look away.  In this situation, generally 1 of 2 things happens.

1. Either you both start smiling, because it’s weird that you’re both staring at each other, and she’s friendly and having fun with it (this is the ideal scenario).  Or,
2. She gives you the “what’s up” or “what are you looking at” gesture.  Picture a curled end of the lip, raised eyebrow, slight shoulder raise with palms of the hands turned up or out.  Or some combination like that.

In the first scenario, where you both smile, **that is basically guaranteed mutual attraction.**  You approach immediately, and unless you say something ridiculous (and not in a good way) you’ll be in the sack within 7 days.

In the second scenario, where she gives you the “what’s up,” that could result in anything.  I’d say approach anyway, because well...“fuck it.”  **But that’s also a signal for you to just move on, nothing to regret.**  You made an eye opening.  She wasn’t ideally receptive.  Moving on.

Here’s an example of how I used eye contact to get a girls number a few weeks ago.

I met a buddy for dinner at a classy place.  Our server was a skinny little thing with a ridiculously plump ass.  She was basically blond hair and ass.  At the end of the meal, she dropped off the check (naturally) and went off to do whatever.  When she came back to collect, **I held it up and said: “Hey, there’s something wrong with the check.”**  She said (of course) something like: “Oh no, what is it?”  To which I replied: “I didn’t see you’re number written at the top.”  **Then I just looked at her.**

There was a two second pause, and then she burst out laughing.  That’s always the reaction btw, when using this line.  **How could she not laugh?  The line is completely unexpected and completely ridiculous.**  After collecting herself, she says: “I’m flattered, but we’re not supposed to give out our number to customers.  It’s against policy.”

Now as a quick aside, this place was a breastaurant.  You know, the kind of joint where the servers are all sporting low cut tops and plaid skirts.  See I told you, a classy place :-).  So I’m sure the girls get hit on all the time, and it wouldn’t surprise me if there *actually was* a policy that they shouldn’t give out their number to customers.  However, who cares about these silly formalities.

**So, after she says “It’s against policy,” I just look at her with the ridiculously masculine, indomitable,** ***I’m going to bang your brains out*****, eye contact we’ve been developing in this post.** I also had a cocky smirk (I’ll describe how to master that in another post).  Eye contact and the smirk go hand in hand.

I’m looking at her.  She’s looking at me. My buddy is watching all this in total suspense btw.  He said it was better than a movie.  **We looked at each other in silence for at least 3 seconds.  Maybe 4.**  And then you know what happened?  Without a word, she pulled a pen from her apron, took the receipt, wrote her number at the top, set the check down on the table, winked at me, and walked away.

I didn’t say one fucking more thing to close that deal.  **It was all eye contact.**

**It was the ultimate example of how getting a girls number is so much more about your body language and nonverbal communication, than about what you actually say.**  **I didn’t say anything.**

BTW, the “I didn’t see your number written at the top,” line is great for anywhere a woman hands you a receipt.  I still use that one all the time just to stay in practice.  You might be surprised how often it works.

**To Your Success!**

\---

Update: My best selling book 'Make Women Chase You' is now available to read **FREE** on Kindle Unlimited.

[amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193056&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.co.uk](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193197&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.com.au](https://www.amazon.com.au/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193254&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.ca](https://www.amazon.ca/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193354&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.in](https://www.amazon.in/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193319&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language)

\---

Also check out my free guide on 5 Steps To A Masculine Sexual Frame That Women Find Irresistible [here](http://dailymanup.com/attract-women-girls-masculine-alpha-sexual-frame-presence).

\---Your frame is essentially everything that makes you you.

It is your looks, your charisma, how you carry yourself, your personality, your lifestyle and what attracts women to you.

Here is how to let her fall into your frame:

- Carry yourself with dignity.

This means that you walk with your chest out, chin up, shoulders back and hold eye contact.

Because your physiology does affect your emotions.

So when you have solid body language, you will start feeling self-confident and solid on the inside. It will also make you more charismatic as a side-effect.

- Don't compromise yourself.

Be shameless here.

For example, instead of placing the opinions others and especially women have of you on a pedestal, view them as secondary. Acknowledge them but do not make them your truth.

- Authenticity.

By authenticity I mean to stay true to who you are, to have integrity and substance.

Say if you are a guy who can't get himself to kiss girls but pretends to be good with girls behind the computer screen, this will be noticed by women you date as insecurity and incongruency in your personality (=she cant trust you=she wont want sex with you). This will also be a reason why they reject you.

It means to not fake who you are in order to impress her or get her to feel attraction for you.

Although you can get many girls by putting on a mask, what this does in the end is that you will never feel loved by girls you want to have a long term relationship with since she loves the fake you and not the authentic one.

You will always be under pressure to lie and to keep up a facade plus have unmet needs which leads to depression.

- Be on your purpose and if you don't have one, create one.

This sounds cheesy but, when you are in the mindset of 'I don't need her to be happy because I already am', do what you love doing and what you are good at without giving a fuck, you will become a lot more attractive and the girls you fit with will come to you as a side-effect. You will meet them on your life path.

I have experienced this myself over and over again and it proved to me that the law of attraction is real.

If you don't have a purpose right now, create one or find it by putting yourself out there, by being open minded and trying out many different things until you found something that complements your skills, your expertise, your strengths and most of all, something you enjoy doing.

For example, off the scratch I think of these things you can try out:

Mentoring/coaching.
Coding.
Producing music digitally or playing any instrument.
Writing.
Public speaking.
Any sport.
Dog training.
Finance stuff.
Video/movie editing.
Managing social media accounts from influencers, small businesses and big companies.
Photography.
Etc..
The list goes on and on.

If you feel you need some guidance regarding  your inner growth and authenticity, DM me.I’m a recovering Nice Guy.  Initially, it was an uncomfortable process transitioning from someone who deferred to others and sought approval to a new attitude of having boundaries, saying ‘no’ to others more frequently, being upfront with who I was and what I wanted.

Those of us who post advice frequently  project the image that we have things figured out, that we never struggle or slip up. That’s bullshit. 

The other day, I was hanging out with my girlfriend.  I had a couple cups of coffee and got up to get another. Realizing that I was nearing my caffeine threshold, I asked her, “Can I get another cup of coffee?” It took a few seconds to register, but I was shocked those words came out of my mouth. I said, “Forget I said that.” and proceeded to pour another cup.

There is a distinct difference between being nice and kind. You always want to be kind in your relationships. You can be bold, edgy, have boundaries, not take bullshit and still be kind. Being nice is being deferential and weak, putting the opinions of others before your own needs. Being kind is authentic

Self improvement never ends. You will never arrive at a final destination where you never fall short or fall back into negative patterns. It’s a constant process.

Despite being a petulant weakling, the Nice Guy is the most resilient bastard in existence. He refuses to die completely. Always be aware of small actions that defer to others or seeks approval, otherwise it will slowly become your baseline behavior again.

Edit: It was at my house, not hers.About three weeks ago I saw this girl at the gym I've never seen before. Petite, bubble butt latina who was physically everything I want from a girl in terms of looks. She always worked out with airpods in, and always alone.

Some days I see her stare at me, and my friend noticed that too.

Yesterday, she came into the gym halfway through my workout, and I kept making excuses not to talk to her. "She's just trying to workout." "People are near her and will think weird of me." "What if she rejects me?"

About 20 minutes go by and I just say fuck it. I approached her when I was walking to the locker room and she was leaving her locker room. I told I thought she was attractive and asked her where she was from and she turned out to be Colombian. I asked for her number and she told me she had a boyfriend and I told her okay no problem and her to enjoy her workout. My approach wasn't the best, I was nervous as fuck, but I had to do it.

The last two times I did a cold/hot approach on girls, they ended up being relationships.

I wish I could have done a better approach, had more confidence, said different things, but at the end of the day, if I didn't do it, I would have regretted it way more.People think that they have to be well-accomplished in order to have a ton of confidence.  They think they have to have money to have a ton of confidence.  These things help, but what if you're starting from square one.  You have no confidence.  It's just an "empty plot in the land of confidence".

Think of your confidence as a structure or skyscraper.  If your build your confidence on unstable ground, it will come toppling down in certain situations.  This is why I don't believe in "faking it until you make it".

# A Clear Mind Is A Confident Mind

So the first thing you want to do is have a clear mind.  ***A clear mind is a confident mind.***  It's like leveling the land and clearing the debris of any BS that has been accumulated over the years by either other people or what you've conditioned yourself to believe.

**Sit in a quiet room with your eyes closed.  Focus on your breathing and heart rate.  If a thought enters your head, phase it out.  If it's a positive thought or a negative thought.  Phase the thought out.  Do this for at least 10 minutes a day.  The goal is to have a clear mind that allows you to feel more than overthink.**

Some of you may leave a comment, "How does a person "not think" that's impossible".  You will always have  a thought pop into your head, but the more you can phase thoughts out of your head, the more alert you become.  You're not mentally masturbating about a girl liking you and you're not getting depressed because you think a girl is gonna reject you.  This is when you level the land so you can leave room for what's next.

# Taking Action And How To See Each Outcome

A man with a clear mind can take quicker, well-timed action.  He's not forced to take action because people are telling him to or he's forcing himself to.  He's taking action because it's what needs to happen at that specific moment.  In the beginning you have to condition your mind that you are not afraid to talk to women, so in the beginning you need to talk to women you like.

When you have a clear mind, you don't create fantasies and scenarios in your head.  You just take the action to see what happens.

"This girl is cute.  Let's see what happens if I smile at her and say good morning."

Any response or sign she gives you is feedback.  It's either wanted feedback or unwanted feedback.  It's not always that you're ugly or she's not attracted to you.  In either way, it should only tell you if she's interested or not, not to tell you if you're attractive or not.

"What the hell does that mean?"

Just because a woman is not attracted to you doesn't mean you're ugly or unattractive.  And just because she's interested doesn't mean she's attracted to you.  Sometimes women will string men along and play mind games with them.  When you have a clear mind, you're able to move on instead of be at the mercy of her mind games.

# Eye Contact And Being More Focused And Aware

When you approach a woman and actually get into a conversation with her, that's not the time to  fantasize.  You want to pay attention to what she's saying.  You want to pay attention to her body language.  You want to listen to the message she's giving you.  Eye contact is very important because it shows you have a level of confidence.  It shows you're paying attention to what the person is saying.  Don't give a woman a blank stare because this means you just see her, not listening to her.  It also means you're not paying attention.

When you have a clear mind, you're listening, looking around, looking at the person in front of you, making it a point to remember what they said, etc.  If she's talking and you're wondering if she's interested or not, you're gonna miss everything she said.  You're gonna miss those signs she's giving you that she is interested or those signs of she's uncomfortable or not interested.

A lot of men waste their time, trying to convince a girl that she needs to choose him.  He's getting all worked up over one girl.  When you have a clear mind, you know that your awareness will allow you to spot the ones who are interested.

Yes, the more aware you become, the more women you'll find who are actually interested in you.

# Get Out Of Your Head And Into Your Body

When you're stuck in your head, you're creating false outcomes.  This prevents you from taking action.  This is also why you tend to get those butterflies and let them overwhelm your actions.  When you're in your body, you feel the fear, you feel nervous, but you take action anyway.  Brian Begin calls this "Stepping Into Tension".  Believe it or not but if you're attracted to a woman, and she's attracted to you, if she sees that you're a little nervous when you talk to her, it makes her less nervous.  This lets her know that you like her too.  So she can relax a little herself.  It happens if you like a girl and you find out she likes you too.  All of a sudden you may feel a weight lifted off of your shoulders and you can relax a little more.

Anyway, the more you approach in spite of that nervous feeling, you'll start to get use to it.  As a matter of fact, you'll see that nervous feeling as "a reason to approach this girl".  If she's making you nervous, you're attracted to her.  Being that you have a clear and confident mind, you tell yourself, "This girl is cute and she's making me nervous.  I think I'm attracted to her.  Let me go up and talk to her to see what happens."

When you get out of your head, and into your body, you start to trust your instincts a little more and may actually be right in your decisions.

# Try It And See How It Works For You

You have some work to do to build your confidence.  The tallest skyscrapers weren't built by men wishing that the skyscraper would be built... they had to take the needed action to build it.  Once you try it, and see how you feel over time, you'll see how ridiculous it was to get all worked up in the first place.

Good luck!4 years ago I stumbled upon reddit (no pun intended). It really changed my life in how to step out of my shell (extroverted introvert) become confident and get women. While I'm still far from where I am, I have definitely become the guy that people say "what the hell is so good about him, why does she want him and not me?" It's pretty cool because i was once the guy who said that. I wanted to give back to everyone with some of my own favorite tips on dating, approaching, etc. Feel free to ask any questions!

*After a break up or before getting out there the number 1 advice I have (and this is said repeatedly often) is to work on yourself. Step back and focus on being the best possible version of yourself whether it be working out, learning a new skill (I've taught myself graphic design, video editing, web design, promotion, event planning all this summer alone), and just getting healthier and more attractive by stylish clothes/haircuts/etc.

*Stop caring what everyone thinks. Truly the minute you stop giving a fuck and it is SO much easier said than done, you'll feel a weight off your shoulders.

*Stop caring so much about having sex. If it happens it happens if it doesn't it's not the end of the world. Focus on having fun and being the life of the party. Who wants to look back and your only memories of going out are you sulking in a corner that no one wants you. HAVE FUN.

*Hotter girls are indeed more crazy, be careful what you wish for.

*It does not matter how rich a girl is, sometimes the headache isn't worth it.

*If she cheats on her boyfriend with you, she's gonna do it to you.

*If she accuses you of cheating early on, she's either A. already doing it to you or B. she's going to. Run.

*Everyone loves a little crazy, but not when it gets to a point where you are being made to look like a fool.

*Which brings me to the next point, have some self respect. It's nice to have your first hot girl friend its very tight. But not at your expense. If she cheats, leave no second chances. If she yells at you in public or acts like a child walk away don't call her again. There's indeed plenty of fish in the sea and you need to know what you're worth.

*If trust is broken, it will never be repaired. It will always be in the back of either persons head no matter what and it's best to just end it.

*The worst possible thing that can happen with you approaching a girl is her shoving you, going on a mic, announcing you're the creepiest dude in the bar and having everyone boo and laugh at you while you get thrown out. Haven't seen that happen in my entire life you'll be ok.

*Date as many women and as often as you can. The more you do the more you'll realize early signs of characteristics you don't like. If you hate lying the first time you're lied to you will know that it is not for you and will save you time with this person.

*Be fun be spontaneous. Make every day an adventure.

*Don't be stubborn learn to compromise

*control your emotions, learn to be more understanding. I've fucked up a lot of relationships by being too much of an asshole.

*Don't ever be needy. It disgusts most people. 

*Always be cool, outcome independent, and laid back. 

*Get a dog. Ladies love dogs and if you break up its nice to have something that isn't selfish.

*Lastly whoever cares more in a relationship has the least power. If you're constantly checking on your partner, texting them all the time, calling them, saying that you love them etc. you are more invested and anything they do against that will devastate you. Be just as invested, don't always text first, always be busy but not too busy to neglect her needs, and always be respectful.

Edit: Thank you so much I really hope I've helped please don't ever hesitate to ask me anything. I'm really not that big of a deal but any insight I have I will always give back to the ones who helped me.

Figure while I have this up, if anyones from the Chicagoland area and ever want to set up an event whether its for a company, wedding, etc. shoot me a message! Quit my job to get this [company](https://www.gsechicago.com) going and I could use the support :) (or if you just want to talk!)I get that’s it’s respectful to formally ask her if she’ll go on a date with you, but there’s no thrill in that and it’s way too easy for her to decline or be a flake.

Instead pitch your date idea right away and make the decision for her. Tell her there’s a really good Mediterranean grill, or a lovely park, or whatever your date idea is then follow through by telling her she’ll love it. 

She’ll no longer question herself whether she’ll have fun or if it’s worth going out for. She’ll be much more excited and your success with scoring first dates will skyrocket

EDIT: A lot of you hated how I said “make the decision for her” what I meant is to say something to make the date seem desirable and then tell her she’ll love it. 

An example could be “hey [her name], there’s this local park I want to take you to, you’ll love the incredible view of the sunset. Be my date?”So I was studying abroad in Asgard and took "How to Speak Groot" as an elective. This course has changed my life when interacting with people (i.e. women), and I want to share a bit of what I learned!

Read each of these sentences aloud:

I am groot.

I am groot?

I AM groot. 

I... am groot.

I. Am. Groot?

I... am... groot...

I am groot!!!

Even though each of these sentences is exactly the same, what makes them stand apart is in the tone and inflection of your voice when you speak. The emphasis on one word vs another. The slight lift in voice in the end that denotes a question vs the strong pronunciation that denotes a statement. The words are just words. How you say them changes everything.

This is why I tell people what you say is never as important as HOW you say it.

I'll give you another example. We're all familiar with Joey's (FRIENDS) famous pick up line:

"How *you* doin?"

The reason it makes people giddy is the delivery. It's the inflection on "you" and the subtle drop with the "doin" that grabs you.

It's that way he makes "How *you* doin?" sound like "You are beautiful. You are sexy. You are fascinating. I WANT YOU."

It's all in the delivery.

How this affects your interaction with women (and why confidence is so important), is because when you learn how to adjust the way you say things, you can say anything, but convey a different meaning the way you say it.

You can say "Good Morning" in a way that makes her *hear* "Damn! You're sexy as fuck!" 

You can say "Let's go get a drink." and what she *hears* is "I want to take your panties off with my teeth!"

And the best part: When you learn to play with your delivery, she will "hear" what she wants to hear! And while this can often be a doubled-edged sword, if she's attracted to you, it will ALWAYS work out in your favor.

Now, here's how you can make this work for you:

Read the following sentences silently.

I think you're beautiful.

I think you're intelligent.

Wow, you're really funny.

I think you're sexy.

I want to fuck you. 

You want me!

Want to have sex?

Now read each sentence again, but this time say "I am groot". Say it in a way that tries to convey the meaning of the sentence.

You'll notice the subtle changes in diction and inflection, not only as you speak them, but as you *hear* them as well.


Now do it all again, but this time... smile while you speak.


This... this right here... this is Flirting 101. It's how to say or do one thing, but convey a completely different meaning.

It's the subtle difference in voice tone and body language that gives what ever comes out of your mouth "context".

And that subtlety makes all the difference in the world. It's the key to flirting. It's the reason I always suggest making an actual phone call vs text msgs. It's the reason what you say is never as important as HOW you say it.

Now go find a mirror and practice. 

Cheers.- You’ll get laid, but trust me when I say it’s not the silver bullet that will magically solve all your problems

- Stop worrying about the end-goal and trying to do everything right to achieve it. Just focus on casually navigating the process itself and take it as it comes.

- Why are you acting like she’s the last girl who will ever give you a chance? There’s always going to be another girl.

- Be direct and straight up about what you want instead of beating around the bush. You’ll find out if she’s into you or not sooner rather than later, and that means you can move onto the next one more quickly.

- Stop expecting so much of yourself and other people. Expect nothing and you’ll never be disappointed.

- Stop thinking you HAVE to get laid to have a good time or be successful. Success comes first, then come the good times, girls come last. (Yes, just like the Iggy Azalea/Tyga song).

- Don’t compare yourself to others, there’s always going to be a guy who’s better with girls than you. Not even he gets to be with every girl he wants.

- When you meet a girl instead of just trying to impress her, try to make her impress you as well. If she doesn’t meet your standards don’t be afraid to cut her loose.

- Do you notice any patterns? Is there a common denominator in the girls you are dating? More importantly are you doing the same thing over and over again? If it isn’t working, try doing something different.

- Rejection, ghosting, and failure are part of the game. Instead of moping and getting all worked up about it, grow a thick skin to it and pick yourself up afterward and keep going.

- If you see a girl who catches your eye just talk to her, you never know what will happen.

- If you want to be her friend don’t try to date her. If you want to date her don’t try to be her friend. Girls don’t put you in the friendzone, you put yourself there. There is a difference between wanting to sleep with a female friend and preferring not to sleep with a female friend.

UPDATE: Thanks for the silver /u/Julian_007! Also loving the comments everyone’s posting here, a lot of very solid advice that would make great additions to this post!Never wrote a post like this before so apologises in advance for the not so graceful formatting

   Neediness is something a lot of guys struggle with. The anxiety we feel when a girl doesn't answer our texts, the need we have to impress a girl to gain her approval and the hurt we feel when our efforts fail. That hyper focus on "i must achieve results tonight", rather than simply having fun and letting the girls feel that energy and come to us

   Neediness is a state we find ourselves in when we are not comfortable with ourselves. Its a energy we put out that repulses people away, makes us too invested and ultimately does us no favours. 

   So what can we do to let go of this feeling? Well i have one suggestion I'm sure many of us have heard before, meditate. But not just any type of meditation

   David R. Hawkins in his book letting go, the pathway of surrender offers a meditation technique that can help greatly reduce the emotions of negativity that go along with needinees. Letting go of these emotions helps greatly not only with the feeling itself, but with any anxious and recurring thoughts that constantly appear in your head.

   The technique is simple, allow yourself to become aware of the feeling inside you (whatever it may be), let it come up, stay with the feeling and let it run its course without resisting or trying to change it in any way. Simply allow the feeling to be there and felt fully in your body, this will help to release the energy behind the feeling and have it disappear. One crucial point in this technique is to not focus on the thoughts that come up during this, ignore your thoughts completely and bring your awareness completely on the actual physical feeling within your body. 

   Emotions are like energy, and they get stored up inside us. They need to come out or they will cause us anxiety, stress and negative recurring thoughts. I urge you to try this and become more comfortable with yourself.  The more comfortable you become with being alone with yourself, the less you will feel that needing and craving for anotherRecognizing your own self-worth exists outside of the opinions of others and striving only to compete with who you were yesterday, answering only to your own inner compass, and looking at every imperfect venture as a 'process of elimination' rather than a 'failure to acquire value' 

https://youtu.be/ni7JLG8cJmUGentlemen. As you know, flirting is critical to attracting women and building sexual tension.

The most important thing to keep in mind about flirting is that: IT’S ALL ABOUT DELIVERY.

The difference between flirting that is fun and builds sexual-tension vs flirting that’s just plain cringe, all boils down to delivery.

There’s three main components to delivery: Timing, Confidence and Playfulness.

**Timing** – Some types of flirting can happen immediately. Your opening can be a flirt. Other kinds of flirting require some attraction to be there already.  If the attraction isn’t there, then what would otherwise be playful flirting can come across as totally cringe.

**Confidence** – It’s basically impossible to flirt without having confidence. If your hands are stuffed into your pockets and you’re looking at the floor, nothing you say will come across as fun, playful and flirty. Nothing you say will build sexual tension. I’ll talk more about confidence at the end of the post.

**Playfulness** – Flirting needs to be delivered as a joke. A half-joke really. A half-joke essentially means that on the surface flirting is delivered as a joke. But there’s some underlying hints (some unstated, mysterious nuances) that maybe you’re just a little bit serious. That’s what creates tension, thrill and excitement.

**-- 6 Ways To Flirt –**

**1. Making an Ongoing “Big Deal” Out of Small Things**

This tease involves taking any kind of small thing that she says/does and blowing it out of proportion. Poking fun at where she’s from is a great example. Almost everywhere has some stereotype about it. Here’s some examples:

\- She’s from a small town – Stereotype examples: “so you totally like to bail hay in your spare time, don’t you?”  “Yeah, we can go, but my car moves faster than a tractor. You ok with that?”

\- She’s from Vegas – Stereotype examples: “so you totally have a gambling problem, don’t you?” “Are you going to try to bet me for the next round of drinks?”

\- She’s from England – Stereotype examples: “so you like to eat everything in “pie” form, don’t you?” “Yeah so let’s get the steak and chips, the salad and chips and I’ll have a beer and chips. What are you having?”

The key to this type of flirting is that making a big deal doesn’t mean “make a huge deal once, and then forget about it.” Instead, it means keeping the joke ongoing. Making references to the stereotype whenever the situation calls for it.

For example, if you happen to see a pack of cards, or a pair of foam dice hanging in somebody’s windshield, or you walk past a casino, or you see a billboard for a gambling addiction hotline, you can again make some kind of reference the gambling stereotype. Like you’re “keeping her away from the addiction” while playfully pulling her away from the casino entrance, or “they put that sign up when they found out you were moving here.”

**2. Making Random Assumptions That She Will Do “Unreasonable Things” For You**

For this one I mean “unreasonable things” in general. Not in a sexual way.

Examples:

\- She spills something in your car: “So…when are you planning on buying me a new car?” She gives you the pursed lips and scrunched nose to the teasing. “Well it’s either that, or after dinner we’ll go back to my place and I’ll get a bucket of hot soapy water and a scrub brush ready for you.” Another round of pursed lips. “I have to supervise the scrubbing though.”

\- She says she’ll stop at the store for a bottle of wine: “Oh you’re going to go shopping for me? That’s so sweet. You know I’m actually out of laundry detergent and paper towels. Thanks for getting all that.” She gives you *I’ve just been teased look.* “Oh and dish soap too.”

**3. Playfully Blaming Her for Things**

Here’s some examples:

\- You reach for your drink and realize it’s empty: “Did you seriously just drink all my drink?”

\- You bump into her lightly when walking down the street: “Can you stop bumping into me?”

\- She say’s basically anything which is not intended to be flirty: “Quit flirting with me all the time.”

\- She asks you a question about something totally innocuous like “should we see the 7 o’clock show or the 9’oclock.” You pause for a moment holding eye contact; mild smirk: “Why do you keep looking at me like that?”

**4. Acting Like What She Just Said Is Really \[Fill in the Blank\]**

For \[Fill in the Blank\], it can be anything which fits the situation or what she is talking about. For example, really “silly,” really “nerdy,” really “Texan,” really “yoga-ish.” Any kind of stereotype (playful stereotypes – nothing that is actually offensive).

Here’s how you execute this: As soon as she’s done saying something which was probably intended to be serious, you look at her in silence for 1 to 2 beats. Hold eye contact and have a straight face (i.e. be nonreactive to her statement).

On the 3rd, 4th and 5th beats, let a big smile slowly grow on your face. The kind of smile that non-verbally indicates to her that you think that statement was kind of \[Fill in the Blank\].

After a couple beats, she will say something like “what?” because the look on your face is begging for that question.

That’s when you say something which teases her about being the stereotype.

Examples:

\- She’s telling you a story about something from her childhood which you interpret as silly. First you do the 5 beats and the smile. She asks what? Then you say something like: “You were totally the class clown growing up, weren’t you?” or “I bet you had ice cream stains all over your clothes growing up, didn’t you?”

Anything which fits the situation she’s talking about and pokes fun at her story.

**5. Unexpected Subject Changers That Create Obvious Interest**

These are great ways to open a girl. Particularly if she talks to you first about something totally unrelated.

For example, you’re in a store and a girl working there says “are you finding everything ok?” Instead of just answering yes or no, you ignore the question and change straight into an opener which clearly expresses interest: “Hi. (said boldly with a big smile) How are ***you*** doing today? (hold out your hand for the shake).”

In this example you’re making it pretty obvious that you’re about to start hitting on her. It’s flattering particularly because it’s unexpected and you’ll almost always get a smile. Then proceed to make conversation with her.

**6. Non-Verbal Flirting (Excluding Eye Contact, Smirk & Body Language – Discussed Later)**

Here’s some examples:

**- Getting in The Way –** This is where you would physically get in her way, but act like you’re not doing anything wrong.

For example, you’re both inside and she says she needs to go outside to get something. You agree she should go outside to get whatever it is. But then you stand in the doorway, so she physically can’t get past you. You act like you’re doing nothing wrong until she smiles, pokes you in the stomach, pushes you or whatever. At that point you move out of the way.

**- Doing Something She Asks (But Not Completely) –** For example, she asks something like “can you pass the salt shaker” or “can you hand me the phone” or “can you give me that.” Basically she’s asking you to give her something which is out of reach.

Let’s take the example of the salt shaker. Instead of grabbing the shaker and moving it over right in front of her. You move it closer to her by just a few centimeters. You move it just far enough, so it looks like you “put in effort” but it’s still out of reach.

Then she gives you the I’ve been teased look while you act like you’ve done nothing wrong. Maybe you do it a second time. A few more centimeters closer. And when the joke is played out, you hand her the shaker.

**Flirting Delivery - Confidence**

As mentioned earlier, confidence is key to flirting. Here’s the basics of what you need to do.

**Eye contact** – when you’re saying something flirty, look deep into her eyes. Hold the eye contact just a little too long. Give her the look that says you’re a sexual man, not a friend.

**Smirk** – have a smirk on your face that says you’re a little too cocky. That you’re confident enough play around with her and you don’t take yourself too seriously.

**Body language** – lean in towards her a little bit when delivering the flirt. Get just a little too close. Start closing that distance in preparation for escalating kino later.

**Conclusion**

Start confidently incorporating these techniques into your game and your interactions will be more fun, you’ll see more (and quicker) signs of attraction, you’ll see that sexual tension spiking more quickly and ultimately you’ll have more successes and fewer times landing in the friend zone.

Women love guys who can flirt. Show her you know how.

For more great content to up your game, check out these videos for:

[Destroy Approach Anxiety & Talk To Any Hot Girl](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3m_NJJDJVs)

[Pass Any Shit Test A Girl Gives You](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XATupxHRz_I)

[Attract Girls Like This And Never Get Ghosted & Ignored](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XATupxHRz_I)

[How To Pick Up Chicks in College (Mad Social Circle Game)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qoP1luCOiM)

&#x200B;I’m a woman in my early 20s. I have _rejected_, noticed, seen and talked to different guys. The points I make are totally based on my and my friends’ experiences. 

**1. Fake it ‘til you make it - confidence**

Women are _biologically_ attracted to masculine energy emitting men. Be confident, and if you’re not, fake it. 

I’m talking about these things: posture, the way you talk, open body language, standing still, taking up space (conveys subconsciously that you’re important) etc.

Remember that groomed appearance, working out, fresh breath and clean appearance help!

**2. Don’t try to prove your worth to her**

I’ll admit - some women like a little challenge. It is **totally okay** that you show interest by keeping up the conversation and asking about her, but keep the overly sweet compliments, “☺️, 🥰, 💕” -emojis and flirty talk out of it in the beginning. 

_Show her_ you’re a guy who’s confident in himself and doesn’t need you to shower with compliments to get your attention. 

**3. Flirt in a lowkey way**

Instead of saying “you look so beautiful today”, say, “so, what is your pretty self up to tonight”

= confident, charismatic approach 

**4. Tease her, when the time comes**

This can be done only when you guys know each other a little better and have exited the awkward -zone.

Don’t be scared to tease her a little, or turn down her sexual innuendos.

For instance, I sent one guy this text message, when he asked what I’m up to: _”just started watching X on Netflix, wanna join?”_

His response? _”The thing is, I’m already on the last episode, so you’ll have to catch up ;)”_

⚠️This type of playful teasing is totally acceptable if you’ve done No. 3⚠️

**5. Be a gentleman**

A Nice guy doesn’t mean a gentleman, nor does gentleman mean a simp.

Open the door for her, don’t BEG her to go out (just ask if she’s free on day A or B to go to place Y, or if you’re bold enough, just tell her to get ready at X o’clock for X). 

Plan the date, be chill, try to get to know her, ask her questions - she’s just one girl of the many ones you can approach! 😉I'm a 30 year old virgin. I never approached a girl in my life because of my severe social anxiety, but I finally did it today.



I went to a bar with live music alone. It's the third time I've been to this bar and always alone. I usually stand by the bar and watch people dance all night, but this time I made a change. This woman was with her friends near me, but she seemed to be by herself and just as alone as me. She made eye contact with me and smiled and I smiled back. It took me maybe 40  minutes after making the initial eye contact to finally approach her. I squeezed myself passed her friends (With no plan in my mind) and leaned over the counter next to her, while making sure my arm came in contact with hers. I looked her in the eyes and offered to buy her a drink. She declined and told me that she was the driver. I asked her about her night, made comments about the music and she reciprocated to the conversation a lot - and she really made an effort when I was lost for words, which happened often. I asked her if she wanted to dance and mentioned that I don't dance, but I'm willing to try, and she said yes, but somehow we kept talking instead of dancing. The band had just stopped playing and was on break, so we chatted for maybe 30 minutes. 


Then she told me she was leaving, and she told me that I could walk out with her. I accepted and followed her outside the bar. We spoke a little bit face to face, about a foot from each other. And I *asked* if I could come home with her - she declined. I then asked for a kiss - that's right, I ASKED (totally against the techniques taught here) and we kissed. I followed her lead with the kiss and ran my hand against her back. She left, I left, then we texted a bit when I got home. I tried to tease her by text and she misunderstood (note to self: keep texting to a minimum), but I told her that I wanted to take her out some time. She said I was very handsome, and I told her she was very beautiful. We texted our good nights. 


By the way, she's likely 5-10 years older than me, which doesn't matter to me, but it made it easier for me to ask for the kiss, rather than take it - because she was willing to lead, which I find extremely hot since I lack experience.



Jesus is real



By the way, I lied to her. When she asked me why I was there alone I told her that I just exited a relationship and was feeling down. I felt nervous about telling her the truth -  which was: I was there because I'm lonely. Think I should confess my lie when I see her? She and her drunk friend lied to me about her job when I had asked, and then she confessed to me her real job when we spoke outside.I tried posting this in r/sex, but the mods removed it as it wasn't a "discussion".  I figure since sub is all about seducing women, so here is a way to keep her coming back.

**Mindset and Attitude**

I don't care how un-PC this sounds: most women want to be dominated in bed. There's a reason 50 Shades of Gray blew up, despite being terribly written and erotica-lite.

Here's an article that's worth reading: [https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/darwins-subterranean-world/201910/are-we-facing-the-end-sex](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/darwins-subterranean-world/201910/are-we-facing-the-end-sex)

You cannot be timid or meek. You need to come at her as a MAN. A confident man. A man in tune with her body that is taking her on a journey. Don't act hesitant or shy, but don't be an asshole. Pay attention to how she's reacting to things and don't think that you can't slow down and communicate if needed, but don't play 20 questions during sex. Again, read the article above.

If you aren't a man, then you can still use all this stuff and your partner obviously doesn't want a man, so it all works out :)

**Communication**

If you're in a relationship with someone, then having a conversation about what they like and don't like obviously makes a ton of sense.  

"Would you like it if I was a little rougher with you in bed?"

"Would you enjoy if I took charge more in bed?"

For a variety of reasons, a conversation might not happen prior to sex.  Luckily, the way she reacts to you as things progress are also communication.  If you push her onto the bed, she may moan and smile at you or she may look annoyed or turned off, etc.

What you don't want to do is be in the heat of the moment and go "Would you like it if I slapped your ass?"  Ideally get those conversations out of the way before sex.

Conversation during sex is a turn off, but sometimes it is the lesser of two evils.  If you move her into a new position and she stops enjoying it as much, you can either move her back to what you were just doing or ask her what's up.  "What position?" is something I say frequently.  If you take a break from fucking, kiss her passionately and then groan it into her ear it feels a lot more like it's part of the dance, rather than an interruption.

If you want to be a good lover you HAVE to pay attention to her.  You have get synced up and tuned in with her body and how it is responding.  The way she moves, the sounds she makes, her facial expressions... if you're really tuned in you will be able to feel the vibe that her body is giving off.  Is she tense?  Is she relaxed?  Is she buzzing with energy?  To be a good lover you must be a considerate lover.

Sensuality and Sensual Domination

When I talk about being dominant here, I am not just talking about the classic "Get on your knees you dirty slut" style of domination.  I am talking about a mindset that you are in charge, that you have a vision for how you want things to go and that you are leading her on a journey.  Yes, you can be physical with her, but you do not need to be particularly rough or degrade her verbally to be "Dominant".  It's much more about having a commanding presence and being confident than anything else.

A few examples of things that if done confidently and with a hint of aggression are "dominant":

\- Pushing her onto the bed, climbing on top of her, grabbing her on the side of her neck just below her ear and kissing her passionately.

\- Sticking a couple of fingers down the front of her jeans and yanking her into you so you can kiss her.

\- If she's going down on you, gathering up all of her hair and holding onto it, telling her to look at you and meeting her rhythm with thrusts.  I am not talking about full blown face/throat fucking here, though that can be fun too :)

Generally speaking, I like to start off very sensual and slowly be rougher as things progress.  As she gets lost in ecstasy, so should you.  Let your primal side come out.  When things get super hot and heavy, growl at her.  Not in a stupid bear kind of way, just a low rumbling sound kind of deal.  Make primal, manly noises, but understand that the noises women make during sex actually have a scientific name "Female Copulatory Vocalization" and have been studied and researched.  To my knowledge, there is not an equivalent for men.  I say this because when I was younger I felt like I should be making as much noise as her, but that simply doesn't seem to be the case. 

**Warming Her Up**

It's probably fairly common knowledge that women take a while to get fully turned on. What I think gets missed is just HOW turned on a woman can get.

Go twice as slow as you think you should: She's not going to complain if you spend an extra 5 minutes kissing her and playing with her nipples.

Relax into it: Anxiety inhibits pleasure. Let her know with the way you're going about things that there is no rush.

Enjoy Her: Take your time and savor the experience. While you're kissing her let your hand/s roam. Explore her body.  The key thing here is to go slow and give her time to really warm up. There are tons of awesome ways to tease and play with her pussy externally.  They are linked in the section below, The Pussy: Fingering and Eating It.  I CANNOT RECCOMEND THESE VIDEOS ENOUGH.

Ideally she should have a few orgasms before you even slide a finger inside of her.  One of my favorite things to do is give ample attention to her breasts with my mouth, usually with one hand playing with her pussy externally.  You can also climb on top of her and just worship her breasts for awhile.  Get sloppy, suction your mouth onto her breast and move it around.  Suck on her nipples.  Be loud, be nasty!

**Put Her At Ease**

Most women are self conscious about the way their pussies look, smell and taste. Those feelings are going to get in the way of her pleasure. Yes, [r/godpussy](https://www.reddit.com/r/godpussy/) has some fine examples of vaginas. If I'm being honest though, all pussies are sexy. Even so called "meat curtains" are just more lip to suck on or grab onto. At the end of the day, a woman doesn't have any control over how her pussy looks and you shouldn't be such a little boy that you find it anything other than sexy. If you think her pussy looks sexy, tell her!!!

Same goes for smell and taste, but with these you can also SHOW her:

\- Inhale sharply and tell her how hard the way she smells makes you

\- Before you start fingering her and her juices have collected at her entrance suck/lick them up

\- If you've been fingering her, suck or lick her juices off your fingers

Be creative! You're worshipping the divine feminine. Get lost in it. Be primal. Be nasty.

**The Pussy: Fingering it and Eating It**

These two videos together are a Master Class in pussy eating, as well as the pussy in general:

 [https://www.pornhub.com/view\_video.php?viewkey=18839622](https://www.pornhub.com/view_video.php?viewkey=18839622) 

 [https://www.pornhub.com/view\_video.php?viewkey=ph5712f4fcadf9c](https://www.pornhub.com/view_video.php?viewkey=ph5712f4fcadf9c) 

Layla Martin has some great videos on YouTube, here's one about Pussy Massage: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0awN8gaeXfU&has\_verified=1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0awN8gaeXfU&has_verified=1)

Obviously a true Pussy Massage is a more gentle, intimate thing and doesn't make sense to incorporate into every session. You can incorporate certain techniques into your regular sessions, though.

I like to explore her vagina.  I am "waking it up" and also finding which areas she likes stimulated.  Pay attention to how she's responding!

Another trick I like to do is to stimulate her sphincter from inside the vagina.  You can actually sort of finger her ass from the inside out.  When I say finger, I really mean just like a bit of the tip of your finger, going in circles and maybe gentle "thrusts" so to speak.  Don't try to shove her vagina out of her butt.

I like to use my fingers to make a woman cum at least a few times before sex. As things get intense she might squirm or kind of involuntarily pull away. Grab her with your other hand and make her take it. If she really wants you to stop she'll use her hands or push you away.

Being nasty and loud while you go down on her is a turn on for a lot of women.  Loudly spit on her pussy and then lick the fuck out of it all, then slurp up her lips into your mouth and pull your head away, releasing her lips.  Shove your tongue deep inside of her pussy and "mmmmmmmm" in enjoyment.  There's tons of things to do and the How To Eat Pussy videos I linked above are an excellent resource!

**Squirting**

Best I can tell based on what I've read, and from personal experience, there are two kinds of squirting: from the bladder and from the Skenes Glands.

Squirting from the bladder isn't urine, perse. The bladder fills with fluid, which is then expelled during orgasm. That may contain some urine if she doesn't pee before sex, but according to an article I once read they did a study and found little or no traces of urea.

Bladder squirting is the messy squirting you typically see in porn (when they aren't just super hydrated and peeing). Squirting from the bladder can be achieved with over stimulation of the G spot. A word of warning though: Some women report discomfort from this afterwards. Sometimes for days. It can feel like a strange UTI. It takes a lot of intense stimulation to get to that point, though, so don't be hesitant to really go into overdrive with your fingers once she's really warmed up.

Kneel beside her, insert your middle and ring finger, palm up(if she's really petite/tight you might be better off with just 1 finger) and jerk your hand up and down so your jamming your fingers up and into her G spot, while simultaneously doing a modified version of the well known "come hither" motion. Once she's super into things, go as fast as you can.  My suggestion, if you're unsure about how fast/intense, is to gradually increase the intensity and pay attention to how she's responding.

Some women bladder squirt from "normal" orgasms. I don't really understand the mechanism or whatever. I just know it happens. And if you're wondering if they're forcing themselves to pee, I've had women apologize profusely (I don't care - I have one of those nifty mattress protectors) and one that even took a quick break to go to the bathroom so she wouldn't make as much of a mess.

Squirting from the Skenes Glands([https://myvagina.com/skenes-glands/](https://myvagina.com/skenes-glands/)) is true "female ejaculation". In Tantra the fluid is referred to as "Amrita", or Nectar of the Goddess. For me personally, this is the Holy Grail of pleasing a woman. True female ejaculation comes about from very deep, very intense orgasms. There's no short cuts, you have to take her to the highest peaks of pleasure for this to happen. In my experience, the A-spot is the best way to achieve this. From what I've read and experienced, I'd say the amount of fluid is usually only a tablespoon or maybe two, so if she cums hard and all of a sudden things get extra wet - there you go :)

**The Anterior Fornix (A-spot)**

Here's a link: [https://www.healthline.com/health/healthy-sex/a-spot#vaginal-vs-anal-stimulation](https://www.healthline.com/health/healthy-sex/a-spot#vaginal-vs-anal-stimulation)

My preferred progression is clitoral orgasms -> G-spot orgasms -> A-spot orgasms.

That's not a hard rule. Sex is jazz: it's about improvisation and it shouldn't ever be exactly the same.

This part is going to make guys self-conscious, but oh well: this is when having a big dick comes in handy. A longer penis can reach the A-spot better. But guys, listen: If a woman loves you and(or?) you can do even most of the shit I'm talking about here SHE WON'T CARE HOW BIG YOUR DICK IS.

One technique that I like to use in the early stages of fingering her is to slowly explore her pussy - every part of it.  Gently!  You can reach back and feel her cervix, then explore the area all around it, which is the A-spot.  Pay attention to how she's responding!

**The Lower Abdomen**

Think about it, if the A-spot is \~5-6 inches up, that would put it roughly right above the pubic bone. This means that you can put pressure on it from the outside and it will feel pleasurable. Some things to try:

\- Get some coconut or almond oil (use something that can go in her pussy and not cause issues) and massage her lower abdomen. A good time to do this is before you really start doing much with the pussy, but you can also do it while you eat her pussy in a really chill way. Mouth massage for the pussy, hand massage for abdomen.

\- If you really want to give her a treat, as a special event and the main focus of the night, do a full body massage and as the step before you start doing a pussy massage you can focus on the abdomen.

\- If you're say, laying next to her, you can kind of cup her pussy in your hand. Fingers on her lips and clit, palm right above her pubic bone and apply pressure and rock your hand.

\- While you're fingering her with one hand you can use your other hand to gently apply pressure on her lower abdomen, sandwiching all that tissue between your fingers and your hand.

**Fucking**

It's been my experience that after a woman has a bunch of orgasms, her pussy feels different. It's tight, but unlike the unaroused tight pussy the highly aroused tight pussy wants to be stretched. It feels AMAZING and if you need a selfish reason to go through all of this, this would be it.

Women seem to all be laid out just a little differently down there in terms of which positions get at the right spots. The article about the A spot linked above has some good advice on this.

**Energy and Intensity**

If you want to have a marathon session I recommend starting with low energy. Rom-Com level energy is impossible to sustain for that long mentally, and what both of you will notice is the DROP in intensity. It kind of ends up feeling like one or both of you got turned off. If you're confident, experienced and comfortable with each other it's not as big of a deal, though.

If my aim is to really take her on a pleasure journey, I don't get crazy intense until intercourse starts. Even then, as the Tenacious D song goes: sometimes you've got to fuck her gently. At least, at first :)

**Physicality During Sex**

You don't have to choke a girl or degrade her to dominate her. Sex is a physical act, but it's about so much more than inserting Part A into Slot B. The more you can use and demonstrate your strength, the more she'll get turned on. I've had a lot of women tell me that they LOVE when I just pick them up and carry them wherever I want. Some other things to try:

\- When you grab her, GRAB HER. Her hips, her breasts, her thighs while you're going down on her, etc.

\- Pull her hair. I've yet to run into a woman that doesn't enjoy at least a little bit of hair pulling. Grab it close to the roots, not at the ends.

\- When you're doing doggy style grab her around the biceps and pull her into you.

\- In missionary, grab her behind the back of the neck and pull her into you with each thrust. You can also grab her around the shoulders.

\- In missionary, hold yourself up with one hand and use your other to grab onto her hip.  

\- When she's on top, place your hands on either side of her face and make intense eye contact.

\- Most women like to have their asses slapped. I'm not talking about legit spanking, just a good smack on the ass.

\- Bite her! Not hard, but playfully. On the neck, shoulders, ass, thighs.

There's tons of other ways! Improvise, be creative, have fun! There are obviously other far rougher things that can be done, I'm not going to include those here as they aren't as universally enjoyed as those I've listed above.

Eye contact during sex is huge. It shows confidence just like in any other situation and in my opinion it's an important element of being dominant. Locking eyes with her, especially when you are seriously pounding her into the mattress, is amazing. But it makes some people uncomfortable, so they'll keep the lights off or avoid eye contact, essentially hiding from their partner.

Don't hide! You're having sex with another human! Connect!

Ultimately women are truly amazing creatures with a capacity for pleasure that is magnitudes larger than men's.  Society has conditioned women to think that the opposite is true, as well as thinking that sex is bad/dirty/immoral/etc.  If you can come to her as a man that truly appreciates women and their capacity for pleasure and get her to open up it will be an incredible experience for both of you.

A couple notes:

For guys that aren't well endowed or can't last that long, please notice that the majority of what I've written here isn't about intercourse. You can totally and completely rock a woman's world with just your hands and mouth.

If you suffer from ED or premature ejaculation, I really think that putting effort into really getting good at everything else would be good for two reasons: 1) your partner is super satisfied and 2) because she's super satisfied you'll feel more confident and less anxious = your penis might cooperate more.Alan Watts said
 **"You’re Under No Obligation To Be The Same Person You Were 5 Minutes Ago."**

A quote that is liberating if fully internalized. You have no obligation to remain the same as you were yesterday, every new moment is a chance to reinvent yourself. The only thing that stops us is our EGO.

Tony Robbins even pointed this out when he said **“The most powerful force in the human psyche is people’s need for their words and actions to stay consistent with their IDENTITY – how we define ourselves.”**


We often hold onto our EGO (our self made us) with a vice grip. Our Ego is shaped through years of memories, societal conditioning, and the stories we tell ourselves. Our view of ourselves is completely an illusion a self-made one, ask a scientist where this 'self' resides and they won't be able to tell you.


This 'self' is what stops us from doing things that we need to do in order to advance ourselves. If you ever hear words such as "nah I would never do that", "That's not me", that is the EGO talking. The EGO we create loves to remain rigid, it loathes the word 'evolution'. Why do you think people love comfort zones? Leaving them alludes to 'evolution' something the EGO can't have.


Those who wake up from a coma after losing their memories often come back with different personality traits, their previous idea of themselves destroyed by some injury.


You and I can do the same, we can consciously choose to say "fuck you" to the old idea of ourselves and take on new paradigms that are more helpful.  
Once you remove the limitation of your mind you are truly free to do whatever you want.

* The Obese person who has never exercised can start at any second
* The person with social anxiety can decide to talk to the girl
* The person with low self-esteem can decide to feel good about themselves for once


The gates of self-actualization open up when you truly believe in Alan Watts assertion.

Don't forget to check out the video! ►[**Watch This!**](https://youtu.be/872R75ChYsw)
Too many guys in here believe they don't deserve a really attractive women in their life, they have insecurities about there own value and it shows. What you need to do is stop focusing on women for a month, challenge yourself to do something really damn hard like running a 10k by the end of the month. Get some achievements and milestones under your belt that ***you*** worked hard as hell to get, make it something that very few people actually end up doing.

I quit smoking two weeks ago, started running for the first time and today I got on the treadmill only planning to do 2.5km at my max speed. Something strange happened and I just refused to stop running until I hit 5km. Two days ago I was struggling to hit 2.5km without breaks in-between but I just forced myself to keep on running and did 5km in 30 mins with no breaks.

The truth is, I was always capable of doing that, it was the mental barriers I hit that stopped me from realising what I could actually do. The same is true for game, you're probably more than capable of attracting and sleeping with beautiful women, you just hit mental barriers and let them stop you. You see her and you decide not to go say hi, you decide not to ask her on a date, you decide not to kiss her. Take some action, you'll be surprised by how well you do.

EDIT: What I’m really trying to get at here is that you need to impose some level of hardship on yourself. When I was a kid I did karate and the stretching routines literally involved my Sensei coming over and standing on my body parts to make me stretch that extra 10-20% that I thought I couldn’t do. The dojo was solid wood flooring and you’d be expected to hold stances with your heel to the ground for the entire session, if you moved, the Sensei would come over and put you back in that position. I continued doing those stretches at home and would push 10-20% further than I thought possible. When 6pm rolled around it was time to eat shit for an hour and feel like my ligaments were about to explode but I made I did it and was really good after a year. Adopt the same mindset in pickup, give yourself an hour where you are gonna eat shit, just get up, walk out of the house, go find a girl and say hi. What else sucks ass? Trying to escalate, well ask her to grab a coffee there and then if you get past the pleasantries.

There’s never a time that’s suitable for anything in life, it’s always inconvenient, you’ll never have the energy, she’ll never be in the perfect situation for you to approach.

So do it anyway.So I (22M) did my first cold approach ever today! I noticed a cute girl working at a grocery store I shop at and after arming myself with as much Reddit advice and YouTube videos on approaches as I could, I decided to go talk to her when I saw her there today. I went up to her and told her that I had seen her there a few days ago and I thought she was cute so I wanted to come say hi. I’ve never used this basic and straightforward approach before but it worked better than I expected and it was a lot easier and not as awkward as I was thinking the whole thing was going to be. 

I was in the store earlier today too and didn’t see her but I talked to a school friend for a bit that worked there and asked him about this girl. He told me she had a boyfriend which made me not want to talk to her, but then I decided I still would just to get a little practice in because I already know the outcome. Whether or not I do everything right or not, I’m not going to get her number, so what is the harm? It felt like I had taken the risk out of it which calmed my nerves about doing it because I was a bit nervous. So I went and did it when I saw her there this evening, not really feeling nervous about doing it because I knew I was already rejected anyway. 

The conversation went well and then she brought up that someone (my friend) was talking about me today and mentioned I was doing something cool with school, which she recognized when I told her my name. Then she brought up that my friend had said he told me she had a boyfriend and I laughed a little and said yeahhhh he did but I figured I would come talk to you anyway, which made her laugh a little. Then she mentioned that she actually just got out of a relationship a couple days ago but that she had been wanting to leave it for a while. She brought up her dog as one of the reasons she stayed because she was trying to make sure she could keep it when she left because they had gotten it together, and we talked about dogs for a bit. After that I said that I’d feel a little awkward asking for her number since she just got out of something but I guess I’ll see you around here and then left. 

I probably could have done a few things better but I felt really good about it because I left my comfort zone and talked to a pretty girl which used to really scare me! She also didn’t seem to actually reject me which is great, but I could have rejected myself for her by saying what I did at the end. I’m thinking of talking to her again the next time I see her and bringing up something she mentioned she likes to do to get things started. I’m also going to try offering her my number instead and say if she wants to get coffee or hang out sometime then definitely text me. I feel like that is the better way to play it without pressuring her too much since she got out of a relationship recently. If she texts me that will be great but if not that will be okay too!

I just wanted to share my exciting experience with you all and thank you for all of the really helpful advice that is on this board! If anyone has any advice about the situation or how I could move forward please share!I just want to pop in and say that a huge 'thank you' to all of you for being part of this sub, whatever the reason is. I can't thank you enough.

For all of you out there that are anxious about still being a virgin, I have to say: seriously, I realized that it really not a big deal. 

Okay, I hear you say: '*It's easy to say now, you just had sex.*' But I mean it. The pressure and fear that I felt because of that, it was all in my head. It's all in YOUR head. It's a big deal to you because you make it a big deal. But in the end, if you think about it, it's just skin touching some other skin, nothing fancy. (that doesn't mean it's not fun though!)

------------

Here is what I did to get there:

I came here in a moment of despair, after having little to no relationships with girls for my entire life. I used to think I was ugly because of school bullying when I was young. I had the 'nice guy' syndrome, agreeing with everybody all the time to avoid any confrontation. I had a lot of 'friends' because of that, but nothing very personal because I wouldn't open myself up.

And then about a year and a half ago, after falling for yet another oneitis, I told myself: **enough is enough.**

I started by reading Mark Manson's *Models*, which told me exactly what I needed to hear, cutting through bullshit information available everywhere.

Then after that, I started working on my inner game. I realized that the greatest cockblock I had was *myself* by far. I was so afraid to feel rejected that I never made any move and I threw away every opportunity I had because I was constantly telling me that *no girl could possibly find me attractive*, so I was probably misreading the Indicators Of Interest.

I started lifting. Nothing huge, twice or three times a week. I'm really not super beef, and I don't care. All I wanted was to stop being a fucking twig, which I did. I developped a lot of confidence because of that; it made me feel handsome for the first time, little by little. I also tried meditation, on and off since then. I'm not a huge praticer, but it gave me an objective view of myself that was really useful to find the flaws I had in order to fix them.

Then, I did the hardest part: I tried to stop being outcome dependant. I went with the flow. If things were not going the way I wanted, I made a very conscious effort to get over it. And shit, that was so hard. I realized that I had such a strong ego to break apart. I won't lie to you, it still comes back every now and then (after all, I'm only human). But now, when it strikes hard, I notice it a lot more quickly and I can shut it down. The best part is, it only gets better with time.

And then one day (in fact, yesterday), after all that hard work came the reward.

So despite all the hate that reddit tends to get sometimes, I'm very grateful that I came across this site, and particularly /r/seduction. You guys helped me become a better man, and I am absolutely happier now. Thank you.

**TL;DR: I did it, I'm super happy, but really, don't stress over it too much. All it takes is work on yourself. It will be the single, biggest challenge of your life, but trust me, it is absolutely worth every amout of work that you put in it. You'll be way happier in the end.**I know this has appeared in seddit before but I feel like it bears repeating. There's been a few posts recently that showed guys with one-itis, and other guys asking the age-old question "how do I get this ONE specific girl, she's special bla bla". 

Seduction doesn't work that way. You don't learn pickup and focus all your energy and knowledge on that one target special snowflake girl of your dreams - that in itself is pedestalizing the girl. 

You learn pickup to **increase your own value as a man in the sexual / dating market**. You apply these principles across the board, with all women. Learn to adopt abundance mentality, pedestalize yourself instead of women, become and behave like a high value male with many options. 

Just a friendly PSA. So many people don't want to hear truth about their lives because it hurts their feelings, it hurts their ego. But Running away from the truth creates more suffering in the long run and that's when people play the blame game. That's when they act like a victim as if they didn't have a chance to improve. 



**1. You don't have a
stable career/job/business.**


Only success doesn't get you women but it's important nonetheless. A lot of guys worry about their personal finance, a lot of guys over work just to pay the bills. Men who don't have financial security/job security always feel an unconscious fear about the future. What if this goes wrong? What if that goes wrong? But those guys who has a successful financial base and ***work life balance*** can be more **non-needy**, they can follow the advice **be yourself**, because by having a good financial foundation, a heavy stone have been lifted off their chest. That's why it's important to have a business/career/job security. 



Though it is no end all be all, those guys who don't take care of this fundamental aspect of life often finds themselves in desperate situation(Specially during this time). So if that describes your situation, forget about all these "attract women" advice and take care of the fundamental problems of your life first. The advice of "Being Honest" doesn't work with guys who are broke and poor and isn't traditionally good looking. A certain amount of Success in life is needed to boost your non-neediness and it also helps you to "be yourself".




**2. You're not at your optimal health condition.**


You can read hundreds if not thousands of articles on "Lower Testosterone in Modern Men". Lower Testosterone leads to anxiety, depression, shitty mood and so on. Do you think you can really be your best self without having optimal level of testosterone? Do you think you can really be a guy with great enthusiastic energy when most of the time you just feel tired? 



Educate yourself on nutrition, learn about the kind of foods that keep your energy level high all throughout the day. Your excellence in the field can't be divorced from your health. Show me a guy who lifts heavy systematically, eats optimal amount of healthy food and gets quality sleep and I'll show you a potential lady killer. 




**3. You're outer game hasn't improved much.** 


Consider these 2 scenarios. One guy with great vocabulary has well rounded knowledge in philosophy, psychology, history, culture, storytelling and comedy. And another guy just tries to be "cool" and tries to use some "techniques" to attract women. Which guy is gonna come off as more authentic? 



I see a lot of dudes asking questions like, "How do I become a better communicator?" 


And more often than not they get some very generic advises which seem like shortcuts. 


But nobody wants to hear, "If you want to attract quality women, be a quality guy. Don't be a bum who looks for quick fix. Educate yourself on interesting topics. Few people are born smart, if you want to be a good storyteller, a good communicator, you MUST invest time in it." 


Women will sense it if you use too much "Game" and if you're too technical, She'll find it weird. The key is to find a sweet spot in between but unfortunately most coaches focus on the "Game". 





It's one thing to get lucky and it's another thing to DOMINATE the field. You may just "get laid" and write a happy field report but can you repeat that? 



Finding consistent success with women requires a big shift in lifestyle. And I have just listed 3 fundamentals that can make or break your dating life.How many times do you think that an attractive women has been offered the same standard boring interview style conversation by other men? (What's your name?, Where are you from? What do you do for work, etc.) The answer is countless times, including likely multiple times that very night.

Many men often fall into to the trap of immediately entering into interview mode when starting a conversation with a woman. It seems to them as the default safest option to avoid there being an awkward silence or their fear of not knowing what to say.

But in reality, its better to mix in talk about literally anything else. Doing so will positively distinguish yourself from the thousands of other guys that all start conversations the same way. 

Many people don't like their jobs or where they currently are in life, and go out on the weekend to try to relax and forget. Starting an interaction by asking a person a long list of boring questions that is more akin to a job interview is often not the best move.

Of course it is fine to eventually exchange such personal information as a conversation progresses. Just don't pack it all into the first 5 minutes if you want to appear as an intriguing and interesting person to talk to. Be brave, take a little risk, and put forward a real topic for discussion.

Full Video: [Techniques for Effortless Conversations](https://youtu.be/X0GU4WowWSQ)Hey guys! First of all, a big "THANK YOU!" to all the people who commented or gave a badge to my previous post. I really didn't think that it would receive so much attention (let alone positive one).

Part 1: [https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/imcq2e/turned\_30\_as\_a\_virgin\_now\_1\_year\_later\_after\_a/](https://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/imcq2e/turned_30_as_a_virgin_now_1_year_later_after_a/)

There were a couple points from part 1 that I wanted to **clarify** before moving on

* Making an emotional vs logical connection is up to much debate and would probably need a post on its own. The take-away is to generally make questions that reveal feelings, emotions or past experiences, instead of just plain information. It all depends on the context and I can't really be giving you canned material mainly for that reason. Just keep this in mind: When you are talking, instead of focusing her attention to "what", make the conversation mainly about "how" or "why". E.g. "What are you studying?" is an informational question but "Why did you chose that?", or "How did your parent affect that decision?" requires her to do some deal of introspection. Similarly asking "Do you cook?" is plain information, but "What is your favorite food?" will bring up the memory of that food and, hopefully, also the good emotions of eating it. Of course, both informational and emotional questions have to be made in order to progress the conversation. Also let her talk as much as she wants and *listen carefully*. Use what she says to make her open up more. It's good to have a some general conversation topics at hand, but don't try to steer the conversation into the topics or threads you have predefined in your mind. Instead, use the information she is providing herself.
* Several people messaged me for advice about some specific girl. While I'm flattered, I am not a coach/mentor (at least not professionally) and I can't give professional advice, save from my own personal experience or opinion, so take everything I say with a grain of salt. My own personal opinion is as I stated it on part 1: **Move on from girls that nothing sexual has happened yet**. It is not worth to beat around the bush. You deserve a girl who you REALLY like and who she is REALLY into you, and not somebody who is unsure. It's SOOOO common for men (me including) to "kinda get something going", and then we get so attached that we forget about other girls, and then brood over that one particular girl for months without anything actually happening. Please don't do that! It's SO MUCH EASIER to get a new girl who will be 100% into you from the beginning and will probably be even better than your previous "crush". Literally, no one of the girls I slept with was previously my friend or we had been "kinda sexually" texting for more than few weeks (even though there were indeed specific girls in the back of my mind that I was thinking about. But as soon as I saw how easy it was to get somebody new get head over heals for me, I immediately forgot about them and got to see how vain I was)

---

Moving on from part 1, these are some additional points. As usual, for **tl:dr, read bold only**. Also note that these are personal opinions/views. They do not reflect anyone else besides myself and I know some may sound controversial:

* **A great way to mitigate mixed signals is to communicate to her that you are a cool guy, but NOT a "harmless" one. After you reveal your sexual interest to a girl, make absolutely sure she understands that, if she does not feel the same way about you, that's cool, but if she chooses to keep interacting with you, she's getting nailed at some point.** You are serious and you not goofing around. That's a man-to-woman interaction. This is not a game and you are not her emotional toy. If she wants you, she is getting the full package or nothing at all. If you had a girl who you had a great time with, and you "kinda" revealed to her that you like her, and then she kept interacting with you like nothing happened or she very lightly flirted with you, probably sending you a couple of kissing emojis here and there or joking around that she is your GF so as to keep you interested, then that means that she wanted you around as a friend because she was having a good time but you had not triggered any attraction switches. And, unfortunately, it also means that she knows perfectly well that you would be so docile and harmless that you would never kick back because you are such a "good and understanding boy" after all. Yeah, well, this is bullshit. What you should do instead, as a rule of thumb, is this: You reveal your interest, and then if she she does not feel the same way, that's fine, tell her that you can't be "just" friends with someone who you have sexual feelings for, bid her goodbye and move on, no hard feelings, go meet other girls, don't text her. But, if she comes back on her own, or texts you or asks you to meet, go out and act sexual: Touch her, stare in her eyes, hold her hand, tell her that you want to kiss or fuck her, do things that you'd do if it was a first date, etc. Make it overtly obvious that you are there to make her yours and not talk about the weather. If she retracts and says that it's not like that or that she is still confused. Tell her that's fine, you understand, bid her goodbye again, and rinse and repeat until you get bored. Under no circumstances fall into her "frame". This is a one-way ticket to FRIENDZONE. You are not friends and you never will be. Communicate this clearly.
* **Dating apps are garbage IMHO. They distort your goals and your methods of achieving them. You are far better off with real-life approaching!** Fundamentally, dating apps generally lead people to develop skills/mindsets which are NOT very congruent with the those that are important for sexual attraction and maintaining relationships. For example, knowing how to take good photos, posing for photos, dressing to cover-up your insecurities, editing/filtering images, or screen multiple matches as quickly as possible, or making witty funny comments with their names, making sexual innuendos in chat, or securing a number/date etc. are fun skills to have, but pretty worthless when (sexually) meeting someone in real-life. To add to that, I've met several people who's mindset around dating apps has shifted from "finding a date" to "amassing as many likes/matches you can so you can feel good about yourself and not like a worthless piece of shit who dropped out of college and is now a wanna-be influencer or some other new-age crap"
* **All social apps (including dating apps) make the good-looking people vain and arrogant, while the not-so-good-looking people really depressive and questioning their actual worth. Keep them as a side-tool if you want, but don't let them define your worth!** If you are using dating apps with some success, by all means, keep doing thet, but I'd strongly suggest that you invest at least the same amount of time meeting people in real-life. Half the girls who agreed to go on a date with me explicitly (and blatantly!) told me that they didn't think I was physically attractive at all. I guess that means that they'd most likely would have swiped left if they came across me in a dating app. However, meeting them in real-life not only I managed to get on a date with them, I also slept with a couple of them.
* **A girl's attraction is peaking somewhere between unquestionable loyalty and plain cheating from your part.** If she takes you too much for granted, her attraction feelings will plummet. Also, if you are constantly too distant or she thinks that you are cheating her, she will get bored or irritated and will, again, loose attraction. The peak is between the two: She is yours, but she also knows that you are perfectly capable of meeting and hooking up with other women if you so wish. It's a huge aphrodisiac for her to know that you CHOSE her among other girls (i.e. that she was NOT your only -desperate- option). To be able to effectively communicate that, it's best to have high standards. But make those standards about her character and not things she has no control over (e.g. liking tall women is a poor standard, but liking women who take care of their body, is a better one).
* **Your flirting game will skyrocket when you get in a relationship!** Pretty paradoxical, isn't it? Well, think about it: Everything is in sub-communication, right? And almost everyone will tell you that what sparks attraction is confidence and being detached from the outcome. Well, when you go out and meet new people and no matter what happens, you still have your GF waiting for you back home to blow your dick at the end of the night, only then you are *truly confident* and *utterly detached from any outcome*. As a result, you (sub-)communicate a totally confident and relaxed image and, thus, your flirting skills virtually improve. Even some girls who have rejected you in the past, may come back and hit on you themselves.
* Having said the above, **I Personally recommend that you DON'T stop flirting after you do get in a relationship. Now, I don't mean to encourage cheating. What I mean is that, once you get into the relationship, you should NOT go back into being your old anti-social reserved self.** I've seen far too many guys do this because they naturally crawl back into their comfort zone once they secure a source of regular sex. Instead, what you should do is to keep being social and meeting new people and maintain a healthy social circle (outside your GF). I don't say go out and get numbers from random girls or have sex with them (unless you've agreed on an open relationship), but do talk to the cute waitress, do greet the cashier, do go meet that girl group at the party. You get the point. Just don't be a jerk about it. That way you 1) virtually keep options open, because, after all, as we said above, feeling "chosen" it's an aphrodisiac for your girl, and 2) keep your flirting skills honed. Think about it this way: Every time your GF goes out, she gets hit on: a stare, a smile, an innocent conversation with the barman, etc. She is essentially *passively* practicing her flirting skills either she wants it or not. However, us men, when we go out, we very rarely get passive flirting. In order to practice our flirting and social skills we do it "actively". We have to go and approach, initiate conversation, keep them interested, be fun, be physical, etc. But if you go out and sit at a corner, most likely nobody will flirt with you. This way, after, say 3 years, you break up, your girl will immediately go back out there because all those 3 years, she didn't forget how to meet new people and flirt. However, if all those 3 years you stayed inside and played video games, then good luck getting back into being social and flirting effectively again!
* **Buying stuff for a girl who has done nothing to actually deserve them is the PERFECT way to enter the FRIENDZONE or the provider-zone (a sex-operated ATM-machine). Don't do it.** If not immediately, it will plummet her attraction in the long-run. Trust me, even if you are getting sex, no woman is really getting soaking wet for her ATM machine. This applies to all ages. Tip: pay for the first date, but only if it is easily affordable for you (e.g. less then 30-20$). If she insists splitting, tell her to buy you drinks/coffee next time. Alternatively, you can also make it an exchange with other material stuff, but not sex (e.g. "Let me pay for the dinner, but next time you come over, you'll bring that awesome chicken pie you said you made the other day, deal?").
* **Having a loving GF is great! No matter what people will say regarding "finding a girlfriend won't make you happy or won't solve your problems". Well, if your problem IS finding a girlfriend and having sex, then it will solve this for sure. There is a GREAT sense of achievement in going through the process from approaching a stranger, to going on a date, to bringing her at your place, to calling her "baby" a month later. All due to your own hard work.** For me, it always felt like a *huge gap* in my soul. I had trusty friends, a loving family, good hobbies, my own place, did great at my job, etc. But seeing all my friends getting into relationships and having sex while I was still a kissless virgin made me feel half a man, even though I have pretty much everything figured out and set for. It's a bit hard to explain, but it kinda felt like putting together a puzzle depicting Mona Lisa with all the pieces set in place but the one piece with her face is missing. You can easily tell what the picture is, but still, the most important piece is missing.
* **Sex is great and every person should experience it.** No matter what people will say that it is not a real goal, it is still a measurable result that can also give you a very real sense of achievement as a male and as a human being. Always keep a sex-positive attitude and be mindful that everyone is different. There is nothing wrong getting first time sex at 30+ or 40+ or later. It happens. There is also nothing wrong about having many or few sexual partners or about enjoying casual sex or not. Also keep in mind that first-time sex is supposed to be awkward
* **Don't be judgmental or pushy about anything at all! And don't take things personally!** I guess too many guys get this wrong because I've been explicitly complimented for being open and non-judgmental more than once. If a girl goes on a date with me but then says she does not want to go out again, cool, I guess she is not for me then. If she had 0, 5, or 50 past lovers, that's also cool. Is she still in-love with her ex? OK, let her figure it out on her own and go meet someone else in the meantime. She agreed to come to your house, but doesn't want to have sex. That's OK, she probably needs to feel more comfortable first. She had past trauma and is very reluctant to give BJs? That's totally fine, there are so many other things to enjoy during sex. What I mean to say is that if you keep an open mind, chances are she will feel much more comfortable around you and will also make her keep an open mind about you as well. This does not mean that you should disregard red-flags or not set boundaries. It means that you totally understand them, and you choose to either to deal with them or move on.
* **Girls like sex as much as men do. Even more so.** However, while most men will gladly fuck most girls who they find attractive, girls won't like sex with just about anyone (very few girls might actually do). Most girls will enjoy (and subsequently lustfully crave) sex with their partner. If you are with a girl for more than 3-4 months and her sex drive is still suspiciously low with you, then (unless there are mental issues) something hasn't exactly "clicked" correctly in her mind. I've seen girls who were really hesitant with sex or trying new stuff with their Nice Guy(TM) boyfriend for years, and that poor guy was trying to be understanding and wouldn't break up with her, no matter how much he wanted to fuck her brains out. And that same girl would later do a threesome with a couple of strangers the moment she had 2 drinks at a party. Bottom line: sex shouldn't be a chore for either partner. Sexual chemistry is super-important for maintaining an LTR. You deserve someone who *enjoys* waking you up with a blowjob every morning.
* **If you know what you are doing, you can give a girl mind-shattering orgasms with FINGERING.** No matter how hard you try, a girl may or may not cum from oral or PIV intercourse. But she can surely cum from fingering. My own sample is small and not statistically significant, but it supports my point 100%. There are helpful videos on-line. I got several guy friends who think they are "great lovers" only because they (say they) have a big dick but it turns out they essentially don't really care about their partner satisfaction in bed. So bottom line: There is absolutely no reason to feel bad or anxious about your size or your previous experiences. If you have an arm and a hand with 2-3 fingers, just watch a couple of vids and you are all set.

I may post an update if more bullet points come up.I (20F) have been a lurker on here for quite a while and thought I'd share this experience!

As I was waiting for my train to arrive earlier today, I was approached (and totally caught off guard) by this cute guy! He started speaking a foreign language at first so my initial thought was that he was a tourist and probably needed directions. After I tell him I can only speak english, he goes 'Oh sorry, I thought you looked south african, you're beautiful.' I was like.. did this dude just profile me?? but I brushed it off and took the compliment.  He then leads the conversation into asking me what I do, where I've travelled, etc etc, and finally, the most important question of all, what kind of food I'm into. After we establish that we both like korean, he asks me for my number and lets me know he'd like to take me out for some korean bbq. He says he needs to get to a meeting soon and he leaves me without saying another word. I was blown away.

This man was oozing confidence, and I knew as our conversation progressed that he just had to have been going through this page or watching those cold approach videos on youtube because he was TOO SMOOTH!! He played a little hard to get, was super funny and just went about his day afterwards as if this wasn't a big deal. I'm just excited I got to witness this and wanted to share with you all! Never thought I'd be the subject of an approach lol

Edit: I’m not sure what response I was expecting when I posted this, but I definitely wasn’t ready for a bunch of people to make these wild assumptions that I’ve essentially rejected this guy, or that I never found him attractive in the first place. Yes, I’m busy for a few weeks on end, and yes that is possible (travelling, work, studying, and the shit storm that is life). Its just a matter of timing, and even if it doesn’t work out perfectly, I just wanted to appreciate his confidence and skill! Now please leave me alone lol

Edit #2: Alright you fuckers. I've never encountered so much pessimism in my life. You guys need to restore your faith in women. The 5'7 man and I have set up a date to get lunch before a music festival we both happen to be going to. This is next month, on the 21st of September since some of you are so bloody curious. I've given him a really brief detailing of whats going on in my life before then and he understands. Its possible! He wants to see me even if it means waiting for a month!!! He'll have plenty of time to hit on other women and improve his 'game' before then too. If you need proof on top of this, you can pm me! PLEASE CAN I BE LEFT ALONE NOW. (Thank you to those sticking up for me!)Women love attention.  Just remember that anytime you go out with a woman, she's not dressing for you.  She's dressing to get the most attention.  She wants to solidify your attention on her, or the attention of other men if she's not that into you.  Some women know how to easily get attention, while others get mad because they don't know how to and see men give other women attention.

So what does this mean to you?  Very simple.  The women who look like they're trying to get attention by wearing attention-getting clothing, talk to them like you would anyone else.  The women who aren't dressing to get attention, look at the eyes.  Women who aren't dressing to get attention, but give you eye contact, approach these women.  Talk to them like they have your undivided attention.

"I thought you said you were gonna tell us how to get women to chase you?"

Remember that you're treating the women who are trying to get all the attention like a regular person, while you're treating the woman who's kinda hiding like she has all of your attention.

Something beautiful will happen.  Being that you had a good conversation with the woman who wasn't looking for attention, you built up rapport and she's willing to hang out with you.  She may not get that everyday, so she'll be genuinely interested in seeing you again.  So she may call or text you first.

The woman who is an attention-seeker also doesn't get that everyday.  She's use to men gawking at her and putting her on a pedestal.  When you acknowledge her but don't give her all of your attention, all of a sudden you become interesting.  She may be thinking,

"There's something different about this one"

So don't be surprised if you're out and about and you see a hot woman come and approach you for whatever reason.

You may not have noticed her, but being that you didn't give her attention like most men do, she'll be willing to get it by approaching you.  If she doesn't approach you, she may give you eye contact and flirty looks.

Try it and see what happens.One thing that isn’t often spoken about is how hard it is for men to approach women with romantic intent. It’s actually one of the hardest things we ever have to do and that’s the reason why the vast majority of us only ever do it while drunk and specially defined scenarios like a bar or a club. Well I don’t want to be that way anymore and have decided to get over this fear once and for all so to that end I’ll be approaching 2 women every day for 50 days and writing about what happens.

And just so we’re clear; this isn’t about ‘getting laid’; it’s about breaking through my personal limitations and learning to become a much stronger man. When a guy approaches a girl he doesn’t know, every one of his insecurities are shoved right into his face in technicolour HD and it’s in that moment that he really finds out what he’s made of.

It’s time to find out what I’m made of. Let’s do this.

FYI – All names have been changed to protect the privacy of the women in question.

 
Day 2 – woman number 1 – Klara

So I was walking through the streets daydreaming today when two girls walked by, one of which was really beautiful. As they passed, I made eye contact with a builder who’d clearly noticed them too and we both gave each other a knowing smile. In that moment I thought #fuckit, ran back, stepped in front of the one I wasn’t interested in and said:

ME: Hey can you help me with something please?

FRIEND: With what?

ME: Basically I think your friend is absolutely gorgeous but I don’t know what to say to her. Can you give me some tips?

[BOTH GIRLS LAUGH]

FRIEND: I don’t know, just talk to her and see what happens!

[I TURN TO FACE THE ONE I AM INTERESTED IN]

ME: Hey my name’s Ciaran and I think you’re gorgeous. What’s your name?

KLARA: My name’s Klara and thank you!

I asked them what they were doing and they said they worked in the area and were on their way to meet friends for lunch. I then asked Klara for her number and she agreed. After that; I said I’d be in touch and told them to have a great day. I then walked past the builder who’d seen the whole thing and patted me on my back in congratulations.

Woman number 2 – Unknown

Later on in the day, I was sat next to this woman on the tube who I really wanted to talk to but couldn’t bring myself to do it because of how many people were around us. The carriage wasn’t packed, per se, but there were enough people in the vicinity to ensure that any rejection I faced would have been subject to an audience and I wasn’t ready for that. I’m disappointed that I didn’t do it, but at the same time I accept that it’s where I currently am in this challenge. By the time I’m on day 50 that’ll be the sort of thing that I dive into so I’ve given myself room to grow.

Anyway shortly after that mild display of bitchitude, I saw a woman walking towards me and decided to say hello, but when I did which she looked at me with as uninterested an expression as you can possibly get. I then asked for her name and she said me ‘Why?’ so I said ‘I’m just trying to introduce myself.’ She then said ‘Sorry I haven’t got time.’ and bounced as hard as one human being realistically can bounce. Her outright rejection of me was a mild sting to my ego, but on the plus side I suffered no severe injuries to my person and all of my internal organs remained unharmed so I guess I’ll be OK.

2 days down, 48 to go

HASHTAG FUCKIT

**FYI I’m starting a private WhatsApp group for men who want to be amazing with women. DM Me if you want to join**Very very weird post.

I take cold showers regularly, for one simple reason. To remind myself of something.

Just before I turn on the tap on my shower and set it to cold, I look at it frozen in fear. Anxiety kicks in. I start coming up with rationalisations on why this is a bad idea. I self talk about hypothermia, I self talk about masochism, I usually say this is stupid.

But then I look that shower in the face and I remind myself something "It's going to be uncomfortable at first, but then it'll be okay."

The first drop is the worst, but after that it's okay.

It's like jumping in a cold pool, or a cold sea.

For me it's the same with approaching.

Before I approach, I get frozen with anxiety. I come up with several rationalisations on why this is stupid, "she's busy", "she's probably a bitch.", "I'm not in state" etc etc etc.

But then I remind myself, just like with cold showers.

"It's going to be uncomfortable at first, but then it's going to get better."

And the first approach might come out awkward, but what sometimes happens is I just own that fucking nervousness and the interaction goes way better than expected.

I'll leave with this lesson I learned from Seneca:

*The Fear of Future Suffering is often worse than the suffering itself.*My sophomore year of high school, I was a 300 pound fat kid who only had a small circle of friends. I felt fed up with not being the person I wanted to be and started my spiritual and self improvement journey very early on. My senior year i weighed 180 pounds but I was now muscular instead of fat. I never paid any mind to the girls around me even though I obviously had the desire to have relationships with many of them. I stayed in my lane and focused on making myself the best I could be physically and mentally. Seeing how I lost so much weight a lot of people wanted to naturally talk to me. It got to the point where hearing “omg you lost so much weight!” gave me a headache. It felt like people only noticed me after I lost the weight, as if I was irrelevant to them before. It felt good to be noticed by the girls that never paid me attention and it felt especially good to make out with the girl I had a crush on for 5 years. The only reason my life changed so drastically was because I finally stopped caring about what other people think about me and started to focus on what I thought about me. I’m still on my journey and there’s still much I don’t understand about the world around me but one thing is for certain. Stop caring what other people think about you and live in the moment. The moment is a gift that’s why they call it the present. Change your life, eat healthy, stay active, educate yourself, and never give a single shit as to what anyone else has to say about you. Keep it real with yourself and push yourself and you’ll see the results you want to see.Imagine if a girl randomly said to you: you seem like you’re from California.

(Assume for this example that you’re from anywhere except California).

You’d be like: “why do you think that?” Or “what makes you say that?”

Your response is just a knee-jerk reaction.  It’s human nature to want to know why someone thinks something about us when there’s no apparent reason.

This is particularly true with women. Think about how much effort women put into their appearance. All that effort and then you’re randomly like: “you seem like you’re from California.”

Her mind will instantly be scanning through the possibilities of why you would think that: is it my hair, my dress, the way I’m talking, etc, etc.

She will want to know (just like you would want to know) why you think that.

Now think about what would happen if she wouldn’t tell you why she thinks you’re from California? She just changes the subject and moves on.

Would the assumption disappear?  No. It would just be lingering there.  Unfinished. Something for your subconscious to chew on while you two discuss other things.

And most likely, whether you want to admit it or not, you’re going to bring it up again later.

On the flip side, women will *always* bring it up again later.  And you know what she will subconsciously be thinking about the whole time, before bringing it back up?

You.

So here’s how you do it.

You: “you know, you seem like you’re from LA.”

Her: “what makes you say that?”

You: “I don’t know...(looking like you’re really thinking about it)...there’s just something about you....I’m not sure...

You: “hey have you ever heard of Kaisen?”

Her: “what’s that?”

You: “it’s where you make small improvements to something everyday, and eventually it adds up to a lot.”

Her: “is that what you do?”

You: “Yeah actually last week I started...” (and then you go into some story)

It’s as simple as that. You make an assumption. Then when she asks about it, you defer the answer and create a cliffhanger.  Rest assured, she has not forgotten the assumption. Her subconscious is chewing on it. She’s curious about it, which makes her curious about YOU.

The second thing you did was: change the subject.  This is one of the simplest things you can start doing right away to avoid those “awkward silences” guys worry so much about.

Attraction is not logical. Attractive conversation does not have to go in any logical order. In fact, logical conversation is often boring. And boring is not attractive.

So change the subject at random, with no hesitation. It’s a great technique so you never get stuck and always have something to say.

Another thing you did in the above conversation was: tell her somethings about yourself.

Guys will often be hesitant to do this (particularly at the initial, smalltalk stage of a conversation) because they get hung up on: “will she be interested in that,” “will she think that’s stupid,” etc.

If you take one thing away from this post, it’s that when you need something to say, you can always just tell her something random about yourself.  It doesn’t matter what.  One thing will lead to another, and conversation will ensue.

So what kind of assumptions should you make?

You can make assumptions about anything. The key is to make sure they’re **wrong** (or at least not obviously right).

For example if your in a bar in LA talking to a chick, and you’re like: “you seem like you’re from LA.” She’s gonna look at you like you’re an idiot.

However if you say that in a bar in New York, then it works.

Now what if you happen to be right, when it’s not obvious.

For example you drop the LA line in New York and her face lights up and she’s like: “how did you know?”

Or you make the assumption: “you seem like a yoga girl to me.” (Obviously you would say this when she WASN’T all decked out in yoga gear). And she’s like: “Yeah totally. I’m an instructor down at Orange Theory.”

In these cases you happen to have assumed right, but it wasn’t obvious. So just go with it.

You: “what are your 3 favorite things about LA?”

You: “what are the 3 biggest benefits to yoga that you would tell a new student?”

This brings up another misconception I see all the time. There’s this notion floating around that you shouldn’t ask chicks questions. That questions are boring.  That’s complete nonsense.  How are you going to learn anything about someone if you don’t ask a question?

Boring questions are boring.

Boring questions are ones that seek short, yes/no type answers.  They are the ones that cause you to constantly have to think of more questions.

For example if you said to the LA chick in NY, “so you like LA?” Her response: “it’s ok.”

Now that’s boring.  Your question required no real thought to answer. And now you need another question.

But if you ask for her 3 favorite things about LA, now she has to think.

Now you will get an answer with some substance to it.  And any of the three things she brings up can be the next point of conversation.

For example she says (and I’d hope you’d get more of a response than this, but let’s just pretend she keeps it short like this): “Sun. Sand. And all the sexy people.”

You (bad response): “that’s cool.”

You (good response): “So whats the difference between LA sexy people and NY sexy people? Give me details.”

Your good response is yet another question that requires her to think and come up with an answer of substance.

Your bad response just leads to awkward silence and you fumbling around for what to say next.

You’ve heard everywhere that women like men who are challenging. Well what is challenging? Is it challenging her to an arm wrestling match?

No.

It’s making her think. When you make her think, you’re challenging.

Assumptions, cliffhangers and questions seeking substance make her think.  That’s challenging. That’s attractive.

If she’s responding to you with short answers, it means she doesn’t have to think. That’s boring.  Which means you’re boring.

So incorporate the: “what are 3 things” line into your conversational arsenal.

You can ask the 3 things question for just about anything.

Once you do that, as well as start using the other conversation techniques discussed about, you’ll be well on your way to making *Endless Conversation.*

\---

Update: My best selling book 'Make Women Chase You' is now available to read **FREE** on Kindle Unlimited.

[amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193056&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.co.uk](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193197&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.com.au](https://www.amazon.com.au/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193254&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.ca](https://www.amazon.ca/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193354&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language) / [amazon.in](https://www.amazon.in/Make-Women-Chase-You-Conversations-ebook/dp/B07GLJQJZQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=digital-text&ie=UTF8&qid=1538193319&sr=1-1&keywords=how+to+attract+women+talk+to+girls+start+conversations+flirt+text+alpha+male+seduction+body+language)

\---

Also check out my free guide on 5 Steps To A Masculine Sexual Frame That Women Find Irresistible [here](http://dailymanup.com/attract-women-girls-masculine-alpha-sexual-frame-presence).

\---So i (M19)was going out tonight, with my brother and sisters boyfriend. We got a few girls from tinder to join us and i got my eyes on one of them. Danced with her and hit it off, once the place closed we walked to the beach and split up from the main group. We were talking about anything really, it was so great under the stars and at the beach and i told her. Said that i was enjoying it so much and how it felt really nice to talk to her like this. It was her last day here on vacation and i said we can celebrate the last day with a kiss. Then it happened, she said no. Now you are probably asking what is wrong with me for being so happy, but she explained to me she is really crushing on a guy back home. And how she wanted to wait for her first kiss in a relationship. And i just said hey thats fine, wont change how much i enjoy this evening. So we talked about the guy and how she was afraid to tell him because of his reaction. I told her to not be afraid and just do it. She asked really? And im like yeah 100%. Call me a simp but it was so good to connect with this random girl i just met. I shared how i was hurt by love so many times and i really opened up and we just talked. Friends later asked  me why i didnt kiss her, but I couldn’t really explain. I loved it. We talked about how she was afraid of his reaction and i said to take me as an example. I took it very well, and we still respected eachother. I told her if he can’t do the same he is not worth it. And she is a beautiful girl you deserve somoene who treats you with respect. It was so good. We waited for them to grab a cab and get home safely. The best thing is, she told me i was different, i accepted it and didn’t just go away or leave them if they say no. 


Im a little drunk but i guess im just so glad i shoot my shot and we talked so good. She is special. Too bad she is crushing on someone else but thats okay. Im so proud of myself, by escalating, talking to her, just telling her how good it felt and most important that i accepted it and that she said im special in a way. It felt so good man. Goodnight guys, love yall


Edit: the girl i was talking to was not active on tinder, one of the other girls was and thats how our group came in contact.I met this girl thru cold approach and towards the end of our second date there was a part where it seemed like she wanted me to kiss her. We made eye contact for longer than usual and I could see her look down at my lips and back to my eyes. This girl is a bit of a stoner and before this we were hitting her weed vape and I was too much in my head and ended up not going for the kiss. On our date after this her body language was completely different from before. Her arms were closed and she didn't seem happy at all. She actually ended up cutting the date short saying her friend texted her saying she needed her help. After this she basically ended up ghosting me. It just seemed weird bc on our first two dates it seemed like she was totally into me.I hate it when people try to oversimplify pick-up, but if I had to boil down pick up into one principle every man should understand, it is this: The woman must be more emotionally invested in you than you are in her at every stage of the relationship. I call this the IRON LAW OF SEDUCTION. 

Understanding and correctly applying this law will solve 99% of the problems men have with women. She’s not responsive to your advances? Not emotionally invested enough. Not returning your calls? Not emotionally invested enough. Flaking? Not emotionally invested enough. On the flipside, as a man, if you emotionally divest yourself from girls, you solve most your own problems. Outcome dependent? You are too emotionally invested in getting laid. Approach anxiety? You are too emotionally invested in the success of the interaction. Neediness and desperation? You are emotionally invested in getting girls. Suck at conversations? You are too emotionally invested in getting laid and can’t just have a regular conversation. 

Emotional investment is subconsciously communicated and women evolved to sense it. One guy can talk to a girl all night without her feeling like he is emotionally invested, but another can talk to her for 2 seconds and get auto-rejected for being too invested. Of course, a woman may talk to you, hang out with you, fuck you, or even date you for a long time if she’s not emotionally invested because she’s horny, crazy, lonely, desperate, drunk, bored, want something from you, etc.... But if she’s not emotionally invested, you are on thin ice and vulnerable at any time to flaking or going cold.  

**What is emotional investment?**

Emotional investment is occupying one’s thoughts and emotions. It is not the same as being interested or “liking” somebody. I “like” a lot of people but I don’t “feel” anything for them and it wouldn’t hurt my feelings if they rejected me or even died.  This distinction is why women flake. Women “like,” get “interested,” and give their numbers to lots of guys, but if she is not at least a little emotionally invested she will not be motivated to get out of bed, put on her make-up, and come somewhere to meet you. Unlike men, women get invited to shit all the time by guys they “like” so they are not going to care about meeting you unless there is some emotional investment.  

Think about emotional investment like this: like most men, you probably like Lamborghinis. But like most men, you probably don’t have one, and you probably don’t spend all day thinking about Lamborghinis and being sad because you don’t have one. But if I lent you a Lamborghini for two months and you drove it around, took care of it, showed it off to your friends, and got laid because of it, you would be sad when I take it back. It’s irrational, but you would get emotionally invested in the Lambo even if you weren’t sad when you never had one. Because you became attached to it and it gave you a sense of identity and power, the Lambo took up space in your thoughts and emotions, making you emotionally invested. 

Emotional investment in people is similar. Being around somebody awesome and feeling like they “belong” to you  becomes addictive like crack. An awesome man makes a woman feel special, loved, important, powerful, and cool. An awesome man is also fun, positive, confident, carefree, and dominant, easing the woman’s anxieties and insecurities. Being around an awesome guy is literally like a drug to women, and if they are around you long enough, they become hooked. 

**The Ben Franklin Theory**
 
Ben Franklin, one of America’s founding fathers and greatest poonhounds, famously and counterintuitively discovered that if person A does something for person B, person A will like person B more. Most people would assume the opposite – if you want people to like you, you should do things for them, so person B should like person B more! Right? Wrong!

Person A “likes” person B more because person A has become emotionally invested. Maybe person A subconsciously expects person B to do something nice back. Maybe person A subconsciously see themselves as “beneath” person B in the ape hierarchy. Maybe person A is protecting their own ego – person B must be somebody special if even I did something for them! Or maybe the simple act of doing something for person B caused person B to enter person A’s thoughts and emotions.
 
Whatever the psychological mechanism, when a woman really likes you, she will WANT to do stuff for you, sometimes even aggressively, and she will WANT to emotionally invest while you fantasize about other things. When a woman really likes you is when you realize that needy, supplicating, validating behavior is not necessary. I have friends that are strippers, and their job is basically to hustle men out of money and to trick guys into buying shit for them. I don’t buy girls things, ever, (and I never, ever visit my friends at work) and I notice that when these strippers start to like me they buy me shit, clean my house, do me favors, etc... One night I even got into an argument with a stripper because she bought me 5 drinks in a row and she wouldn’t let me buy her a drink in return. That’s emotional investment.    
 
**The Woujo Theory**
 
According to my corollary of the Franklin theory, supplicating to a woman, validating yourself to a woman, buying a woman things, following a woman around, allowing a woman to treat you like shit, and spending too much time trying to “help” a woman who doesn’t deserve it subconsciously will cause you to become emotionally invested in her and feel “beneath” her.
 
Sometimes guys will do loserish things, like let a girl treat them badly or repeatedly pursue a girl who doesn’t care about them, and justify it by saying “I don’t really care about her, I just want to fuck.” This is a bad idea, because even though you consciously think you “don’t give a fuck,” by pursuing her, you become emotionally invested, and by allowing her treat you like shit, you subconsciously re-wire your brain to feel like a beta male. Even if you didn't give a fuck before, now you do. 

You can’t control how you feel, but you can control what you do. Where your actions go, your feelings will follow, and where feelings go, your thoughts will follow. If you do loser things, you will eventually feel like a loser, even if you consciously tell yourself you “don’t give a fuck.” If a hot girl tries to strike a Faustian bargain with you and let you fuck her in return for treating you like shit, you must reject that deal out of respect for your own mental health. 

Your brain works by making connections, and when you focus your thoughts and emotions on something, your brain starts connecting that thing to other things in your brain, and that thing becomes “enmeshed” in your wiring, creating a deeper web that is hard to untangle. For example, if you date a really hot girl, your brain will start to associate her with sexual pleasure, or ego, or fun times, and other things you like, so when she dumps you, you will think of her constantly. 

The definition of “not giving a fuck” is only keeping positive thoughts and emotions in your head, and cutting out people, places, activities, thoughts, media, etc... that are negative. “Not giving a fuck” is not about being cold, aloof, an asshole, or stupid, but by filing your thoughts and emotions only with positive things that deserve to be there. 

**Why is emotional investment unattractive?**

Emotional investment is an immediate turn-off. It doesn’t matter why, but I can guess some reasons. 

First, emotional investment is unattractive because people are attracted to lives that are more interesting, exciting, higher, and better than our own. We just assume that somebody living a better life than us is going to be thinking and feeling about their awesome life, not us. If a woman knows she occupies your thoughts and emotions, she will assume your life sucks. She wants to fixate her thoughts and emotions on something higher, but if your thoughts and emotions are fixated on her, she’s back where she started. 

For example, a girl that plays soccer will be attracted to guys that are better at soccer than her because they will appeal to the part of her thoughts and emotions that are invested in soccer. I'm not saying she will never become emotionally invested in a guy who is worse at soccer than she is - she may invest in a guy for other reasons - but the guy is playing with a disadvantage. 

Second, emotional investment is unattractive because, simply put, emotions are bad and scary. Our society acts like “love” is an emotion and “our true selves” are our emotions, but that’s bullshit. Our value lies in what we can do when we are rational, what we’ve learned in our life, what we know how to do, and what we strive to achieve and be when we are clear-headed. Emotions are temporary and fleeting; but true love is a rational, credible commitment to your beloved’s well-being. In his dialogue the Phaedrus, the Greek philosopher Plato said that emotional love is a kind of madness – when things are going well, you are irrationally nice to the person out of proportion to what they deserve. When things are going badly, you are irrationally nasty to the person out of proportion to what they deserve. Women know that when you are irrationally nice to them you will eventually be irrationally shitty. 

Most of our emotions are selfish, irrational, unrealistic, uncontrollable, and oftentimes downright evil. Emotions are fundamentally needy: they always want something, even if the “want” is to help somebody. If you see a beautiful woman and think “I like her, and I want to make her happy and do nice things for her,” you’re lying to yourself. You want things FROM her. You want to fuck her, use her for an ego boost, have your friends see you with her, and make yourself feel better for being a “good person.” You don’t want to see her run off and be happy with another guy, you want her to be unhappy with you. When you show emotion women subconsciously know you want something and that puts pressure on them, and they run away. Women sometimes will hang out with guys they don’t like or aren’t attracted to in any way, just because those guys are not emotionally invested and are not putting any pressure on them.  

When you become extremely emotional, you fantasize about getting your beloved back or hurting them for the wrongs they did to you, you stalk them, you act weird, you feel depressed, you can’t function, etc… Love songs glorify these feelings, but these are not healthy feelings. They are signs of weakness. Women have these feelings things too (oftentimes much more deeply than men), and they know it’s a scary pit to be in, so if they sense for even a second that a man is feeling these things (or is even just slightly beginning to feel these things), they run away immediately. Women want an emotional rock. They want the lifeguard on the edge of the pool pulling them out, not somebody drowning with them. 

Women also take longer to get emotionally invested in men than men take to get emotionally invested in women. Men evolved to seek “fertile” women (big ass, big tits, healthy face) to impregnate as soon as possible. Women, on the other hand, evolved to find the strongest man in the tribe that could protect her and her baby, so they seek a larger group of traits, many of which are long-term traits (confidence, dominance, emotional stability, intelligence, etc…). It takes a woman time to figure out if a guy has these traits but a man can immediately be attracted to a hot girl. In every man-woman relationship there is a period of time where the man is emotionally invested, but the woman is still “rational” and feeling the guy out. Many men fuck it up here – they start acting creepy, or weird, overly nice, overly fixated, and the woman, who feels nothing, thinks the guy isweird or worse. 

Of course, emotions are a part of life and can be beautiful if channeled correctly. But you shouldn’t show your emotions to a woman until she has also developed those emotions. 

Third, emotional investment makes you stupid and saps you of your vitality and awesomeness. Tons interesting, smart, funny, cool, successful guys become vacant shells of their normal selves around women, partly because their thoughts and emotions are empty of everything that makes them awesome. If you are deep in a game of chess and I try to have a conversation with you about quantum physics you will sound stupid because your thoughts and emotions are full of chess. Seduction requires intelligence and creativity, but if your thoughts and emotions are just “durr, she’s a pretty woman” you’re going to fail. Because women are “rational” longer than men, they want to have rational, intelligent conversations about interesting shit. 

Another reason is power. It’s a sad fact of life, but humans are wired to look at relationships in power terms. We subconsciously rank everybody in a particular social situation from least to most powerful. Women are much more aware of the power dynamic because they are generally less powerful than men. And unfortunately, we subconsciously see emotional people as lower in the power hierarchy. The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche said, correctly in my opinion, that individuals higher in the social hierarchy do not feel emotions for people lower than them. The lower ranked apes evolved to obey and be obsessed with the alpha male because they need his protection and resources, but the alpha male feels nothing for the lower ranked apes because he does not need them for anything. 

Most importantly, women are not attracted to emotionally invested men because women are attracted to RESILIENCE. Resilience here means “the ability to confidently pursue your goals and not let anything or anybody perturb you.” 

Women are attracted to resilience because they naturally want a protector, and a protector’s commitment is only credible if he cannot be thrown off of his mission, whatever that mission is. If a protector becomes emotional, dishonest, distracted, or submissive, he can no longer be trusted to protect. We subconsciously see emotional people as weak because they can be easily controlled. If a guy is emotional about a girl, he is likely to agree with whatever she says, let her get away with bad behavior, etc… 

If a protector wavers for even a second, the woman becomes anxious and fearful, but a confident man with boundaries is not scared and cannot be thrown off of his mission. You must be a brick wall that cannot be moved or affected: if you approach her or escalate with her, it is purely based on your own desire, not her cajoling. At every moment you should think to yourself “am I doing this because I want to or because I am trying to impress her”? Sometimes you need to monitor her emotional investment on a moment-by-moment basis. 

**Subconscious communication** 

Women can quickly sense by your body language, words, demeanor, tone of voice and actions whether you are emotionally invested. Neither you nor her may consciously know you’re invested, but you will just “feel” unattractive to her. Sometimes very subtle changes in behavior (staring too long, asking a question that is too intrusive too early) can tip off that you are too invested. 

I use the “gravity theory” to gauge emotional investment. In social settings, high-value people are “bigger” and therefore “draw” lower-value people to them. If you look at any party, you will see hot girls usually in the center, relaxing and having fun, and guys literally surrounding them like planets around the sun. There is a reason these guys are called “orbiters.” If the girl gets up to leave, the guys may play it cool for a while, but they then get up to follow her. Your ultimate goal is to become the center of gravity so women are drawn to you, not vice versa, which is hard, because as a man you must approach. But even if you approach your demeanor and body language can exude the message of “I am the center of gravity, and I create a rip in space-time that compels you to come to me.” 

The subconscious subtext of an interaction is 99%. For example, the sentence “can I buy you a drink” can have a wide range of subconscious meanings depending on the tone, body language, context and emotion I deliver them in. “Can I buy you a drink” can mean “I want to fuck you,” “I feel like I owe you something and I want to pay you back,” “I’m a generous guy and I like to just people free things,” “you’re a good friend, and I want to show my appreciation,” “I’m a loser and I want to make you like me by buying you things,” etc… What matters is not your superficial words, but your subconscious context. 

Because seduction is mostly subconscious, I can’t teach you every detail of the walk, speaking style, body language, demeanor, etc… of a guy who is not emotionally invested. Even if I did, it’s too much for you to remember and process. I even doubted the efficacy of writing this article because it’s incredibly hard to “fake” an emotional state for a long period of time and most people will go back to behaving like what they feel they are.  

**The paradox of escalation**

So far it sounds like the right solution to get girls would be to just ignore them completely. You won’t look emotionally invested, right? Unfortunately, that doesn’t work. It is the man’s responsibility to approach and escalate because women do not get emotionally invested quickly and are afraid of rejection. 

To get a girl attracted to you, you must show at least some initial interest and escalate, luring her into becoming emotionally invested in you. Magicians use a technique called “forcing,” where they trick the person into thinking they are picking a random card out of the deck when the person is really picking the card the magician wanted them to pick. Seduction is similar: she should feel like she is picking you, not vice-versa. You are just opening the door to her. 

**The challenge of seduction**

Seducing a woman while you appear not emotionally invested is incredibly challenging. First, women’s aversion to emotional investment is mostly subconscious – consciously, women want the guy to show at least some interest. And it’s naturally hard to hang around a woman you like for a long period of time and not become invested to at least some degree. Beautiful women create a reality distortion field where men lose all concept of rationality, truth, normal standards of right and wrong, etc… You can say “you’re overthinking this, just be yourself,”, but women touch men’s strongest emotion, so many men literally forget how be themselves. When a beautiful woman walks into a nightclub a swarm of otherwise successful, rational, manly men immediately lose their fucking minds. They start begging for her approval, trying to buy her things, acting stupid, etc… 

And like I said earlier, men emotionally invest quicker than women, so we must be patient because our emotions push us to jump the gun and get right into lovey-dovey mode. And in non-romantic contexts, people become emotionally invested at the same rate, so you are used to the other person feeling the same as you if the interaction is going well. And when we feel emotionally invested in somebody, we naturally are going to want to elicit a positive emotional response. But trying to make a woman happy that is not emotionally invested comes off as validation-seeking, supplicating, bitch behavior. You must instead do what is RIGHT. A woman may seem cold, and we may think we can “warm her up” by being “nice” to her, but we should really just pursue our mission and have faith that she will emotionally invest even though she appears on the surface to not be attracted or care about you. Remember: women are constantly sizing you up, so even if they don’t look like they are attracted or paying attention, they are. 

Seduction is a gamble because you must have faith that eventually the woman will start to emotionally invest, knowing she might not. Sometimes she just won’t like you. Sometimes she just wants attention. Sometimes she is in love with you but won’t let it on. Some women are damaged and never emotionally invest in anybody – they see all men as objects to be used. This is why you must assume attraction – because you DON’T KNOW. 

**How to not be emotionally invested**

If you take away one thing from this article, it is this: a woman who is not yet invested in you must not occupy a big part of your thoughts and emotions. You must have your mind and heart on other things when interacting with women. Period. If she hasn’t made room for you in her head and heart yet, you shouldn’t make space for her in your head and heart. If you make this change right now, I promise your results will instantly improve. Women are the dessert to a good life, not the main course, and that’s how women should feel when you are talking to them. WOMEN WANT TO BE DESSERT.

Here are my main steps to not becoming emotionally invested:

1)      Realize you don’t need to emotionally invest

2)      Have an interesting and awesome life that occupies your thoughts and emotions.

3)      Have “abundance mentality” with respect to women.

4)      Have boundaries and be unperturbable.

5)      Focus on your own fun first.

**Realize you don’t need to emotionally invest**
 
This may be the most important step. I think a lot of guys emotionally invest in girls because society and pop culture subconsciously make us think that for a man to get a girl, he must supplicate to her and emotionally invest in her. In the movies, the confident, successful guy living his own life never gets the girl; instead the winner is the loser who falls in love with her from afar, and then spends the rest of the movie trying to “get” her, enduring multiple rejections and humiliations. These movies also teach that women are delicate flowers that need constant coddling and lovey dovey bullshit. That’s not how it works in the real world. 
 
Men also misunderstand women’s aversion to rejection. Women have a strong need to be “accepted” and therefore are often much more sensitive to rejection than men. The phrase “hell hath no fury like a woman scorned” is true. Dread game and “ignoring” women only works if she is ignoring you first. But if you outright reject her, or if she makes a move on you, or asks for acceptance, and you say “no” or she feels like you are ignoring her there is a strong chance she will emotionally “un-invest.” Because women have this strong need for constant acceptance and validation, men mistakenly think they must emotionally invest. But all you really need to do is not reject her or make her feel excluded. It’s a thin line between keeping a woman “accepted” and emotionally investing in her. 

To win this game, you should only do something for a woman if the woman would do it for you. If you want to buy her a drink, think about whether she would buy you a drink. If she wouldn’t, don’t. If she wants you to wait for her, think about whether she would wait for you. If she wouldn’t, don’t. If there is a girl you always say hi to, but she never says hi to you, stop saying hi to her. She knows who you are, she can say hi to you. It’s ok to “win” in relationships. 
 
Again, this is easier said than done. Society and your emotions team up to make you feel like you need to follow girls around, wait for them, put up with their bullshit, buy them drinks, etc… You must fight your feelingss and social training and have faith that if you stay the course women will become attracted. This requires the ability to say “no” to a woman (saying “no” is different than rejecting her) and the ability to walk away from her, even permanently. 
  
**Have an interesting and awesome life that occupies your thoughts and emotions**
 
Humans are wired to seek good feelings. If the main part of our life is not making us happy (job, school, our hobbies), we get those good feelings from other sources: drugs, trashy TV, women, food, etc… All those things are not bad by themselves, but if your regular life doesn’t make you happy, you will overly emotionally invest in bad things and become addicted and depressed. If your life is miserable, you will subconsciously and unknowingly immediately start overly investing in women.

I use the “cheese pizza method.” Whenever I feel like I’m getting too emotional, I fill my thoughts and emotions with something I love – cheese pizza, Oreo cheesecake, the day I did mushrooms at the beach, reading about dinosaurs stoned, etc... This clears my head and allows me to act “normal” around women. When I am thinking about doing something for a girl I ask myself “what has she done to dislodge cheese pizza out of my heart and mind?” You can replace cheese pizza with anything, ideally an incredible, thrilling life that she would want to join. 
 
**Have abundance mentality with respect to girls**
 
No matter how awesome your life is, it is hard to not emotionally invest in girls. Abundance mentality is when your thoughts and emotions are full of other women, so you don’t need this one girl. If you don’t have other girls, you need to delude yourself. I recall times when I did have abundance and put myself back in that mental space. If you’ve never had abundance, imagine you are Brad Pitt or some other celebrity and think about how he would feel and act.

**Have boundaries and be unperturbable**

Women want you to be an immovable wall that confidently and joyfully pursues his mission. She will try to perturb you from that mission, not because she wants to see you fail, but because she wants to test whether you are actually a brick wall or a façade for something softer. The same way you knock on a desk at the furniture store to see if it is real wood, a woman shit tests you to see if you are actually confident enough to pursue your mission or if you will be perturbed. And the more confident and immovable you are, the stronger the shit tests become. This is true even if the mission is getting her! As long as she is into it, you need to escalate as if you already know she will say yes.

Your mission, when out, should be maximum fun. She should sense that your emotional investment is “where’s the party? Where’s the next fun thing?” You should have a plan for the entire night: I’m going to X, then I’m going to Y , etc… You should not let the woman hijack your plans and take the lead. Your primary mission (career, hobbies, etc…) should also be in your head. Remember the song “girls just wanna have fun?” In truth, everybody just wants to have fun but boys are wracked with anxiety because they are trying to impress girls. Whenever you are feeling nervous, scared, anxious or like you are emotionally investing too much in a girl, just say to yourself “I’m here to have fun. If you contribute, great. If not, you are dismissed.” Fun and positivity always win. 

Example: If a beautiful woman is talking about something incredibly boring most men pretend to be interested. Wrong! Women know when they are being boring and it is sometimes a subtle shit test to see if you will let her get away with it. Women are not desperate for sex and they do not need to hang around if a guy is being boring, stupid or mean, and they cannot respect or empathize with a guy who would put up with bullshit from her. Men let women be boring when they lose their vision of the good life. A good life involves beautiful women, but it also involves interesting conversations. If you aren’t getting interesting conversations from her, you would leave because you have options. Whenever a woman is being boring, I change the subject just to let her know I don’t tolerate bullshit.  

By having a vision of the good life, boundaries, and confidence that your life, thoughts and emotions are interesting and valuable, you can challenge and stimulate a woman. Women want a man that will help them grow and introduce them to a better life and more interesting world than the one they currently inhabit. They don’t want some a that agrees with everything they say, a pushover, or a simple-minded conformist.  Women want a guy who is willing to walk away at any time, not because he is some cold-hearted psychopath, but because once a man shows that is he NOT willing to walk away at any time, there is no challenge or growth. 

Of course, for most of you, this is very difficult. Many of you have uninteresting lives so a beautiful woman would instantly become the most interesting and important thing your life or you are so sex starved and desperate that you don’t care if a woman is being boring, or mean, or uninterested, or whatever. 

**Focus on your own fun first**

Imagine you paid $500,000 to spend a week with Leonardo DiCaprio (or whatever celebrity you think lives an awesome life) and when you get there Leonardo says “tell us what we should do?” You would say “I don’t know, what are the options?” and Leo goes “I don’t have anything planned – let’s just do what you were gonna do.” You would be pissed! You want to become part of Leo’s awesome life, not make your own plan. That’s how girls feel when men don’t have a plan. They want to join your life, not lead you around in their life. That’s why you need to focus on your own fun first. You may like you are being rude or selfish, but you’re not, because women are more attracted to the act of leading than the destination necessarily. 

**How to make her emotionally invest in you**

For a woman to emotionally invest in you, certain shit must happen: 

1)	She must “like” you – i.e., she must find you pleasant, friendly, good-looking, compatible with her values and interests. 

2)	She must feel an emotional connection with you.

3)	She must feel accepted by you. If she you are rejecting her, ignoring her, or being hostile, she will not emotionally invest. 

4)	She must watch you be confident and resilient. 

5)	She needs to spend time around you. 

**She must like you**

This one is self-explanatory. Women are usually not going to invest in you if you don’t share their interests, values, goals, etc… Some girls want a rapper covered in tattoos, others want a nerdy guy who watches Star Wars. If you’re a versatile guy with lots of interests, a lot more women will like you, but some people just aren’t compatible. 

**She must feel an emotional connection with you**

The key to developing an emotional connection with a girl is experiencing emotionally exciting things together. The ultimate is of course, passionate sex, but a good concert, a deep conversation, even a beer pong game you guys play together can help build an emotional connection. 

Another way to build an emotional connection is for her to vicariously experience your confidence. She wants you to be her emotional rock, so she would like to project her insecurities and fears onto you, and watch you brush them off as if they were nothing. She also wants to watch you take the lead and make the night fun. 

A woman has emotional energy, and that energy must be directed towards something or somebody. You want that energy to be directed to you. The easiest way to do this is just by spending time around her. Just “being around” will help build attraction as long as you are not fucking it up by being needy or making her feel bad. The best way to get women to like you is to be “forced” to be around them, such as work or a group hangout, where you do not supplicate to them or validate yourself to them. My friend used to take girls out on his boat, and these girls would usually end up liking me by the end of the day because we would have spent all day together. Celebrities get so much tang because women watch them in movies or listen to their music and become emotionally invested, whereas the celebrity shows the women no emotional investment in all. 

**She must feel accepted by you.**

Again, hell hath no fury like a woman scorned, so it must feel like the door to you is open. As she invests in you more, you must escalate more. You can fuck this up by being an asshole, not being sensitive to her emotions, and not reading her advances correctly. 

**She must watch you confidently pursue your goals**

The word confidence comes from the Latin con (with) + fidens (faith). A man with confidence has faith that he will succeed in whatever he does and cannot be stopped by anybody. Women get turned by watching a man confidently pursue his mission. Why are women w so attracted to DJs, promoters, and drug dealers in the club? Those guys aren’t exactly the “cream” of society. It’s because those guys are the only people at the club actually doing something. All the other guys are just sitting there drooling over the girls, instantly reducing their attractiveness. 

**Putting it all together**

To apply all this knowledge, my strategy is to adopt a rational, almost businesslike demeanor, at least in the early stages of the interaction. As I said earlier, women are “rational” at the beginning before they are emotionally invested, so you should also be rational. A man must act almost like he is a woman: he is interested in a relationship (or maybe even just sex) but he has high standards and must evaluate the woman thoroughly first and make sure she is suitable before he gets emotionally invested. You should act like your actions are guided by a seduction computer that makes all the decisions based on the available information, not your emotions. 

One technique is called “disinterested interest.” Your rational words should show interest and enthusiasm but you must communicate the “emotion” of “I’m just talking to you to be nice, I am not totally emotionally invested in you yet and I could walk away at any moment.” The best way to do this is by keeping your thoughts and emotions focused on something else, other than her. 

You should not, however, stay completely rational. You must allow yourself to show your emotions about things that are not her: your passions, your interests, your friends, etc… And you can show emotion towards her if she deserves it: laugh if she says something funny, thank her if she does something nice, sympathize with her if she says something sad: just don’t let on that you feel emotional about “her” unconnected to anything she is or has done. 

And of course, escalate sexually. Paradoxically, it is possible to escalate sexually and not appear emotionally invested. In fact, a lot of women (especially damaged ones) are looking for emotionless sex. You must touch her, you must turn the conversation sexual, you must do “seductive” things like look into her eyes and whisper in her ear, etc… And you must confidently take the lead in the conversation and the situation in general, leading her from place to place, getting intimate with her, etc… And when she starts to emotionally invest, make her feel like you MIGHT emotionally invest too (but not as much as her). Sometimes if you play it “too” cool she will think you just like her platonically or that you lost interest. 

**A broader view**

This article is obviously about getting girls, but the principles are applicable in all areas of your life. Simply put, you should not invest your thoughts and emotions into people, places, institutions, and activities that do not give a fuck about you and/or do not produce a return that equals the investment you put into them. One of the biggest mistakes people make is investing too much in their job, friendship, hobbies, etc..., and getting 0 out of it. 

Additionally, whatever you do becomes your emotional investment. If you spend every weekend hanging out with piece of shit people that just do drugs, complain and make bad decisions, guess what, you are now becoming a piece of shit person. You are what you do. 

Follow me on twitter: http://www.twitter.com/woujo3

Go to my website: http://www.woujo.comOne of the biggest myths that many buy in to is that there is only one special person out there for them. This limiting mindset leads to neediness, a willingness to please, putting their partners on a pedestal, and other self-sabotaging behaviors.

If the relationship doesn’t work, someone in this frame of mind will waste precious time and opportunity on their ex, who either rejected them, or just simply isn’t compatible. 

This flawed belief of ‘the one’ leads to fixation on an idealized, fantasy version of their ex, not the real person. That person’s negative qualities and the issues in the relationship are overlooked or ignored, because romantic hopes are being projected onto them, instead of realizing that things ended for a reason. 

Do not buy into the myth. There is not one single soulmate for everyone. Based purely on population numbers, there are a multitude of people that you would connect with. It’s tragic to see this opportunity traded in for fixation on an imagined, idealized version of someone. 

The best relationships come when there is mutual prioritization. Trying to convince someone to take you back will typically yield the same results. For whatever reason, they felt they didn’t need you in their lives at some point, enough to cut things off.  Even if you manage to win them back, they still inherently do not value you. Once the infatuation fades again, the same issues will typically come to the surface again.In the last 2 months I have noticed a two different mind sets. There is the mindset of neediness and sexual frustration, and there is the mindset for abundance. You have all heard of these before but I find that the "RSD" and pick up guides on youtube try and sell you the result without telling you the secret to achieving the result. They say "confidence is key" and "don't double text a girl" and "don't compliment her too much". I used to be super thirsty back in my high school days and used to lap this advice up. I used to try so hard not to get feelings for a girl, not to double text, not to develop "aphid attraction" to her. I then had a journey of immense self-discover and transformation. Focusing on myself and not on girls. I began to become so fixated on my needs that I wasn't thinking about girls anymore. Sure I would see them on the street and at the gym (ngghh), and I would be very attracted to them, but once I really embraced the mindset of work before girls, the game changed. I realised that yeah, I would be very happy with a woman, at the moment I don't and it is much more painless and productive in this situation to focus on myself instead of women. Holy fuck did this mindset work wonders. Putting most of my time into me and seeing no point in fixating on girls, I became an extremely happy, relaxed and carefree person, who doesn't really want a relationship anymore after being around so many insecure girls.

&#x200B;

It ain't a superpower, just gaining control of your mind. When I was out for a date with a girl, it was like she was just another bloke sitting there who I happened to be attracted to. Idk if she was insecure or what but she was not hiding her attraction. Anyway the point is that this has changed the game, from the women being the players and the "prize" to changing my mentality and becoming the focus. It comes with hard work, mentally and physically. If you're not willing to put in the work, don't bother but here's the deal:

1. Workout - it takes discipline but your insecurities die in the gym and you will become very attractive to all women.
2. Work hard - do your homework, it'll feel good to be productive. It's only overcoming barriers of discipline. Start low with 30 mins before a 5 minute break and build your way up. Being disciplined and productive will build your self-esteem and confidence
3. Meditate - this will put your mind at ease. It will clear your head of negative thoughts that are stopping you from approaching or being successful with women and the anxiety (subliminal negative thoughts) that makes you awkward around them.
4. Change the negative thoughts in your head: most guys have anxiety these days, due to social media, and it's killing our chances with women. It might sound stupid but you need to actively change this thought pattern. Whether it's writing down how good you are and all the good things about you to build up your self-esteem (it's not shameful to lose confidence at times, but know how to get it back by changing your thoughts), or reminding yourself that you are worthy of the woman and refute the negative anxious energy that you feel (there's no reason to feel this, I'm gonna do fine) - do this everyday and I guarantee you will see results.
5. Get hobbies - these are the fruit of life. Not many of us actually find work enjoyable, other than when you realise that it's helping you grow and develop as a person. Hobbies are a fantastic way to be happy without the need for a woman. Also, women find them exceptionally attractive.
6. Stop watching porn - whilst probably not entirely necessary if you don't have a problem (2 times a week max and to vanilla shit), IDK why but it really takes a toll on your confidence around women and ability to naturally let conversation flow. In the words of my best mate - "I watched porn the other day (after a rough breakup) and talking to girls gave me social anxiety, it was really weird, maybe this shit is bad for me"

Paraphrasing the words of a youtuber called "friendlyjordies" - the meaning of life is personal development and contribution to society. Once you realise this, you will stop playing video games and using social media so much and will start finding happiness in these two things. You will become happy by yourself, will develop confidence and abundance in life. You won't need a woman to make you happy, because you will already be content with life. Then the women will flock to you. STOP TRYING TO ACHIEVE THE RESULT WITHOUT PUTTING IN THE HARD WORK - IT DOESN'T WORK. If you do end up "faking it till you make it" (by doing this you are actually developing yourself by becoming charismatic and working on your personality - all very transferrable and handy life skills in learning pickup, but once again really shitty means to the end) you will end up with some insecure chick who will may be fkn great in bed, but will make the rest of your life hell.

Lastly, stop being so thirsty. Girls will probably find you weird and/or will lose respect for you and it ruins shit for the rest of us. They will most likely take it as validation rather than thinking of you as a potential partner. Stop giving them un-earned validation for free. You're probably not going to get the girl and I guarantee she is not as amazing as you claim she is.

&#x200B;

TLDR: Mindset change, self-esteem

work on yourself = focus on yourself = focus not on women,

get hobbies = happiness = abundance = no need for women,

meditate = no anxiety = positive thoughts + confidence around women.

Porn = negative thoughts around women (idk why but I've experienced it and so have my mates) = anxiety and lack of confidence = lack of ability to let conversation and flirting flow naturally due to awkwardness.

Mindset change = positive thoughts and no anxious energy  = less anxiety around women = more confidence and natural flow

&#x200B;

Edit:

* The perfect state to be in is one of confidence and abundance + openness and being horny (sexually attracted to women). Being open to a girl yet being self-assured as to not need her will generate results and women follow.
* Forgot to mention the importance of truly believing that everything will be okay. As porn and social media exacerbate anxiety, you will feel nervous as you will believe that if you don't get the girl then everything will not be okay. I have experienced this myself and explored these emotions enough to understand them. Don Draper from madmen is a clear example of this mentality. Believing that no matter what happens, everything will be fine will allow you to be comfortable in stressful situations. To achieve this, you need to work on yourself enough to be comfortable with yourself. Meditation and getting rid of negativity in your life will also help this. The belief that even if the girl rejects you, you can still be content with life as life goes on is powerful and very true. In fact, I don't know a single time in my life where a girl rejecting me has stopped the earth's rotation. You should be patient with girls and truly find the one that is worth it. If a girl rejects you, life will go on and everything will be fine. It's her loss and she probably has issues that she needs to work out herself before she gets into a great relationship with you.I (33F) decided to shoot my shot today... I slid in a guy that I liked dm's on insta... Sadly I was given a very half hearted response. I feel so embarrassed like I shouldn't have done it. I was in a 7 year relationship and we broke up a year ago and I am now interested in dating again. I think I'm very attractive but guys jus haven't been approaching me like they used to before my relationship which is why I slid in his dm's... Uggggg this is so embarrassing.
**I made this into an animated video, if you'd like to watch it, here's a link:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo)

&#x200B;

If you enjoyed this please consider subscribing with this link. I create a lot of summaries: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub\_confirmation=1

**If you're prefer to just read, here's the video script...**

I'm going to teach you the top five lessons from the book “Models” by Mark Manson.

The tagline of the book is “how to attract women through honesty” while it definitely teaches this it doesn’t mean if you have a girlfriend the lessons aren’t useful. The lessons will also teach you how to be more charismatic and confident around anyone you meet not just women. The lesson will work for anyone trying to attract anyone no matter what sexuality or gender.

**Lesson one don't be needy**

You need to be happy with who you are.

If you are needy you do things to impress others.

Mark Manson says “all performance is neediness”

To stop being needy do things because you enjoy doing them and for no other reason

Be comfortable with who you are and don’t look to anyone else for approval.

You don’t need the approval of others just the approval of yourself. One needy behaviour is sending too many text messages.

Mark Manson says that texts should be used to arrange dates and that’s about it, they should be used to arrange real life interactions.

Also, a non needy man will stick to what he believes in even if it doesn’t match what the others around him believe.

Don’t be disrespectful to the people around you but don’t just go along with the crowd.

Be invested in yourself and what you believe in.

This isn’t to say be horrible to others - you 100% should care about other people just stick to what you believe in respectfully.

Allow others to have their own opinion on things and allow yourself to have your own as well.

Don’t worry about rejection - Mark Manson says “rejection exists for a reason — it’s a means to keep people apart who are not good for each other”

**Lesson two: Show your vulnerable side**

Most people try their hardest not to look stupid. Men think to attract a woman you’ve got to be as macho as possible and make no mistakes.

The thing is women don't actually mind if you make mistakes or look stupid, what actually matters is how you react to looking stupid.

You see “Humans are attracted to each other’s rough edges.”

If you make a mistake or say something wrong and just laugh it off it shows that you have enough self esteem that small things like this don’t bother you.

Nobody is perfect, everyone makes mistakes. By you being vulnerable others around you will relax because they know they don’t have to be perfect either.

So talk about things that you’re truly passionate about not just small talk even if you talk about mistakes you’ve made in don’t worry about trying to cover up your rough edges.

If you try to have deeper, more meaningful conversations more often you will form stronger relationships much faster.

If you’re talking to someone and say something stupid just laugh it off.

**Lesson 3: have an attractive lifestyle**

Actions speak louder than words.

If you concentrate all your energy on the best lines to say to someone in the hope of impressing her but then you actually lead an unattractive lifestyle then you might be able to attract the them initially but before long you lifestyle will put them off and you’ll become unattractive to them.

A big misconception is that the majority of your attraction comes from your natural looks.

Physical appearance is one area of attraction but your lifestyle as a whole is more important.

What lifestyle would someone else most like to be part of?

If you have a relationship with someone who is really attractive, they drive a nice car and have a good job but they also work 50 hours a week you might be attracted to them initially but eventually because they work all the time you won’t get to see them so their lifestyle will put you off.

So how do you make your lifestyle more attractive?

In my opinion the most attractive lives for the majority of people involve 2 things.

Freedom and time. To me the most attractive lifestyle is doing what you love, when you love with who you love.

How do you do that?

One simple aim, get your passive income higher than your expenses.

If you are not sure exactly what this means I would recommend listening to rich dad poor dad by robert t kiyosaki.

When you passive income is higher than your expenses you won’t have to work and that way you will have a lot of time to work on what you actually love.

**Lesson 4: Make assumptions rather than asking questions.**

Have you ever been in a situation where someone is talking to you but it feels more like an interview?

All they are doing is asking questions and it's not fun to be part of.

To avoid this is you want to talk in terms of statements.

Make assumptions about the other person.

Rather than asking what do you do for a living?

Say “You seem like a great person, I bet your job is interesting.”

Instead of how do you guys know each other?

Say “You guys look like you’ve been friends for a long time.

Instead of What hobbies do you have?

Say “You look like someone who is really into sport”

This is called cold reading and it’s just making educated guesses about another person.

Mark Manson says you should cold read with women as much as possible.

Most people would be worried about doing this because what if you get it wrong.

The reason it works so well is because it doesn’t matter if you get it wrong.

When you cold read 1 of 3 things will happen:

&#x200B;

1. You’ll get it wrong and they will correct you - this means that they will just answer the question that you based your cold read on.
2. You get it wrong and the other person is intrigued and wants to know why you thought that.
3. You get it right - You might get lucky and guess completely right and this will build an instant rapport with the other person.

Whatever happens it’s a much more interesting way to get the other person talking and alot more effective than asking endless questions.

By speaking in statements you don’t overpower the other person with questions. It allows them to continue the conversation if they want to and not feel trapped. Also the other person will ask questions about the statements you make.

It’s ok to ask questions sometimes just not all the time.  

**Lesson five stop using filler words**

This means saying words and phrases such as “like”, “erm”, “you know” and “I guess”

By taking out filler words you’ll be much more interesting to listen to because you can say more in less time.

It’s about quality, not quantity.

Here’s an example from the book. Listen to these two different ways of saying the same thing, one with filler words and one without.

“So, I guess what I'm saying is like that I never really felt at home when I lived out there in you know in California the people all just felt kind of like superficial to me and I am didn't really like it  I guess.”

Now take out the filler words.

“I never felt at home in California the people felt superficial to me I didn't really like it.”

Filler words and phrases make speaking to you boring and slow.

Also when you say “I guess” or “you know” it come across as though you don’t fully stand by what you’re saying so you have to weaken what you said with a filler phrase after it.

So how do you get better at not saying filler words and phrases.

First of all be aware that you’re doing it, try to consciously make an effort to not say filler words.

Another thing you can do is record yourself trying to explain something and see what filler words you say the most. Keep re-recording yourself until you can explain the whole thing without filler words.

And finally, be ok with silence, if you are more relaxed in silence then you won’t feel the pressure to always be saying something. This means you are much less likely to say filler phrases. Silences give your brain time to process the conversations and to think of much more interesting responses to what people say.

A pause before replying is recommended by a lot of people because it shows you care enough that you actually want to give a good response and not just say the first thing that comes to mind.

**So, to summarise:**

&#x200B;

1. Don't be needy
2. Show your vulnerable side
3. Have an attractive lifestyle
4. Make assumptions rather than asking questions.
5. Stop using filler words

If you enjoyed this please consider subscribing with this link. I create a lot of summaries: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCfbLDMh6uGOZePAfqqjVZ-g?sub\_confirmation=1

Thanks for reading, have a great day.Let’s say you’re boring.

Maybe no one’s ever told you that but you sometimes get a sinking feeling in your stomach that hints at it. Or maybe someone has told you you’re boring and it makes you feel like a worthless piece of ####.

You want to be interesting and fun, but you’re trapped in the prison of your limited social skills.

… But what makes you so boring?

You do.

The prison bars are made of your own negative beliefs and you can’t seem to squeeze through them. If there’s one thing you’re good at it’s tricking yourself into believing that you suck. How fun. Though the fact that you did this to yourself is actually good news. You can turn it around.

**HOW YOU STARTED BEING BORING**

Once upon a time, when you were about 3-feet tall, you were all about fun. You were an explorer learning to navigate your world and nothing was off-limits.

You burnt your hand on the stove. It didn’t stop you from playing with fire.

Then along came social rules and the idea that you were “supposed to” behave in certain ways in certain situations. You learned that there were consequences to your actions and doubt replaced abandon. The world became more complicated than it had previously seemed.

Take Little Pete for instance. At 3-feet Little Pete liked to run around the house naked playing cowboys and indians, screaming his lungs out. He didn’t give a shit.

At 4-feet Little Pete had his first crush. We’ll call her Lacey. Their class was putting on a dance for the school and the teacher asked the boys to choose their partners.

The problem was that Lacey already had a boyfriend, or at least a boy she held hands with at lunchtime (the little turdburger!). But when Miss Hudson told the girls that they had to say yes to the first boy who asked to be their dance partner Little Pete saw his opportunity. None of the other boys moved. Little Pete pounced! Lacey said ‘no’ but Miss Hudson sealed the deal.

They danced together for the weeks that followed and, slowly but surely, he won Lacey over. She told him she liked him.

Little Pete didn’t know what to do in this foreign scenario so every day he sent his best friend to ask Lacey if she still liked him. That was the extent of his contact with Lacey. She said yes for 3 days then changed her mind.

Little Pete was devastated. He developed a fear of talking to girls which dragged on until he was 18.

After a few more run-ins with “the consequences of his actions” he stopped taking chances. He made his decisions based on what people would think of him. He agreed with opinions, he avoided stepping on toes, he suppressed his desires. He was good little boring boy.

There was a time when you too used to act first, think later. Not anymore. Now you worry about all of the negative & far-fetched possible outcomes that your mind can conjure up, and they’re usually enough to convince you to be boring.

It goes something like this in an uncertain situation:

**THE BORING PROCESS (CODENAME: BORING BORIS)**

TRIGGER:

“I’m not sure what to do."

1. Do I have to do something (or say something)?
No: Do nothing. Play it safe.
Yes: Go to step 2.

2. What should I do?
Option 1 — What is the polite thing to do?
Option 2 — What do I think is normal in this situation?
Option 3 — What is the easiest (least scary) thing for me to do?

3. Choose an option and act.

You’ve run this process over and over again. You said 'no' to your inner explorer. Congratulations, you made yourself boring.

But the good news is it’s not you that’s boring. It’s the boring shit you choose to do that’s boring. And all it takes to stop being boring is to do something different.

**WHY BEING BORING MAKES YOU FEEL LIKE CRAP**

There's a problem with the Boring Boris process: we designed it to keep us safe and we feel safest when we use it, but we feel like crap afterwards.

Most people don’t dislike us when we use Boring Boris because we put none of our self in our actions, hence there’s nothing to dislike. They don’t see us at all. We make ourselves easy to ignore.

* If I do the polite thing I make no connection;
* If I do what I think is normal I’m not even copying a real person. I’m copying a hypothetical average and turning myself into a characterless bore;
* If I do the easiest (least scary) thing I’m hiding as much of my self as possible. Only sharing what I have to. It’s like taking out a hair clip when you lose at strip poker. Boring.

If you want people to actually like you you have to get naked, or at least show some skin — figuratively ;). Give them something to like. Put your self in your actions.

Yes, there’s a risk in not being boring. Some people might not like what they see when you stop hiding, but their disapproval means nothing when you find the people who do like you. Those are the connections that will fuel you. Being truly accepted for the weird monkey that you are inside is the greatest feeling in the world.

It’s a much bigger risk to be boring. You’ll never make strong connections.

Imagine yourself in this situation: it’s your first day at university. You’re sitting in the lecture hall and you don’t know anyone. Imagine the speaker asks for a volunteer to stand up and tell the class something that you did in the past week as an ice-breaker.

Did you get a physical reaction to that last sentence? Lump in your throat, maybe? Are you unsure what to say?

Most people in the class will go through a thought process that looks something like Boring Boris.

Trigger:

“I’m not sure what to do."

Do I have to do something (or say something)?
No: Do nothing. Play it safe. Hide.

Or if they’re singled out they take the easy option. They share nothing risky about themselves: “I don’t know... I did lots of things this week. Umm, I bought some textbooks."

Not Felicity though.

Felicity used to play it safe but now she's the first to put her hand up. She’s a risk-taker. She doesn’t mind looking foolish because she’s learnt there’s more to gain than there is to lose.

You might like Felicity or you might hate her, but would you say she’s boring? Read on and compare.

**THE FUN PROCESS (CODENAME: "FUCK IT" FELICITY)**

How do we put our self in our actions to become more fun? More interesting?

We replace the ‘should’ in Boring Boris with ‘want’. We stop reacting and start creating. It looks like this:

Trigger:

“I’m not sure what to do."

1. What do I want to do?
Option 1 — What experience do I want to create for myself?
Option 2 — What gets me excited?
Option 3 — What am I afraid of doing, that at least part of me wants to do?

2. Choose an option and act.

Felicity’s heart is racing from what she’s about to say. She’s scared but she wants to connect, so she seizes this opportunity to share with the class. Because fuck it.

“I levelled up my Mage in World of Warcraft and my guild is raiding a dungeon tonight! If anyone here plays WoW come say hi."

Now everyone in the class knows something about “Fuck it” Felicity. They have something they can talk to her about. They might even feel a bit closer to her. She certainly didn't bore them.

Meanwhile no one knows anything about Boring Boris.

**STOP BEING BORING**

Becoming interesting can be scary at first. But you want it. Do you know the combination of fear and desire that I’m talking about? That’s your green light. That’s your brightly-lit path away from boring.

Felicity didn’t stop being boring because she was particularly interesting. She stopped being boring because she decided to “get naked”. Now she expresses her opinion, she steps on toes, she chases what she wants… and the funny thing is people love her for it. She’s real.

The next time you’re unsure what to do in a given situation, try running “Fuck it” Felicity instead of Boring Boris. Start small, make mistakes and learn from them.

**EXAMPLES**

A real estate agent told me he wants to build trust with his clients. "I'm not an average agent. I care about them and getting their home. I want them to know I'm the best agent and they can trust me with one of the biggest investments of their lives.” He tries to connect with his clients but the majority of the time they give him one-word answers. The stress of trying to sell them a house gets in the way of connecting.

Boring Boris would act the way he thinks a real estate agent “should” act in this situation. He’d make polite small talk and tell the clients how spacious the bedroom is and how much light the living room gets because the windows face east, where the sun rises.

“Fuck it” Felicity might say “Listen, before I show you some houses I want you to know that I actually care about you finding a home that makes you happy. Some agents just want to offload as many houses as possible but I can’t do that... I’d feel too guilty if I forced something on you. Plus I’m a terrible liar. So I actually want to know what you like and what you don’t like. If you promise to tell me, I’ll promise to not pretend a crappy house is great for you."

Someone else I know has trouble connecting with people because he's too eager to connect. He says he has a weird personality and sense of humour so he resorts to polite conversation to play it safe… meaning he’s essentially running the Boring Boris process. His conversations look like this:

Him: Hey! How are you?
Them: Good, how about yourself?
Him: Pretty good.
Him (in his head): (Okay what's next? — awkward silence)
Him: Gloomy weather, eh? or What’d you have for lunch?

“Fuck it” Felicity would make it personal. She might read the other person’s body language and say “Hey, you look (happy/focused/full of energy/excited/chilled/etc!). What’s happening?"

Even if you read them wrong they’ll appreciate that you’ve taken the time to notice them. And now you can talk about what’s really going on, instead of the weather. Try to avoid making negative observations like sad, tired, sick, etc. because it can make them self-conscious. You could put a more positive spin on it with something like “You look like you’ve been working hard.” or “You look like you’re deep in thought."

If they seem like they don’t want to talk, because sometimes we all don’t, you can follow it with “Anyway, you look like you’re on your way somewhere.” or “You look like you’re really busy.” They’ll appreciate you giving them an easy out and will remember how socially aware you are next time.

Someone else I know rarely shares things about himself because he feels like he’s too boring or not good enough for his friends. He talks to his friends about football, wrestling and topics he thinks they want to talk about, because they’re easy. He judges himself based on how interested they are in what he says, yet he puts no self in what he says. Textbook Boring Boris.

If you’re scared to share something because you think “it’s too boring”, you’re probably wrong. Most things that are scary to share are actually rather interesting. People have similar fears. They can relate.

When you share things that scare you people recognise that you’ve trusted them enough to share something scary. They admire that you’ve taken a risk for the benefit of connecting with them. You stop being boring, you become real.

That’s why when “Fuck it” Felicity feels like she’s too boring she might say to her friends “Hey guys, how do you always come up with interesting things to say? Sometimes I think I’m a bit boring." Because she’s real. Be real.

Boring Boris’ fears come from low self-esteem or insecurity. We all have them to some degree. Applying “Fuck it” Felicity’s approach can help you change not just your outcomes, but also the root of the problem over time.

Now go get back in touch with your inner 3-foot-tall explorer. Go play with fire.

If you want more actionable advice like this, get your daily dose of communication hacks and people skills [here](https://beardstrokings.com/learn?utm_source=red-sedboring).I'll keep it short. Pause between your sentences. Don't just talk like a wall of text. You know how in reddit we hate posts with a lot of unformatted, 1 giant paragraph of text? If you talk like that guess how the other person feels. So as you're running your opener or telling your story or trying to get to know her. Talk slowly and put pauses between your sentences.

Example: I'll demonstrate with this day time opener.
-
You: Excuse me *(wait until you have her attention)*

Her: *(She will either say yes or just looks at you expecting you to say something - either way is fine)*

You: I know this is random *(0.5s pause)* but I just saw you from there and I thought you look cute *(0.5s pause)* so I had to meet you.

^^ use this instead of saying all these as one long sentence.

**tl;dr:** talk slowly and put some pauses between your sentences. It will pique her interest even more and makes you look more confident.If we're all being honest, there's at least one or two things either currently in our lives or in our past that we feel some sort of shame about, something that has festered over time and become an insecurity of ours.

Maybe it's something about your physical appearance.

Maybe it's your career or current job/occupation.

Maybe it's your favorite hobby or thing to do on your free time.

Could even be your financial situation.

Whatever it is, I'm here to tell you this: other people don't care about your insecurities 1/10th as much as you do.

Because it's something that affects us and we feel negative emotions towards, that thing becomes magnified into the thousands, and to us, it seems like the absolute most unattractive, despicable thing in the world.

To others though, they either don't notice it, don't care, or care so little that they forget about it as soon as they realize it.

For the .000001% of people who DO care and judge you, fuck em. You wouldn't want to spend time with someone like that anyways.

So how do you actually use your insecurities to your advantage?

Well, like the old saying in the dating world goes: Whatever you can't fix, you feature!

Don't shy away from talking about it; embrace the fuck out of it and do it shamelessly and unapologetically.

Women admire and are very attracted to a man who is so comfortable in his own skin that he's willing to be vulnerable. Not from a place of weakness ("Oh, poor me, my life sucks because of...) but from a place of power (Yeah, X is true and it is what it is. But I accept it...)

So embrace the fuck out of whatever insecurities you have and stop shying away from them; whatever you resist, persists. Whatever you embrace, you can then go through and let go.

\*\*\*Just to clarify: I'm not necessarily telling you to go running around, telling every woman you meet your biggest insecurity right off the bat like a socially unaware creep. You can if you'd like, but that isn't the point of this post, for all the guys who want to troll and pick apart this dope post :)\*\*\*&#x200B;

About 3 years ago, I was a 29 year old Asian guy with only a couple months to go before I turned 30, working at a Big 3 Accounting Firm (Lol KPMG), and I was realizing that I was unhappy and miserable, working long hours at all times of the day and night and spending all my free time playing Overwatch, and Dota 2…

And despite earning good money, I had a house and some savings, I just knew my life was nowhere near where I wanted it to be or thought it should be, despite all the years of hard work because I never had a girlfriend. I was still a virgin at age 29. A kissless handholdless virgin… I just wanted to take the time to finally get this off my chest since I have nothing better to do during the quarantine.

I soon decided, with the help of an epiphany while reading some pickup articles on Reddit that this was not the life for me and that I would need to start approaching girls and learning game to have any hope of losing my virginity before 30… To have any chance at a normal life...

I didn't want to become a 100+ lay Gigachad:

* I just wanted to experience what other guys experienced in college that I missed out on.
* I just wanted to have someone I could share my hopes and struggles with, someone I could come home to and hug if I had a bad day.
* I just wanted to have some fun before I get married and start a family…

Was that really too much to ask?

So I quickly began to learn about game and seduction and browsed Reddit and other forums almost daily to get hyped up and learn how to do cold approach. I soon discovered, however, that I had bitten off far more than I could chew…

I met up with a white guy I met online who seemed equally as motivated as me to go out and approach and we went out to several bars and clubs together. Every time we went out, he would always go home with a new girl… I’m not proud of it, but I was extremely jealous since none of these girls gave me any kind of IOIs or other signs of attraction when I approached, and stopped going out with him. Now, I realize it's because he went to the gym a lot and always had a nice haircut, but back then, It was kind of ridiculous how I’d approach girl after girl and get one word answers and a GO AWAY vibe the entire conversation and he would come in a few minutes later and THE SAME GIRL would be smiling and asking him questions about himself, it felt like he didn’t even need to do any work to get laid…

At this point, I was watching pickup videos from or reading articles on how to get girls on an almost daily basis, trying to study and learn all the latest game techniques. It felt like I hit a brick wall. This was SOOO much harder than I thought it would be. The pickup articles I'd been reading specifically said that “women would rather fuck an ugly guy with a strong frame than a handsome guy with a weak one” but that didn’t seem to be the case. I was a 5’5” Asian guy competing with 6’0”+ white guys at every club I went to and it felt like no matter what I said, no girls were even willing to have an actual conversation with me. This is after 100+ approaches so I knew that it wasn’t just bad luck or lack of effort.

So reluctantly, after learning some valuable lessons about the harsh nature of reality, I invested $2997 in a well known pickup bootcamp since I figured I was already watching so many of their videos, and it’s only fair that I pay them and hopefully learn how to break through my sticking points since my strategy of trying to learn everything by myself was clearly failing.

For those of you thinking about going to a PUA Bootcamp, be very careful you don't waste all your money like I did. This particular company did not give a single FUCK about me other than my money. My instructor just kept telling me to approach and approach, which I already knew how to do, and every time I asked for feedback on why none of the girls seemed receptive, he would give some bullshit feedback on how my vibe was off. I asked him how to correct it and he never had any real answers, always giving some woo woo answer about how I needed to have outcome independence and have more fun. It was really weird that everyone who seemed to succeed seemed to be the type to go to the gym a lot and pay a lot of attention to their physical appearance, even though they teach that looks don't matter.

I finally lost my virginity through sheer luck after over 500 approaches. It was a random girl I met at the club after approaching empty handed the entire night, but we actually started making out right away after like 2 minutes, I'd never moved that fast before. It really was a life changing experience to finally get that monkey off my back. I felt more confident than ever and I even went on 2 dates with her to try to be her boyfriend but she didn't seem to reciprocate...

Over the next couple of years, I became obsessed with getting good with girls, which certainly kept me going, but it also caused some problems…

I went out with so many wingmen, hoping to find that gold nugget, that shining piece of knowledge or wisdom that would finally catapult me past this unbreakable wall, but they would either be just as bad with girls as me or be over 5'10", no exceptions. I read an article on Reddit about how you had to talk louder and slower and that actually helped a lot. Girls would actually give me a chance to have a conversation with them instead of rejecting me immediately but they would still shake their head when I asked them to go home with me or even just grab a drink together. That's when it hit me that I didn't know as much as I thought I did and that there was a lot more to learn.

The bad news is, all this rejection was not good for my mental health. I started to wonder if maybe a short Asian guy like myself is just not meant to procreate… I was seriously considering moving to Thailand or The Philippines to try to at least find a gold digger wife…

But finally, I found one particular dating coach that really resonated with me and I immersed myself in his training… He was 5’7” and Asian, so a short Asian like me. John Elite from Vancouver.

The first thing he told me was that my hairstyle, fashion, and body language were all shit and unless I fix them first, nothing else would work. Now this is completely contradictory to some of the other advice I read, which convinced me that looks don’t matter but I decided to give it a shot. I got a blazer and chinos from Zara and got an undercut haircut with faded sides along with a gold watch. I didn’t expect anything to happen right away but the difference in girls’ reactions really was noticeable IMMEDIATELY. Suddenly, they would hang in and listen to every word I had to say instead of just politely waiting for me to leave. One girl even started asking me questions about myself and followed me when I asked her to grab a drink with me! I was SOOO HAPPY, it felt like everything changed.

Next, he told me to fix my posture and stand up perfectly straight with no neck or back tilt. This was really hard for me because I spent my entire adult life playing video games and working in front of a computer, always hunched over. I even had to go to a chiropractor to undo the years of bad habits and damage to my posture but it finally got fixed after I started wearing a back brace like they give to scoliosis patients. Again, I noticed immediate results. I actually pulled a girl home this time and got a blowjob! No lay thought because of last minute resistance…

The one thing that really transformed my results though was to speak to girls with vocal variety. I had a very monotone voice that didn’t change in volume or pitch at all. He had me watch episodes of F.R.I.E.N.D.S and we noticed that every character spoke with such vocal variety and inflections that it sounded like they were speaking in color compared to my black and white. This did not come easy but I worked had on it until it was at least somewhat passable. This turned out to be the tipping point and I finally started getting laid regularly when I go out instead of once every 500 approaches like before. Overall, I'm very happy to have fucked 15 girls. I know that's not a lot compared to some other guys on here but it's a big improvement over ZERO.

That’s kind of the level I’m at right now. The girls aren’t like model level 9’s or 10’s yet but I’ve gotten a 7 before, mostly 5’s and 6’s but it’s a huge improvement over nothing. Before the quarantine, I already had a plate I was regularly seeing before shit hit the fan, so I figured I could just continue banging that chick while stuck indoors.

Well, turns out I still have a lot more work to do on myself because after about a month of seeing her during the quarantine, she officially stopped responding to my texts 2 days ago, ghosting me. I realize now that I paid a heavy price for those 15 lays. I dealt with rejection after rejection, becoming a stronger person emotionally, but at the same time, alienating old friends by refusing to hang out with them for not having similarly "successful" mindsets. I even lost my family who have very old fashioned Christian mindsets and see me as a monster for going out and banging so many girls without even one stable relationship...

I'm at the very beginning again, only this time in my early 30's, still working in my accounting job that I don't really have any passion for, but now without any of my old work friends or my family's support. It's hard for me to deal with the quarantine these days because my life was so centered around approaching lots of women and trying to hook up with them that I realize I don't really have any other hobbies.

But I've also changed for the better. After going on this insane hell of grinding out 15 lays, I have a lot more confidence in myself and even though it sucks to not have anyone there for emotional support, I realize that I'm more than capable of making new friends, of starting my own business. Because the only thing holding me back is myself.

Now that I've gotten what I wanted initially (losing my virginity, having random sex, meeting new women), it's time to move on to a new goal: starting my own business. Hopefully this next journey won't be anywhere near as difficult as the last one!

Hope everyone reading this is safe and got some value from my post. Just needed to get this off my chest before work starts up again.I created these summaries with a team and hope you find them useful. Let me know what you think and if you have any suggestions of what videos i should do next please let me know.

Have a great day.

I'm aiming to release a 2 new summaries each week so if you're interested please consider subscribing.

Ps sorry about the time stamps on the links, I need to redo them.

\-----------------------------

**Here are the links:**

Make Your Bed:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7mBNcI2H1c)

The power of the subconscious mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UNi9zDGaZtw)

Getting things done:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oCNN2pyO5Yc&t=1s)

The power of intention:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ezM3fIKHTY&t=1s)

Deep work:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA&t=8s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2SOQpjHKESA&t=8s)

The magic of thinking big:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8&t=3s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wdQRQ82AED8&t=3s)

The alchemist:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU&t=36s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcQjBghtxMU&t=36s)

Blink:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk&t=246s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rie9Pkp4Ktk&t=246s)

Atomic Habits:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6u0X0CDEqU)

The E-Myth Revisited:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctHTVZRnE7g)

Mindset:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QU5Q3lyTqo)

The art of war:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8\_5qhA2y-E4&t=32s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_5qhA2y-E4&t=32s)

Rework:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsaZU-HW18k)

The lean startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE&t=67s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6QPZp--lJE&t=67s)

The hard thing about hard things:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl\_Q3E5d33U&t=2s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yl_Q3E5d33U&t=2s)

Crush it!:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI&t=6s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onbmkc-29KI&t=6s)

Delivering Happiness:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8&t=4s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GiUWCZkHbA8&t=4s)

The personal MBA:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU&t=2s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFpXccN3YEU&t=2s)

The $100 startup:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cqa1LqahOLE&t=1s)

Zero to One:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RGtQjkSUahc&t=1s)

Grit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doUSy1Eo76s)

Start with why:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgMnlf4jcYY)

The compound:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0&t=218s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0nSIiAMnDY0&t=218s)

The Prince:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ&t=78s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzVmhWFdwBQ&t=78s)

The willpower instinct:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ&t=103s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jz5EXLYxWDQ&t=103s)

The slight edge:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS\_ZU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sItMk2xS_ZU)

Meditations:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI&t=30s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul2nuHOnCPI&t=30s)

Who moved my cheese?:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhJkIPHiyw)

The One Thing:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM&t=16s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cS5lgHhbUoM&t=16s)

The richest man in babylon:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs&t=20s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbnHlWFnWLs&t=20s)

The power of habit:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA&t=24s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d366w-o8nhA&t=24s)

Secrets of the millionaire mind:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1WjeoCw30g&t=1s)

The 6 pillars of self esteem:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB\_-w10&t=8s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5NRiB_-w10&t=8s)

The 7 Habits of Highly Effective people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_nGzZ9m\_Xsg&t=3s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_nGzZ9m_Xsg&t=3s)

Thinking Fast and Slow:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw&t=224s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fqw9dwxiKSw&t=224s)

The 4 hour work week:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCWzSlAqO0g&t=1s)

The power of positive thinking:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM\_19KBc&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IAdxM_19KBc&t=1s)

The power of now:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w&t=35s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wa7mAlLhD3w&t=35s)

Think and grow rich:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww&t=1s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btQNKjSy8Ww&t=1s)

12 rules of life:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU&t=26s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InBOOy1eTU&t=26s)

The 5 love languages:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPq4Vxh74jY)

Rich Dad Poor Dad:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8&t=28s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GV31Wpr2Fl8&t=28s)

How to win friends and influence people:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM&t=137s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s61o8y22BpM&t=137s)

The inside out revolution:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo&t=31s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68OwvuqZEGo&t=31s)

Models:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo&t=5s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hs0d7Da8ufo&t=5s)

Man’s search front:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk&t=18s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eyXFQ5W0bMk&t=18s)

The subtle art of not giving a fuck:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&t=253s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dOImyOGN9UE&t=253s)

How to stop worrying and start living:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qUQXrEk52Ug)

The millionaire fastlane:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrtjXONWVfA)

5 extremely powerful techniques to master motivation:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM&t=37s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vmRzDIisUeM&t=37s)**UPDATE: Since starting this project, *Above The Game* has turned into the most controversial dating book ever written - causing Kickstarter to BAN all future self-help projects. Check out http://abovethegame.info to buy your very own copy and [Sign up for the Above The Game newsletter](http://abovethegame.info/above-the-game-newsletter) to get weekly updates from me, TofuTofu!**

**Above The Game - A 9 Part Series**

0) [Intro & My Story](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/11ng7n/above_the_game_intro_my_story_preview_of_my/)

1) [Primer on Who You Will Become](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/11piau/above_the_game_part_1_primer_on_who_you_will/)

2) [Fundamentals of Attraction: Authenticity, Desire, Excitement, Lifestyle](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/11yjkw/above_the_game_part_2_fundamentals_of_attraction/)

**3) Body Language & How to Approach**

4) [Qualifying & Calibration](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1dfo7r/above_the_game_part_4_qualifying_calibration/)

5) [Flirting, Touch & Conversation](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/1di9xu/above_the_game_part_5_flirting_touch_conversation/)

6) [Logistics (getting the number, texting, setting up dates, etc.)](http://redd.it/1dtb8m)

7) [Physical Escalation & Sex](http://redd.it/1dvnem)

8) [Relationships](http://redd.it/1epgwd)

9) [Giving Back: Be a Value Giver](http://redd.it/1gkth6)

---

**A Simple Guide to Body Language**

All right, let's talk about body language. Body language before and during your approach specifically. Other than physical touch, body language is probably THE difference that separates the champs from the chumps. And I have some great news for you guys... Going from bad body language to good body language is probably **the highest return-on-investment you will ever find** when studying seduction. An hour behind a mirror and a few nights out is all you need to get the ball rolling in the right direction. You just need to bring some awareness to your body language.

**1) Your mother was right - stand up straight!**

Slouching is a turn off. There is no simpler way to state this. Barring medical reasons, from now on you will never not stand up straight. EVER. Be conscious of your posture at all times and make an active effort to sit and stand up straight. Just get used to it, it's part of the new you.

**2) "But... what do I do with my hands?"**

First off, stop thinking about your fucking hands. No one cares about your goddamn hands. The more you think about them, the more in your head you're going to be. Keep them down on your sides. That's it. That's all you need to know. Anything beyond that is mental masturbation.

**3) Smirk**

You know the smirk I'm talking about. The one that makes you think, "That guy intrigues me. I wonder what he's thinking about." It's between "too goofy" and "too serious." It screams "doesn't take himself too seriously." It looks relaxed. It has a touch of smugness to it, but not too much. It's that look on your face when you're rocking that new sexy haircut and outfit before you go out, when you catch yourself in the mirror and think, "Oh fuck yeah, I'm looking good." Get to know that smirk well, it is now the face you will showcase to the world when you're out talking to women.

**4) Motherfucking eye contact**

Eye contact! If there is anything resembling a magic pill, this is it! You MUST get comfortable looking people in the eye and not breaking eye contact first. Men who are successful in life do this. They hold eye contact. Look DIRECTLY into her eye and DO NOT LOOK AWAY. I don't give a shit if you're a foot away or across the room from her, HOLD IT. You will feel a rush of energy, nerves, and POWER. Learn to love that feeling, it's the feeling of you becoming a man who is successful with women, kiddo. Run with it.

**5) Get CLOSE to her, damn it!**

To quote Rob Judge, "Personal space is for pussies." I already told you that the most successful seducers are those who can't keep their hands off of women. Well you're not gonna be able to do that if you aren't in close! Shake her hand, hold the handshake for *just* slightly longer than most guys would, and close the gap between you and the girl until you can feel the sexual tension thicken up. This is how you demonstrate intent in your approach. 

Trust me, if you've got that "I'd fuck me" smirk on your face, standing tall, holding eye contact, right up closer to the girl than most guys, she will KNOW that you desire her and want to get to know her better. You can literally say anything at this point and you've made a direct approach. Congrats! Speaking of approaching...

---

**The Approach**

A quick pop quiz for you. Which of these are good openers?

* *"Hi. How's your day going?"*

* *"Excuse me. I just have to say, you are absolutely stunning. I'd be kicking myself if I didn't introduce myself..."*

* *"Oh my god, I love your sense of fashion."*

* *"Hey, help me decide which martini to order."*

* *"Where you girls from?*

Trick question. They're all awesome because you're a non-needy, sexy man with GOOD BODY LANGUAGE.

Master body language and you'll never have to think of a pickup line again. You can open with pretty much anything. Congrats!

But what about approach anxiety? Yes, it's real. Yes, it never goes away. But you've made a decision to get good at this stuff, haven't you? If you haven't, then why the fuck are you reading this? Go jerk off; I hear lonely tears make excellent lube. Otherwise, follow the Action Items in this guide and you'll be well on your way to success.

---

**Action Items**

1) Re-read the Action Items in [Part 2.](http://www.reddit.com/r/seduction/comments/11yjkw/above_the_game_part_2_fundamentals_of_attraction/) If you haven't done those items yet, stop immediately and do them. This is how you get over approach anxiety.

2) Wherever you are, focus on standing or sitting up straight. Let this thought dominate your mind for a week. It will feel a little weird at first, but you will be surprised how quickly it will become second nature. From now on, standing up straight is part of your routine. It will become something you just do, like putting on your underwear and socks.

3) Find the biggest mirror you can find. Make and HOLD eye contact with yourself for 60 seconds straight. Say silly things like, *"Hey sexy,"* and *"Yep, I'd fuck me."* This is going to be a little weird, but trust me on this. You have to get comfortable holding eye contact with someone - it might as well be yourself!

4) Next, smirk! Do something, ANYTHING, to get you fired up and smiling. Go beat that level in Mario Kart or watch some cat videos or literally ANYTHING to make you smile. Now look in the mirror and convert that smile to a smirk. If you're unsure what it looks like, take some photos and send them to me, I'll tell you. But I bet the majority of you guys will intuitively understand what I'm talking about when I say smirk. [Channel your inner Clooney.](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-avYnd-fJ2X8/UAG2IRkFQ4I/AAAAAAAAA5o/PWHo8Wmh3aM/s400/george_clooney_smirk.jpg) Practice this 15 minutes a day for a week.

5) Before steps 6 & 7, send a text message to a close friend or post in /r/100sets that you will be out approaching. HOLD YOURSELF ACCOUNTABLE. Make people follow up with you. Prepare to post a field report afterwards.

6) Go to a bar or nightclub that will have a lot of women. Keep only one thing in mind - you are there to practice getting in close when you speak to women and NOTHING MORE. Approach 10 different girls or groups of girls (they can be hot, ugly, or anything in between) with your eye contact, nice posture, and smirk. Say, "Hi. What's your name?" Hold that eye contact and get closer than you normally would. This is going to feel really weird and might creep some girls out till you get it right, but WHO CARES. You are only there to practice one thing and one thing only. Plus I bet at least a couple of them will be receptive. Get used to being in closer with the women you speak with, this is how guys get laid in bars from cold approaches. You'll need to have some experience in this area if you plan to get good with women. Do this for 5 nights.

7) Go to a busy daytime venue, perhaps a mall, a park, a busy street corner, or a train station. Do the same thing as step 6. Try to get just closer than you used to. Try to feel the sexual tension as you look the girl in the eye. Make some small talk and maybe even ask her for her phone number. Congrats, you just had a successful daytime approach and you're only on part 3 of this guide!

8) Post at least two field reports. Tell everyone what you're doing and ask for feedback. Take it to heart and bathe in words of encouragement.I'm trying to figure out from the greatest womanizers we have here. How does one consistently have sex with alot of women? I have a high sex drive so I want my life to be like this. Please if you can give as much detail as you can in your methods. You saying I stopped giving a f**k is not gonna cut it imo.Last couple years I've had some success at grocery stores. I honestly prefer it way more over night life. Reason being...

Pros:

\-No temptation of alcohol so one can argue it's healthier

\-Doesn't affect circadian rhythm as bar scene is late at night

\-Women tend to respect you more when sober

\-More women will admire you for bravery as most have never been approached in a public place like that

\-You save money in the long run as you avoid things like door fees, drinks, ubers etc.

\-You get more of an accurate assessment of women as they are not as dolled up going to the grocery as they would be at the bars. 

Cons:

\-Doesn't matter what you say or how you say it, there's always that one bitch that finds you creepy for no reason and reports you to the store manager lolIt seems,  to me at least, that nobody is actually there alone. Girls with their girlfriends, girls with their guy friend. What do you guys do to talk to girls when their with some other dude or some other girls?

Another thing, how do you ask get girls to come home with you from a bar or club when everybody seems to be (at least where I live) with their female or male friends?If you won't date yourself, don't try date someone else. If you neglect yourself, your social life, your education/job, then chances are, you'll neglect the other person too. Most people can see that. The world *doesn't revolve around you.* I hate to be insensitive but some people truly are lost on this sub-reddit. If you are an asshole, or needy, or very mentally unwell, among others, don't be surprised when nobody is responsive to your advances. I get that for some (mental illness especially), we can't control how we are, even with treatment. This advice isn't for you. This is for people who are well aware of their issues and **have pathways to fix them but don't take advantage of them.** Don't just accept you have it and move on. Confidence is important but if you clearly are a negative person and your drawbacks make up a major part of who you are, then you're your own bottleneck. It's not because you're ugly, not because you're fat. It's because you're a negative person who expects the world to accomodate you while you refuse to change. If you're depressed, see a therapist. If you're an alcoholic, go to rehab. Same thing if you're an addict. If you dress horribly, dress better. If you have low self esteem, work on yourself!

&#x200B;

I wrote this on another post as a comment but I'll also post it here for posterity:

&#x200B;

This sub-reddit preaches about "game" and "technique", but if you're not dependable when things get tough, and confident in yourself and **care** about what YOU do, nobody is going to be interested. The difference between a so-called "beta" and "alpha" is the beta will whimper when faced with adversity and run to safety, and will go along with societal pressure. The weak link. An alpha is a leader, will take charge when things get tough, and is wholly confident in his ability and what he believes in. This means they are not easily swayed by social pressure, sometimes *they're the catalyst for social pressure in the first place*. Be more like the latter. A KEY characteristic of an 'alpha' is that OTHER PEOPLE are ALSO confident in his abilities. If you choose to be meek and constantly erupt into emotional anguish at every point where something doesn't go your way, you will be seen as a weak man.

If you direct yourself towards alcohol at the slightest excuse, you are a weak man. If you have an easily bruised ego and are envious of other's success, you are a weak man. If you feel the need to put someone else down to elevate yourself, you are a weak man. If you are prone to violence at slight grievances, you are a weak man. If you treat others with contempt and ridicule, because you cannot fathom being wrong - **you are a weak man.**

For the beta to become an alpha, it needs to overcome **inner turmoil & negativity** before it can even *begin* to think about external strength. You'll notice much of what I'm saying is not woman-centred. Getting laid is a symptom of being attractive, mentally & physically.

If you feel like you're not good enough, what do you do? Give up and sleep? Or keep trying until you are? What makes an 'artist' is **imitation** which breeds **unique execution**. When an artist is classically trained, they are being taught by people that already know what they're talking about. You always learn from someone else. What separates a great artist from failed artist is ***luck***, ***perseverance and humility***. Don't ever close yourself off from changing a part of yourself if you see it as negative. Imitate the confident men, find out what makes them tick with the ladies, and apply that to yourself.

&#x200B;

**tl;dr** Get your shit together if you want women.Okay people, short time ago I listened a TED talk about subconscious mind and from that talk I learned  subconscious mind can't differentiate what is real and what is imagination. After that I did some research and found one method about being whoever you want.

Before going to sleep you imagine yourself doing the things that you would like to do or imagine yourself charismatic confident guy and make a picture of it for 15 minutes. My aim is being fearless man because sometimes I am not doing what I want to do due to what others think fear or sometimes I don't have enough courage to do. So I imagine doing the things that I couldn't have done it in time. At first times, you might feel umcomfortable  because that was how I felt at the beginning for 2-3 days. I'm in my day 7 and yesterday I did whatever I want maybe not at the exact moment that I wanted to do but I did it after some delay even in this case I felt very good and relieved. Also I thought this is progression. Btw do imagination and try to act like your imagination in day. Don't expect that just imagination will change you completely you should also take action.

Try it for one month and look the results. You won't lose anything if you imagine yourself in better way. Actually it is pretty enjoyable. Good luck on your journay!

&#x200B;

Edit: I'm sorry guys right now I can't find the one that I watched but I found another TEDx Talk similar to the method in the post

 [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=\_K0SP0JZPro](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_K0SP0JZPro) 

I will try to find original TED Talk We think game is about seducing women, but in reality it is your social skills. We should aim to improve them, and the good thing is that we can get to practice that everyday so many times even though we may not be conscious. If you think its all about approaching women at the club, you are never gonna really conquer this demon. Its a bigger thing. Practice your social skills every time with everyone, put yourself in your best mood/zone and thrive.You can be the ripest, juiciest peach in the whole world and there is still going to be someone who hates peaches. -- Dita Von Teese

It isn't your fault.Sex is just yoga.

Yoga with penetration.

That’s it.

The meanings you put on it are not yours, they were given to you by what you've consumed.

Stop using “the concept” of getting laid as a tool to feel “less than.”

Or some measurement to measure yourself to other men.

It's literally pointless and giving yourself anxiety and depression in the process.

If I asked “did you get yoga’d today bro?”

You wouldn't flinch to say “no” if that was the true answer.

But if I asked you if you got laid today and the answer was “no” you would start feeling sorry for yourself.

It doesn't matter!

It’s just yoga.

Stop trying to prove yourself to narcissists in pick-up communities that care more about their self-image and less about you, whose “followings” are built on people with self-esteem so low they would make a narcissist their God in the first place.

Get laid FOR YOU.

Alphas don't give a fuck what other people think.

Meaning STOP trying to prove yourself to ANYONE.

Guys will simultaneously knod their head in agreement.

Then go back to trying to prove themselves to the men around them.

Their is a level above that.

One where people actually like you for you.

Your true self.

But first you gotta “unfuck yourself.”

De-program.

More to come.***Update. Wow. Thanks for the love everyone.***

When I first got into pickup (14 years ago) my goal was simple: I wanted to sleep with the hot girls. The ones I fantasized about all through my teens, and twenties. But they were beyond me. 

If I got into a situation where I could talk to them, I’d become a nervous, quaking mess. I’d literally have panic attacks. What does that feel like? 

Heart pounding
Palms sweating
Body shaking

And an inability to form vowels, or make a coherent sentence. It was embarrassing as fuck, basically. 

So when I found the pua stuff, it was almost like discovering a diamond in your drawer. Here was the answer. The wealth of knowledge that would fix this shit forever. 

Like you guys who are taking action, I did it. I went out 7 nights, and 7 days a week for YEARS. I lived and breathed pickup. 

It took me three months to get my first lay. But it was worth it. And then after some time, I found this weird, strange situation…

I had hot girls in my life. They would sleep with me, we’d start dating… and then they’d flake, or dump me. 

Over, and over. They just wanted to bang, and then they’d bounce. 

It’s like, cold approach is stage one, getting the girl is stage two, and keeping her is stage three. 

So here’s for you youngins, some tips on how to keep the hot girl in your life, maybe getting her to be the girlfriend you’ve dreamt about. 

1. Cold approach is not enough

Sure you learned how to be calm, rather than shitting your pants nervous, when you approach girls. But you’re still deep down, really nervous she’ll find out you’re faking it, and you’ve never dated a girl as hot as her. You don’t really feel like you’re in her league, and you think she knows it!

Solution: You’ve got the hot girl. What more evidence do you need? You’ve arrived. Accept it. Beautiful women are no big deal. I’ve been with plenty, and guess what? Hot girls are also full of doubt and insecurity. Not just about their looks, but about their lives in general. 

What if they don’t have any skills? They can’t play an instrument, they hate their jobs, they don’t like the sound of their voice. Hot women are human. Understand that not only are you on a level playing field, but if she’s with you, it’s not out of pity. There’s something you have that she wants. 

2. Understand: You have something she wants

I don’t just mean money, or good looks. But maybe that’s it. You could have more money than her, and that’s totally fine. 

But maybe you have influence, a sense of humour, high intelligence, bravery… what is it that you have, that she doesn’t? Know your value. 

3. You are the action taker. You know how to get another hot girl. If you did it once, you can do it again. It’s very, very important that you know… she knows this too. Your hot girlfriend being jealous, is a good thing (as long as she’s not nuts.) 

4. Possessiveness is okay, but not so much jealousy

You can get another hot girl, right? So if she’s not texting back immediately, or you see her touching some dudes biceps at the party, don’t lose your shit, start moping around, and causing drama. Don’t let her know how insecure you are, dammit. 

This was my biggest mistake. I’d think I was this badass pickup artist, until I started rolling with the girl, and she would flirt her away around the party, leaving me a quivering, insecure wreck. This may be subconscious on her part, but she’s testing you to see if you’re faking all that confidence. 

If she steps over the line… dump the bitch! Get another. If she likes you enough, she’ll come back, begging to be your girlfriend. But if she’s just flirting a little bit, let her express herself. It’s okay in moderation. Would you want your girlfriend to lose her shit every time you smiled at a pretty girl? 

That’s just some inner game, relationship stuff. Dating a hot girl can be exhilarating… but also tough. The more girls you get with, the more normal it will become. 

You’ll get used to other guys, including your friends trying to steal her. You’ll get used to being treated differently because you have a hot girlfriend. You’ll get invited to more events, parties, etc… because people want to be around your hot girlfriend. 

It’s a big leap from being perpetually single, reading pickup forums, to having a beautiful girlfriend. Enjoy it, but don’t grasp onto it like if you lose her, your life is over. Whatever you grasp onto, don’t hold too tight, or you’ll crush it. 

Check out my [dating a hot girl guide](https://www.absoluteability.com/relationships/hot-girlfriend-guide/), with another 1500 words of advice. 

Good luck!!Women want a boyfriend as well as a player, or rather, a man who has tons of sexual options as far as women, and can act on them if he so chooses. If you can't do that, or can't at least project that, she will assume that something is possibly wrong with you and that you are low value. 

Even more than this, there is a time and a place to be both of them, the latter of which is more important in the beginning. See, if she's not sexually attracted to you now, it won't happen 6 months down the line. You can't friend your way into it. You can't negotiate your way into it. 

Women decide/screen very quickly as to if they desire you sexually. Anywhere from an instant to 15 minutes into a conversation. At the longest, if she's a neutral candidate who is undecided about you, two dates max. This excludes girls who are generally down for whatever and will let you inside them if you can properly seduce them.

The player vibe is what causes her to want to suck you dry of all your fluids and life energy, and the boyfriend vibe is what is what makes her feel a certain level of consistency, safety, security, and comfort, comfort being the "enemy" of sexual tension. 

Because women decide how they see you sexually as opposed to long term very quickly, it is of the utmost importance that the main focus of your first few interactions are to get her reactive, sexually turned on, and if possible, jumping your bones. 


The Boyfriend Vibe:

Whenever a chick gives you the, "I just don't see you in that way" speech, or the "You're not my type; I didn't know you wanted that" spiel, it's because you were giving off boyfriend vibes. Again, boyfriend vibes aren't bad. But, they are reserved for when you've actually spent enough time with her, observing, investing, vetting, that you deem her worthy of being your girl. 

Boyfriend vibes are a result of not vetting long enough, seeking too much validation, seeking approval, seeking rapport, needing certain reactions from her, caring too much. They are manifested as, 

Taking any and everything she says seriously (except no), as well as assuming it's your responsibility to fix her problems, or follow the directions and implications of what she says

Always checking up on her, trying to gauge her interest level

Treating sexuality or sex as something that isn't natural, but as a reward, or something she has to approve and sign off on, instead of something you two just do, that she craves; a chore; a job

Trying to appease her feelings

Trying to prove your worthiness 

Supplicating 

Trying to use resources, money, gifts, rides, time, to get her to like you and be sexually interested 

Trying to arrange and rearrange yourself into the events of her daily life. You need to be apart of it

Compromising and acquiescing to her requests and demands 

Giving her too much time and attention unearned or for the sake of 

Waiting on her

Being too emotionally vulnerable

Attaching your emotions and feelings onto her as if it were her job to care or give a single semblance of a fuck

Needing her to support you in daily life or conversations 

Seeking her approval 

Looking to her to make you feel good

Being permission seeking


All of these things are either low value behaviors beta behaviors, or boyfriend behaviors. Either way, none of these actually turn her on. Doing any of these is skipping a vital step in the seduction process. Like the equivalent of raising the kids of a single mom and having sex with her 5 years after the fact. 


The Player Vibe:

The player vibes is one that oozes sexuality. It sucks you in. It just feels good. You want to melt into it, surrender to it, submit to it. It's hot, sticky, sweet, and unmoved. It makes women crave your touch and wanna give into you. 

The reason women love the player vibe is because it screams high value and three way potential. Women want to fuck a dude who is higher value than her. The player vibe is that. The essence of a player vibe is constant sexual tension. This created by

Never qualifies, answers serious questions, or answers questions seriously.  Never let her interview you or drain you of information

Always in a fun, carefree, loose mood

Moves slow, relaxed, deliberately

Full of soul piercing, laser eye contact that projects sexual confidence and sexual imagery

Doesn't take any of her words or behavior seriously

Non needy and seeks no approval

Projects the ability to walk away at any time 

Is the buyer, not the seller, meaning, you are the one vetting her and seeing if you like her

Projects a go with the flow vibe, 100% pressure free, leaving everything open and unforced

Non judgemental. This is one of the most important parts of the player vibe. Non judgement gives her room to be who she wants to, act and say what she wants, as wild as it may be, without fear or shame

Is comfortable, in the way of projecting a, "We've known each other forever type of vibe"

Isn't surprised by anything that she says or does, like you've seen it all before

Leads and has direction 

Dominant and reasonably aggressive

Playful and curious

Takes nothing personally, or as offensive

Everything feels really casual,  like "things just magically happen" with no explanation

Talks really slow, deliberately, relaxed, resonant and vibrant, with rapport breaking tonality

Free of outcome and mental clutter. A player's mind is always icy, cool, and free of thinking of the future, the past or the present. It simply accepts and allows

Filled with mysteriousness

Reads women perfectly, anticipating their thoughts, needs, desires

Understands the inner workings of their mind

Is emotionally relevant as well as extremely emotionally polarizing 

Core confidence without a doubt of his value or what he has to offer

Projects freedom with conversations about sex, the prospect of doing sexual things, etc. None of it is a big deal



All these things are the essence of what the player vibe represents. It's unexplainable and women are just drawn to it. You can do whatever you want, but if you don't project these qualities into getting her to see you sexually, you'll get eaten up by the boyfriend vibe and a series of conversations and dates that go nowhere. Remember, if she doesn't see you as "that guy" you're wasting your time. Don't!I get it you are THE MAN, you just went through 40 girls, and you have to tell all these pussies, how life works and how to fuck all the girls. The thing is, this style of writing and acting tough on the internet just ruins all your credibility and makes you look like a wannabe.

&#x200B;

I've been reading this sub on and off for a while now and this is a trend I'm seeing in almost half the posts here. Usually I read FR or top voted/hot topics, to see how others do the "game" or just get some tips to improve my style. I honestly prefer the find your own style, make your life interesting, have fun in life approach. Strangely in these posts it often really feels like you want to push this fake alpha/tough guy style on me. Your points may be valid and good, but when you tell me to "get up from your loser ass and go up to that chick you pussy", only has me sigh-ing and thinking that you are not a guy who has actual knowledge rather just some dude who read/watched some PUA gaming and now thinks he got it all figured out... It's really tiring, and look at all the good pick up artist, life coaches, they almost never you a bitch, and a pussy because that shit is demotivating and in the end you'll be telling yourself that you are actually weak and unworthy because in that moment you couldn't keep eye contact. It'll only lead to worse self-image and less confidence. For me this style is just exhausting and cringey, and usually stops me from reading the post any further. No alpha guy does it. 

***I often feel like there is a lot of irony in this style:*** You should never try to prove yourself to a woman, yet with this macho writing style you are trying to prove to the sub, that you are such an alpha male.  


**How it could be better:** Just write your own experience and what you learned during your the years, how it benefited you and how it could benefit the readers as well. 

**Example1 (tough guy):** Keep eye contact you fucking pussy, and wait for her to look away first, this will show you are an alpha guy and approach her you bitch. (I know a bit of an exaggeration)  
**Example2 (normal guy):** Try to keep eye contact with her and smile, if she smiles back and looks down, she is probably interested and you have a good chance of grabbing her number if you approach her. (see no putting the reader down, and there is a posibble positive outcome for him)

&#x200B;

**tl;dr: Your "macho" peptalk makes me think you are either a 14 year old teen, or an idiot wannabe, and makes me doubt any of your points (and stop reading it). Look at all the good PUA guys, they never call you a "fucking pussy, loser", they motivate people through positive reinforcement and feedback and not putting them down...**  
I asked this girl to give me a brutally honest critique about what I could improve in order to get better dates. She's a total hottie and has a smoking vibe so I trust her opinion.

She said I had many good qualities, but I had no sexual vibe. She said it wasn't a looks thing, it's like "you look at someone and you can just tell. With you it's obviously because you have self-esteem issues and you don't accept yourself, but for an external observer it just comes off as that you don't emanate any sexuality. You're stiff."

That's actually good to know because I never realised women saw me like that, and it explains why I can only ever get girls who, regardless of how good-looking they may be, are not very "sexy" themselves. But I don't really know what one can do to improve this.

Any advice?achilles was only as strong as his heel.We smiled at each other only feet apart but I couldn't work up the courage to approach him.. Now I'm kicking myself for leaving to quickly. I didn't want to be to forward. Or give him the wrong impression but I would have totally pounced on him as soon as we were alone. 

After today I'm not going to let that moment pass. Men don't always have to initiate the conversation. I want to be seductive but not a crazy sex kitten that isn't taken seriously. I do want a meaningful relationship. I can be a tender caring woman when I want to be but I also want to up my outer seductive game and satisfy my curiosity. How do ppl work up the courage? We are all stranger to eachother at some point right? Good day but could have been full of passion.**BEFORE GOING OUT (Mindset)**

Know that the night will be good. It really doesn't matter what happens, your life will still be the same. Your family will still love you, your friends will still like you.

But, for the night to be real great, you have to do something! If you're going out to wait for something to happen... Yeah, like I said, your life will still be the same when you go back home, but you will feel like a loser, I think we all here know how this feels likes, and it's not good.

In every choice you do, you're taking a risk. If you choose to stay by the wall looking at that cute girl, if you choose to wait for the perfect moment, if you choose to drink a lot or every other choice that you make. It is a risk. You're taking the risk of maybe that cute girl look at you and smile, the risk of maybe that some girl collide with you and you two start talking, the risk of you being drunk and finding a girl drunk enough to make out with you. I'm talking with my personal experience here, and I've already choose to take these risks, and all I've learned  was: Good things don't happen for those who wait. Good things happen for those who act!

"The biggest risk is not taking any risks."

If you want to have an awesome night out, the most important thing you have to know is that YOU have make the night awesome. YOU HAVE TO MOVE! Get out of your comfort zone! Feel that awkward feeling in your stomach! Try to get slapped in the face! JUST. DO. SOMETHING.

Watch this(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tlWrFgIR6CU) and this(http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MBBkMtfd7p8) some hours before going out.



**BEING AN ATTRACTIVE MALE AND SOME GAME CONCEPTS**

- Talk loud and slowly.
- Smile. (:
- Take pauses when talking. Sexual tension relys on the pauses that are made. And don't be affraid of taking pauses even when answering. Some guys thinks that you need to have instantaneous replys for everything girls say, but you acctually don't. Sometimes when I don't know how to answer something, I just think for a momment, as long as you are comfortable, the girl is comfortable too, and you will see that there is no such thing as awkward silences.
- People feel what you feel. Again: as long as you are comfortable, the girl is comfortable too.
- Have a strong eye contact. Look people in their eyes!
- Always kino!
- Be unreactive. Don't let other people's drama(or whatever they do/say) affect you and your vibe.
- You are enough. Act like a guy who has 10 women in his house wanting him at the moment, and is only going out to have/add fun with interactions with even other girls.
- Be proactive. Don't wait for good things to happen to you. Make the good things happen. There is no perfect moment, you take the moment and make it perfect. 
- The 3 seconds rule. Look and approach!
- Talk with lots of girls! Don't focus just in the pretty ones. This helps to build momentum and there is always a good chance that some non-attractive girl is in a group of people with some attractive one.
- The triangular look. Look to the left eye, look to the right eye and look to the mouth.
- Be the party, no girl wants to meet a sad and less value guy. They always want something better. They can see in your eyes and in your body language if you're having a good night. And they aways wants the guy who is having a good night. 
- Don't care about the outcome. When your purpose is only to have fun, you will get more girls. Trust me.
- Don't try/Don't give a fuck. With "don't try" I mean, don't look like a guy who is always trying to convey or get something in the interaction. You acctually want to convey and get something, but you have to do this in a smooth way. This is some different way of saying "Be unreactive". 

*Continue in comments...*I've been lurking on r/seduction since a few months. I've read a lot about all that you guys post, you guys are wonderful! 

This post is about what I experienced today. I have a girl friend (Please do notice the space) who I vent to about anything and everything. She does the same with me. We both have no feelings for each other, so it doesn't make anything complicated. So anyway, she recently broke up with a guy. I know she was in love with him. He lived in France so she has started learning French for him. Lots of other sacrifices, you get the drift. 

A couple of weeks ago, they broke up over something. She still has feelings for him. But he has started trying hard to get her back. Chasing hard, guilt tripping her about his sacrifices, trying to logically make her understand why she needs to be back. She showed me his messages, and wow, they were horrible. And she said something to me that I will always remember: "I've started to lose respect for him."

Never, ever, ever beg someone to come back to you. There's a difference between fighting for them, and begging. Also, you lose respect, you are done. She will never feel for you the same way she did. Once you have broken up, evaluate if she is important to you. If she is, try to get her back, but only once. If it isn't working out, there is no point in blasting your self-esteem and self-respect to smithereens. Accept it, and move on. There's other fish in the pond.**A bitter little troll**  
I got into game primarily because I wanted to sleep with beautiful women — the“9s” and “10”s.  
These girls never paid attention to me in high school, and to be honest I was bitter about it.  
I wanted to be the guy who walks down the street with a Victoria’s Secret caliber girl on his arm and have people’s heads turn as they wonder, “Why the fuck is she with HIM?”  
So that’s where I started from. A bitter little troll, hungry for status and power.  


&nbsp;


**Fail until you succeed**  

You might think that with such an unhealthy mindset, I’d never get anywhere with game. That’s where you’d be wrong.  
What I had on my side was an unhealthy obsession with status, a lifelong fixation on beautiful women, and a grudging willingness to do whatever it took to get what I wanted. 
So I learned game. I went out and approached 3 nights a week, rain or shine. I got rejected by 99% of women I talked to for the first 2 years.  
But I kept at it and eventually I got what I wanted. I started hooking up with 8s and 9s on a regular basis, fucked the odd model or exotic dancer here and there, dated a few tens, and eventually made one my girlfriend. (You can see a picture of her at the start of [this post on my blog] (http://insurgentmedia.tv/how-to-have-sex-with-a-woman-youve-just-met/) )  

Getting the hottest women is about two things:  
Action  
Mindset  

I won’t cover action in this post, because you basically already know what you have to do. You have to cold approach constantly. You have to approach consistently. And you have to acclimate yourself to approaching the hottest girls in the venue. There’s no secret to it — take the actions, and you will get the results.  
What’s more interesting, and more subtle, is the question of MINDSET.  
If you have the right mindset, then taking right actions will be easier, and you’ll get results faster.  
Have the wrong mindset, on the other hand, and no amount of action will produce the result you want — because there are unconscious forces blocking you from getting it.  


&nbsp;


**What is a “10” anyway?**  

First of all, let me define what I mean by a “10”.  
I know we all have our own preferences in women and that one guy’s 7 might be another’s 10 and vice versa.  
For now, though, let’s keep things really simple.  
A “10” is the type of girl you see on a magazine cover… at the Playboy mansion… or dancing onstage in a Vegas club.   


&nbsp;


**Why you’re not dating 10s**  

“*Man is not a rational animal, but a rationalising animal.*” - Robert Heinlein  
Now, because we’re on Reddit, a lot of guys are going to say at this point, “Well, those girls aren’t TRUE TENS. A TRUE ten has a great personality as well. And strippers, models, dancers, etc are attention seeking whores and damaged goods.”  
Sit down and shut up.  
How do YOU know the Playboy model doesn’t have a good personality?  
Until you’ve met her and hooked up with THAT SPECIFIC GIRL, you don’t know shit.  
You’re just generalising about ALL women who are models, dancers, cocktail waitresses.  
And that is PRECISELY the reason most guys reading this will never get a 10.  
The single biggest mindset problem which prevents guys from dating “out of their league” is a cognitive bias known as sour grapes.  


&nbsp;


**What is “sour grapes”?**  

In one of Aesop’s fables, a fox reaches for some grapes on a vine. The grapes look delicious and he’s thirsty.  
But because he can’t reach them, the fox gives up and insists that he didn’t want the grapes anyway, because they’re probably sour.  
When you train yourself to see it, you’ll notice that “sour grapes” is fucking EVERYWHERE in our culture. It is in many ways the dominant ideology of our time.  
How many times have you heard someone say the following:  
—“I wouldn’t want a million dollars. It would just be a big hassle, and rich people are unhappy anyway.”  
—“Sure, her body looks good, but she’s a bitch. I like a girl who knows how to hold a conversation.”  
—“Yeah she’s hot but she’s just an attention seeking whore. Women like that are only looking for a guy’s money anyway.”  


&nbsp;


**So why is this so harmful?**  

Because your brain is like a computer, and when you make these blanket assertions, you’re unwittingly PROGRAMMING YOURSELF TO FAIL.  
Do you believe that our subconscious mind is really in control?  
I do. (And if you have any doubts about that, I recommend reading the books Thinking: Fast and Slow, and Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion)   
So here’s the problem.   


Sour grapes starts off as an innocent way for us to preserve our ego, but it quickly mutates into a LIMITING FORCE which keeps imprisoned in a little box.  
You approach a ten, and she rejects you. Or at least, you PERCEIVE that she rejected you.  
So you say, “Fuck it, women like that are all whores / attention seekers / bitchy / boring / cheating sluts / gold diggers / status-driven / [FILL IN THE BLANK]”  
This allows you to preserve your ego momentarily. “I don’t want those grapes — they’re sour anyway.”  
But here’s where everything starts to go wrong.  
Let’s say that from that experience of being rejected by one or two hot girls, you form a belief. This belief states: “Hot girls are bitchy, indifferent and cold.”  
Well, next time you approach a hot girl, that limiting belief is going to be PRIMING YOU TO EXPECT A NEGATIVE OUTCOME IN ADVANCE.  


And because you expect a negative outcome, your game will be weakened. You’ll be less funny, less carefree, more conservative.  
And because your personality is stifled around her, the hot girl will react exactly how you expect her to react: bitchy, cold and aloof.  
It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.  
This is just one example. Thousands could be given.  


&nbsp;


As men, we are by our nature, very proud.  
We don’t like to DESIRE something, and not be able to get it.  
So most of us fall into the trap of playing mindgames with ourselves, that what we can’t get is inherently flawed and not worth getting after all.  
The irony is: you CAN get those hot girls if you’re willing to work at it.   
But by rationalising that THEY’RE the problem — you’re actually programming your brain to fail around them. And thus, the belief that you can’t get them becomes self-fulfilling.  


&nbsp;


**Common myths about the hottest women**  

“*It ain't what you don't know that gets you into trouble. It's what you know for sure that just ain't so.*” — Mark Twain 


&nbsp;


**MYTH #1: Hot girls are bitchier than other girls.**  

**THE TRUTH:** Some 10s are bitches, just as some 5s are bitches.   

However, don’t be fooled into taking a woman’s FIRST REACTION to you as being representative of her character as a whole. Remember: girls are naturally going to be NERVOUS when you approach them. This nervousness might cause them to act rude and standoffish until you spend more time getting to know them.  
Only when you’ve spent more time with the girl will she relax around you so you can know her true personality — which is NEVER the initial “bitch shield” persona you get at the start.   
As Alex (formerly of RSD) used to say: When you see that cold unattainble perfect 10 in the club, imagine her on Christmas morning opening presents with her family. She’s laughing and giggling, happy, wearing pyjamas, no makeup, has glasses and braces on and basically looks like an abomination — but she’s still feminine and cute.  
THAT’S the real girl. The girl you see when you approach her is a FACADE. Don’t be tricked into thinking your first impression of the girl is real.  
99% of stunners are actually cute, affectionate little DORKS once you get to know them.  


&nbsp;


**MYTH #2: Hot girls get approached all the time. This makes them more hostile and irritated when you approach them because they’re sick of men hitting on them**  

**THE TRUTH:** In my experience, the hottest girls usually respond the BEST to being approached. A 9 or 10 is approached a lot. This means she has less anxiety about being approached. She’s more familiar with it.  
On the other hand, if you approach a 6 — she’s less accustomed to male attention, so talking to you makes her feel nervous and self-conscious, and she tries to “reject you first” by being hostile, mainly because she feels out of her depth.   
This almost never happens with 9s and 10s — who are much more comfortable in their own skin, and thus usually more friendly and laid back when you approach them.  
By the way, this is why I exclusively date 9s and 10s now. It’s about more than just looks: their “vibe” is just better, most of the time. They’re less insecure, more laid back, more carefree and in the moment.  


&nbsp;


**MYTH#3: The hottest girls are all “money-grubbing whores”**  

**THE TRUTH:** Again, this has simply not been my experience. I’ve dated some really stunning women over the years and not once did I spend money on any of them.   

Take my girlfriend as an example. Beautiful girl, has done modelling work, partied with celebrities, and has friends who are multimillionaires.  
She easily could have hooked up with some Saudi prince or some shit. Instead she’s with me: a little dork who she met and started dating while I was (a) unemployed, (b) living with my parents, (c) *not even lifting weights* (that last one still blows my mind tbh).  
We’ve been together for 4 years — and throughout that time my career has been nothing but one failed entrepreneurial venture after another. Yet our relationship is stronger than ever.  
What’s going on here? How am I bending reality in this way?  
Simple. I believed I was “enough” to get this girl. And by believing I was enough, I became enough. It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy. (It also doesn’t hurt that she knows from experience that I have the game to fuck another girl as hot as her any time I like.)  


&nbsp;


**MYTH#4: The hottest girls are superficial. They only care about a guy’s looks and status**   

**THE TRUTH:** Are you fucking kidding me? Have you even left your basement recently?  
Do you know how many absolute stunners I’ve met who are in LTRs with some scrawny neckbeard who delivers pizzas for a living?  
Do you have any idea how socially inexperienced a claim like this makes you sound?  
If you open your eyes and actually look around in the REAL WORLD — (not in movies and TV and internet comments) — you’ll constantly see guys who are total dweebs dating girls you’d bite off your left arm to bang.  
To take just one example that I saw the other day:  
Check out [this video] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXzPsZHYUbI) of the YouTuber Sssniperwolf and her boyfriend. 
This is a chick who’s easily an 8 or 9 (probably higher if she was dolled up), yet she’s dating some guy who’s WAY below her “league” by mainstream understanding — fat, nerdy, completely beta.  
(The video actually creeps me out for some reason, to be honest, but it’s an interesting case study either way.)  


Look, I’m not going to tell you being good looking doesn’t help. Of course it does. But it makes LESS OF A DIFFERENCE than you’d think.  
Example: In the past two years I’ve put on a lot of muscle, gone up a few shirt sizes, and look a hell of a lot better. In terms of raw looks value, I’ve probably gone from about a “6” to an “8”   
Has it changed how women respond to me? Not really.   
The law of social momentum still applies. If I don’t go out and approach for a few weeks, I’ll do terrible with women. If I’m in a state of momentum, I’ll do extremely well.   Working on my looks has made almost NO difference to my game or the level of women I can attract.  
I was getting 9s and 10s when I was a 6 in looks. I’m still getting them now. But it hasn’t become any easier or more consistent (other than due to the inevitable advances in my game which arise from experience).  
This is not to say don’t work on your looks — just that after a certain point, it’s much less of a factor than you think it is.  
Another aspect to this is that what any two women find physically attractive in men can differ wildly based on that woman’s own unique imprints for what constitutes an attractive mate (e.g. what her father was like, early authority figures, first positive sexual experiences, etc).  
You won’t be physically attractive to every woman. But whatever you look like — I can guarantee there’s a very hot girl out there who has a “fetish” for your specific thing.   But you won’t find her sitting in your basement, writing posts about how looks matter. You’ll find her by going out a lot.  


&nbsp;


**MYTH#5: Hot girls are less sexual than other women. They’re more likely to be prudes, and harder to have a one night stand with.**  

**THE TRUTH:** There is actually [some science](http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/19485565.2011.615172?journalCode=hsbi20) to back this up 
The more beautiful the woman, the less sexual partners she tends to have. The researchers in the above study hypothesise that less attractive women have to “settle” for one night stands, whereas hotter girls are in a better position to get a guy into a LTR — which is assumed in the study to be every woman’s ultimate aim.  
So, is the average beautiful woman less likely to put out fast, and thus, we can assume, more resistant to seduction?  
Yes, according to science.  
However, statistical averages are bullshit.  
For example, the *average* American woman gives birth to 1.87 children.  
But what the hell does 1.87 children look like? One normal kid and one kid without legs?  
These are statistical averages, gleaned from hundreds of millions of data points.  
But the data points themselves — i.e. REAL LIFE HUMAN BEINGS — are messy and all over the place. While the average woman gives birth to 1.8 kids, there are millions of women who give birth to 10+ children, and millions who have no kids at all. 
Likewise: Some hot girls are super prudes. Other are super sluts.  
When you add them together, you get an average that *makes them seem prude-ish, on the whole*.  
But that ignores the fact that MILLIONS of super hot girls are absolutely ADDICTED to sex and love getting fucked more than anything in the world.  
Case in point: every 9 or 10 I’ve ever been with had sex with me either the first night we met, or on our first date.  
By contrast, I’ve dated 6s and 7s who were super into me but wouldn’t put out even after THREE dates.  
So stop focusing on mental masturbation scientific averages, get out there and start approaching hot girls in REAL life. People will surprise you.  

----------

**TL;DR**
Your beliefs about hot women are probably holding you back. Take an inventory of everything you believe about beautiful women. Selectively alter and remove any beliefs that are limiting you. Replace them with new, more empowering beliefs. This + taking a LOT of action = dating the hottest women.

----------

**If you like what you've read here, you might like my new step-by-step guide on how to have sex with a woman you've just met. Check it out here: [The Ultimate Guide To "Same Day Sex"] (http://insurgentmedia.tv/how-to-have-sex-with-a-woman-youve-just-met/)**-EVERYTHING pickup will try to teach you revolves around being self assured and confidant - this is different than being cocky.

-Some things you need to learn the hard way

-The FASTEST way to success with women is to cultivate and live an attractive and interesting life. Make women want to be a part of something new and exciting - you. Do this genuinely and don't lie about it.

-On that note, don't lie. You can embellish some things though...

-The best pickup 'line' is simply "Hi!". I usually don't remember the first thing I said to women I end up with.

-Go to the gym, its a shallow world out there and women LOVE a guy with a nice build. Stop rationalizing reasons you don't need to go. Its just plain old fashioned good for you anyway.

-Wear clothes that fit. How clothes fit you is 1000% more important than what the clothes are.

-Women are just as interested in sex as men, they just go about it differently.

-Girls have their own version of game too, and they fret about it.

-Desperation is a FOUL smelling cologne.

-Know when to fold your hand, no shame in pulling the eject lever if it plain ol' fashioned ain't happening. Persistence is different than making a total ass of yourself.

- Yes, she wants you to talk to her.

-Pull the trigger on the kiss when the time is right, you will be shocked how often it goes over extremely well. Her eyes will tell you when the time is right.

-Average folks will start dating/fall for those life has conveniently placed around them IE: coworkers, classmates, established friends ect. Your brain will adapt to attract you to what is available and consistently on your radar. This is a symptom of a very unremarkable lifestyle. Date outside your social circle, don't be a lemming.

- PUA is a useful tool for socially inhibited folks, but it is pathetic at a certain point.

- While younger women are attracted to assholes that changes in short order in their older 20's. On that note being a sweet guy is great but don't forget to lead the situation - she is looking to you to drive the experience.

-Easier said than done but necessary: don't be a wuss - what's the worst that can happen? 

-Stop taking yourself so seriously, no one else is.

Get after it gentleman


EDIT: Thanks for all the comments and replies, I haven't really thought about any of this stuff in awhile and its been fun to dust off some older parts of my brain.I am not some dating guru or anything like that but this is something I have been realizing while learning seduction.

**Seduction is an advanced social skill.** If you are trying to learn seduction while skipping basic social and conversational skills. You are not going to go anywhere!

My general advice is to go through these steps first before you learn seduction:

(Recommended) **1) Get your life together**. The only way you will be able to hold a conversation and make connection with other people is when you have a life on your own. If you don't, you won't have anything to talk about with other people and therefore not be able to connect with others. This also gives you confidence and confidence will make people feel comfortable around you and will allow you to do step 2 and 3.

**2) Learn how to to talk to random people.** Seducing women is basically talking to random people, and making random people feel comfortable talking to you. If you can't even hold a decent conversation with random people at any given moment and make them feel comfortable, how in the world would you be able to get random women comfortable enough around you for you to seduce?

**3) Learn how to make friends.** This might be controversial suggestion and you can def call me out on it. But, I think at this stage, you might want to learn how to become friends with women first. And I am not talking about like "friend-zone" where this women doesn't even want to talk to you or see you EVEN as a friend. But an actual friend. Few women that you can talk to on a regular basis or even hang out as friends. Because in a way seduction is like trying to be a friend, but a "sexual" friend, and if you don't even know how to make friends with women, they will definitely not want to be sexual with you.

After you have mastered all three, **THEN, you can come here and learn seduction.**

You can definitely learn and try seduction on the side as you are going through these steps. But if you want TRUE success, I believe at bare minimum you need to learn how to do these three things.

So, if you have been doing seduction for awhile and it doesn't seem like it's working as well as you thought or not having any luck. It might be because you just simply don't know how to socialize or make friends.Wassup sedditors, long time lurker here and I've taken all your guy's advice to the game to improve myself. I was always an introverted/awkward person throughout all my life and I wanted things to change. 

Anyways, I asked out this girl and got rejected, but I took your guy's advice and just moved on. So I went to formal by myself with the mindset that I'm just gonna have fun and I am NOT gonna be one of those people who just stands in the corner being all lonely and shit. Normally, I HATE dancing, but just thinking of that made me so damn confident!

Feeling awesome, I asked out some girls if I could dance with them. Some of them rejected me, and some of them said yeah! After a while, I danced just by myself, and this hot girl asked ME out to dance with her and I was honestly surprised. We danced and spent quite a bit of the night and just had a blast! 

The best part is that while I was dancing with her, I saw the girl that rejected me and she was CONSTANTLY looking at me. It was honestly so damn hilarious how she looked extremely awkward with her own date. None of them were dancing, no eye contact whatsoever, meanwhile I'm just dancing and having the time of my life! 

Thanks r/seduction! 
I have always been a very shy guy. When I was a child, I remember I could barely talk to strangers or classmates. This was to the point that when I started school, I was so shy that my teachers thought I had speech problems (although I could already talk very well at home). So, my parents took me to a speech therapist.

During those years, I thought that this shyness was a part of me. A thing that I could not change. A characteristic of my personality. I thought that it was just me and could do nothing about it. I even made the mistake to call myself an **introvert**.

In reality, I was just anxious about everything.

When I turned 18, I started realizing that I was a **socially anxious extrovert**, not an introvert. I realized I enjoyed interacting with people and that I like taking the lead in social interactions. I was just afraid of them.

This inner development allowed me to do a lot of things that most people just don't have the guts to do. Once I finally realized what my fear was, there was basically nothing that could stop me.

I became the student representative in my uni years where I stood up for my classmates many times. I excelled in all of my oral presentations and defenses. I made real friends. I had tons of acquaintances. At some point, I found someone who was worth my intention and got into a relationship (though it ended). I engage conversations with strangers, without them being awkward.

Progressively, I started being less and less afraid of social interactions.

Does that mean I finally succeeded in dating? I don't think so. However, fighting my social anxiety made me someone who is no longer afraid to talk to people and date them. I ask girls out without being scared.

Right now I'm 25, I am still scared to cold approach, although I do it. There are still many things I must work on and I'm doing my best to become the man I want to be.

**Why am I writing all this?** To inspire you so you acknowledge and overcome your fears. Most people out here are not introverts, they are socially anxious extroverts.

**Whenever you hear yourself saying "that's the way I am", take a moment and think "is this really who I want to be for the rest of my life ?"**.Most of the pain men experience in their dating lives comes from one pernicious source: a scarcity mindset. 

This is problematic because most of us don’t even know what a scarcity mindset is; we wouldn’t even know if we did have one.

That’s where this article comes in. I’m going to explain why scarcity is the source of so much pain and frustration with women, show you the common signs of a scarcity mindset (so you can know if this is affecting you), and provide an outline for how to break out of scarcity if you are in it. 

Let’s start by looking at the scarcity mindset in a nutshell:

&nbsp; 

##Sex and Scarcity

&nbsp;

What does scarcity have to do with dating? 

Like it or not, it’s not inaccurate to look at people as a sexual resource. If you have an abundance of options with women, then you won’t really care if you can have sex with any particular woman. You have plenty of options. 

There’s no reason to fret over Suzie, you’ve still got Amanda, Sarah, and Jessica.

On the other hand, if you have a scarcity of options with women, you can very easily start to think obsessively and neurotically about one particular girl you like. 

This is a pattern most modern man fall into at one point or another, and although the emotions scarcity creates are real, they’re really nothing more than a trick of the mind that can lead to endless frustration (and an unfulfilling dating life).
 
&nbsp;

##How Scarcity Acts as A Psychological Trap
 
&nbsp;

In reality, women are an abundant resource in the modern world. In every major city there are thousands (if not millions) of women, many of which are attractive and available. 

But men still get into a scarcity mindset with women because of their mindset and their social environment.

Let’s say you work with a cute girl (we’ll call her Tatianna). You see her every day, she’s the prettiest girl at work, and so, naturally, you develop a crush on her. What could possibly be bad about that? 

Well, assuming you don’t photograph models for a living, there’s probably not a lot of attractive girls at your job, only a few. Tatianna’s your number one choice among these few attractive girls.

Guess what, there’s a lot of pressure. If you fuck it up with Tatianna, you just lost your chance with the hottest girl who is a regular part of your day-to-day life. 

Sure, there are thousands of hot girls in your city, but how often do you interact with them? For most men the answer is rarely, if not never.

Even though there’s technically a limitless number of options, there’s only one girl you both really like and actually interact with. So, naturally, you’re going to put her on a pedestal. You’re going to fantasize about dating her. You’re going to wait for the “perfect opportunity” to make a move. You’re going to talk to your friends about her. All this because she represents a scarce resource to you: attractive women. She’s the most attractive girl that you actually interact with.

So, now, your mind’s going to play tricks on you. You’re going to think Tatianna’s “special”, that she’s “Not like these other girls”. You’ll think things like, “I should take it slow with her, and get to know her first because I really like this girl” Bullshit thoughts like these are going to trick you into playing it safe.

 

Scarcity Is A Mindset
 

Scarcity isn’t based on objective reality (it can be, but unless you live in a small town, women are abundant), it’s based on a mindset. It’s not that there aren’t many women available, *it’s that there aren’t many women you think you can get*.

If you don’t interact with a lot of attractive women, and/or you don’t think you’re the kind of guy attractive women like, you’re going to get wrapped up in negative thinking like, 
- “I’m just not attractive enough,” 
- “I need to get a better job before I get a girlfriend,” etc. 

Additionally, because you’re in scarcity, as soon as you do get positive attention from a girl, you’re going to desperately latch on to her.

The girl who gives you attention might be attracted to you, she might just be friendly, but either way, her positive response to you is going to make you think, “Maybe she likes me, maybe I have a chance to get her!” Because this is such a rare opportunity for you, you’re going to go all in. 

Unfortunately, she’s going to sense your desperation, which is the biggest turn off for women in existence.

Ultimately, the scarcity mindset is a self-fulfilling prophecy. You rarely get opportunities with women, and when you do, you act desperate and neurotic, so you don’t get the girl. Then, you get more deeply entrenched in your scarcity mindset because you didn’t get yet another girl, and this goes on and on in a downward spiral until you end up settling for an equally desperate girl (or buy a sex doll).

&nbsp;

##Abundance Mentality

&nbsp;

You meet Tatianna, the cutest girl you work with. You think, “She’s cool, she’s attractive, I should ask her out,” so you invite her to get coffee with you. She says no. You think, “Too bad, but it’s no big deal.” And that ends there. You don’t keep thinking about her, you don’t worry about what the rejection means about you, you don’t use it as an excuse to avoid putting yourself out there again. You’re in abundance.

When you’re in abundance, asking a particular girl out or making a bold move isn’t scary. You know that even if this particular girl rejects you, you won’t have trouble meeting and attracting another girl later that night.

If you go out regularly, meet a lot of women, get some phone numbers, go on some dates, and have sex with women on a regular basis, any particular girl isn’t going to have a huge emotional impact on you. You’re not going to get neurotic, overthink, or shoot yourself in the foot with a woman. You’ll just think a girl is attractive and make a move. You know you might get rejected but you genuinely don’t care because you know some other girl is not going to reject you in the near future.

Tatianna was a big deal for the guy in scarcity, so he had absolutely no chance with her (a girl can smell desperation like a police dog can smell drugs). That guy may waste weeks or even months obsessing over her and imagining the life he and her could have together.

The guy in abundance will, instead, spend that same time sleeping with and dating other attractive women. Tatianna may be a cool girl, but there’s plenty of fish in the sea, and he doesn’t give a fuck about his ability to sleep with any particular girl.

&nbsp;

##Second level scarcity

&nbsp;

There’s an important nuance to mention in regards scarcity and abundance. It is possible to be in abundance with some women, but not others. 

If you’ve had success with women who are attractive, but not your version of a “9” or “10,” then you might be in abundance with all girls except those that are particularly attractive to you. 

As soon as you see one of those girls, you’ll start thinking, “Shit, I need to get this girl,” then when you meet her, you’ll probably shoot yourself in the foot by putting her on a pedestal and acting desperate.

My solution to this is to make a point to approach any particularly beautiful girl I see. I may only see two or three nines or tens on a night out, and they may be with male friends, but I'm going to approach them because doing so helps me become comfortable going for the 'top-tier' women. 

&nbsp;

##The Way to Abundance
 
&nbsp;

If you see yourself in the above examples of a scarcity mindset with women, the first step towards change  is awareness. If you realize that the only reason you’re obsessing over one particular girl is the fact that you’re in scarcity, then you free yourself to take the necessary steps to break out of scarcity and into abundance.

But if you don’t recognize that thinking as scarcity thinking, you’re going to think, “This girl really is special,” and you’re going to keep investing your time, emotions, and energy into a cause that isn’t going to go anywhere.

As soon as you realize you’re in scarcity, the way out is to interact with a lot of women. To go out, approach girls on a weekly basis, and start to teach your brain that there are many options.

The second step towards abundance is to start asking attractive girls out. You’ll get rejected a lot, but if you learn from your mistakes and keep putting yourself out there you’ll start to build self-confidence and you’ll eventually get dates with attractive girls.

Your mindset will start to change from the toxic scarcity mindset, into a liberating abundance mindset.

The underlying purpose of “PUA” content, is to take you from a scarcity mindset into an abundance mindset with women. Once this happens you’ll have a lot more success with women, but you’ll also be able to think more clearheadedly about sex and dating too, you won’t get neurotic or emotional in very self-defeating ways. 

For a lot of modern men, dating isn’t fun, as soon as you make the shift from a scarcity to an abundance mindset with women, that will change.Hi guys, 

Long time lurker here. I've been reading/watching videos about pickup and seduction for the last two years, and I wanted to share some hard earned lessons. I AM NOT AN EXPERT. Just a guy who's had some success with women over the last year (sex 3 times, 6 month relationship with beautiful girlfriend (imo)) after being a virgin at 24.  Feel free to just read the bullet points, as I've bolded these and added more details below. I've tried to leave out the most basic pieces of advice (as they are posted often) and stick to the lessons most revelatory to me. 

**DATING**

**Share yourself, even if it's kinda weird**
I had a hard time with this, as I don't fit in with the many fratty guys in my city. I like improv comedy, and when I fully owned this and did improv-y stuff girls really responded well. I took them to shows and loved it. If you're truly passionate about something, you must share it. They'll be interested just because you're interested.

**Destroy one-itis through abundance**
This happens a lot. You get into one girl and fantasize, social-media stalk, and think about all the time. She may even be interested in you two. But sadly, she can sense this mindset in you. EVEN IF SHE'S INITIALLY ATTRACTED this will turn her off. The first few dates work best when there's no pressure. After 4+ dates you can increase your investment as she increases her investment in you (just by spending that much time with you, she's investing). If you're looking to attract one specific girl, it can be MASSIVELY EFFECTIVE to start dating anyone else and then the original girl will be begin to see you in a new way (this has worked multiple times for me).

**Even if she gives you no signs of interest, she is interested if she stays with you**
I've had this happen several times: you go out, she seems totally uninterested and aloof, but you go to a new venue, and then go somewhere else, and then back to your place. Even though she didn't show overt signs of interest, she's spent all night with you. SHE IS ACTUALLY INTO YOU. When this, happens, I almost always get another date and things move forward. Time investment is attraction.

**Looks matter way less for men than they do for women**
I am quite tall and I spent a lot of time in college working of physique. Yet I wasn't super social and didn't have a lot of friends. Little did I know, social proof (evidence of friends, social standing) is more important for women. Spend time on social groups, earning respect among your peers, and this will do far more in earning attraction.

**She wants evidence that you picked her specifically**
Especially after multiple dates, she often wants evidence that you picked her specifically out of many options. She wants to feel special, unique. If she's the only girl you can get, that's a huge turnoff. If you can't explain how she's different and better than other girls you have dated, that's a huge turnoff. She needs to know that 1. You have abundance and 2. You chose her specifically. This wouldn't apply if she just wants to have sex, in which case see the next point...

** Knowing when to escalate is crucial**
Looking back, I could have easily been with 4-5 girls in my last year of college just being able to know when to escalate. Some indicators: strong eye contact, lots of questions, touching, inviting
you over late at night. These seem so obvious now, but I blew many of these situations by over-thinking. 

**Don't be needy with her at social events**
This happens a lot. You're out with a date at some event and you're having a good time. Then she gets in a conversation with some group, or has to leave, step outside, etc. You're clearly at the party to be with her, so what now? In the past I'd stand around waiting for her, maybe follow her around a little. This is a BIG TURNOFF. The solution: go talk to other people, guys and girls, a homeless guy, whatever. Do something you think is fun. Soon enough the girl will come back to you more attracted than ever. 

**Don't take rejection personally**
Often it's not personal, they're just busy. Remember young women are being hit up constantly and it can be overwhelming for them. Be persistent to a point (I like the rule: if she flakes 3 times), but then just move on.

**Keep investment low over first three dates**
This means: not re-arranging your schedule to go on dates, not taking her to fancy restaurants, not facebook stalking her. When texting, make your messages of equal or smaller length, and try not to respond faster than she does. 

**Communicate with emotion first**
If you're getting into a conversation about logic (I did this, then this) (how are you, what restaurant did you go to) STOP. Ask yourself: are we just exchanging information? If so, STOP. You want to move the conversation to a place of emotion. Talk in a way that shows your interested in her. Throw popcorn into her mouth and get yourselves laughing. Goof around. Give her emotion through showing your own emotion. This is much more effective.

**RELATIONSHIPS**

**Fighting/disagreeing is OK and necessary in relationships**
If you're uncomfortable with how things are going, it can be very difficult to bring it up. Especially if you're with a beautiful girl who you're very attracted to. This is seriously hard. But holding things back can erode relationships. It can actually be hard to bring up relationship issues. She may get mad at you for a while. But she will respect you and YOUR RELATIONSHIP WILL BE STRONGER AFTER. It's a weird mind-fuck, but I've found that women can be way more flexible and attentive to your setting boundaries than you think.

**Be extra choosey when deciding on relationships**
I've been there, I've been single for years and desperate to call someone my girlfriend. The desperation is crazy. But choosing the wrong girlfriend can be very devastating. In my situation, I found someone very attractive who also had many of the same values I did. However, she was not someone who I vibed intellectually with. I never could spend all night talking with her. She exhibited signs of crazy that I overlooked (hitting on other guys to make me jealous). Because I was so desperate I let these red flags go unnoticed. Just know that a relationship can emotionally affect you months after it's over (much more than dating someone). So date whoever you want, but be cautious about relationship choices.

**Relationships take work**
This seems straightforward but is difficult in practice. Give constant reassurance about how you feel about her. Set up dates (this is YOUR JOB). Give gifts to her. If she invites you to a family gathering, do everything you can to be there (this is generally a serious step for her). 

As lame as it can seem sometimes, this sub has significantly helped me in this area of my life. Thanks to everyone who shares and gives honest advice out here. It's really true that most people are not taught about dating and relationships effectively. Thanks.

Edit: I am definitely not an expert, nor have I ever claimed to be. These are things that are true in my limited experience, and should not necessarily be considered rules. I am happy with my small victories, but there are tons of people on this sub with more success than I. If you're looking for advice from people with tons and tons of lays, go read those posts. I do all the time.  They're great. Thanks!So this girl I know and I have been getting along really well. I asked her on a date A little while ago, and she said something along the lines of ‘I’m not looking for a fling right now’.

That was fine, and honestly at that point I sort of lost interest in her and gave up hope. 

 Whenever I saw her I became a bit more distant. She clearly picked up on this and started being very, very flirty. I’m not talking subtle flirty.  Tonight she texted me asking me if I was awake and she could come over. I said I was probably going to bed soon but she replied asking if she could join me in bed. 

I said that ok and she came over. (She lives a few minutes away)
We got into bed and she got under the covers and put her head on my chest. After a while I went in for the kiss and she turned away smiling and said, no we are just friends.  

Now at this point I realise you are supposed to smile and shrug it off. However for whatever reason i slowly stood up, took a sip from my drink and basically said ‘look, this is pretty confusing for me... I think you should go’.  I was very calm and polite about it but realise I probably fucked up. 

Anyone had similar experiences?This subreddit, like much of the internet, often becomes an exercise in overthinking and mental masturbation. And yes, I am guilty of it too. But we should all take a step back and remember: 

**An attractive man does whatever the fuck he wants.** He says whatever pops into his head, he goes down whatever path he thinks will be most interesting and fun, and he does not give a single solitary fuck what anybody thinks. And not only are women ok with that, they actually like it. Most people, and especially women, live in a mental prison where they feel like they are afraid to be themselves, so seeing somebody enjoy themselves without giving a fuck is thrilling.  

A “natural” alpha does not sit in his mom’s basement memorizing a bunch of scripts or long rules of dos and don’ts. He just says and does the right thing in every moment and he ends up smashing some broad at the end of the night, and he usually couldn’t even tell you what he did to successfully smash.

Unfortunately, however, most of us are not “natural” alphas. We were trained to be needy, operate in womens’ frame, and to overthink our every move. The best thing you can get out of this subreddit is to 1) understand that you, like every man, have these tendencies, and 2) you should build yourself up to avoid falling into these traps, so that you can 3) get back to the point where you can do whatever the fuck you want. 

In other words, you should look at the pick-up literature as a series of “fences” around your behavior. You can do whatever the fuck you want, so long as you stay within these guidelines: 

**1)** **Take the lead and take responsibility for the interaction.** 

Sorry, you just cannot depend on the woman to take the lead. You must be creative, smart, and funny to find some subject matter that is interesting and emotionally resonates with her. Ultimately she needs to contribute something to merit your attention, but the responsibility to make the interaction fun and interesting is on you. This requires practice.  

**2)** **Maintain your frame and your integrity.** 

“Frame” is a complicated concept, but it essentially means “the rules that govern the interaction.” If you find yourself worried about whether you are conforming to her “rules” then you live in her frame, which will cause her to lose attraction. Ultimately you decide what is right and wrong, fun and not fun, cool and stupid, and she should feel worried she might not stack up. Of course, this means that 1) you must have rules and 2) your rules should not suck. Unfortunately, figuring out what your rules are requires thinking.  

By “integrity” I mean “don’t sacrifice what it means to be you.” Don’t change your rules or boundaries based on what she wants. Don’t change your opinions to match hers or pretend to enjoy something that sucks. If she is being boring, stupid, or insulting, put an end to that shit. Women are constantly testing your integrity, and the moment she realizes you are sacrificing your beliefs, boundaries, opinions, or fun for her (or anybody else), she loses attraction. 

**3)** **Don’t be wanty**

Wantiness is when you ask her for anything or do anything to display you want something from her. If you stare at her too long, tell a boring ass story about something she doesn’t give a fuck about, brag, or do any other selfish shit, you are being wanty because you are subconsciously communicating that you need her validation, attention, and acceptance. When a woman realizes you want something from her she immediately wants to flee because she feels pressure to perform. 

Wantiness comes from ego and scarcity mentality. Part of our psyche wants to have fun, but a different part of our psyche is often afraid we are going to die in the jungle alone with no pussy, so it causes us to act foolish. But if you had no scarcity, you could just act normal and let the fun part of your psyche take over. 

There is one exception to this rule: You can ask for her stuff after she has emotionally invested enough in you to WANT to give you that thing anyway. For example, if you have been talking to a woman for 45 minutes and she wants to continue to hang out with you, you can say “hey want to go to the next bar with me”? If the women is emotionally invested in you, you asking that question doesn’t feel like wantiness to her - instead, it feels like you are accommodating her wantiness. But if she does not give a fuck about you yet and you ask her to go to another bar with her, she will interpret your question as wantiness. 

**4)** **Don’t do more for her than she has done for you.** 

Humans evolved to view relationships as reciprocal transactions, so when you do stuff for her she hasn’t deserved, her subconscious mind senses that something is “off” and wants to get away because it now realizes that she owes you. Do not do anything for her that she has not done for you first, including giving her attention, and only in proportion to what she has done for you. Unless she has done something to deserve it, do not buy her anything, run any errands for her, be her therapist, be her emotional tampon, wait for her, and so forth. Doing too much for women is the same thing as being wanty: men do things women don’t deserve because they are seeking their validation. 

**5)** **Have fun.** 

Having fun means you are curiously pursuing whatever is fun, funny, interesting, or exciting at any particular moment with no regard to what anybody thinks. Life is short, you should be enjoying it. No woman ever decided to not fuck a guy because he was having too much fun. Just don’t be a jerk. 

There was a great book a few years called the Book of Pook, and it was basically about how men learn to remember how it was to be a child again. Children just go after whatever they think is fun without worrying about pleasing or being censored by women. If you can somehow recapture that, you will be attractive to women. 

http://www.woujo.comThis is why it's always a numbers game. It's not black magic. She needs to be attracted to you

But you can't control that - You can't force attraction in a girl - No more than she can make you attracted to her.

When you break game concepts down - it's actually just flirting, really. 

People always say how 'push-pull' is some amazing secret attraction building technique that gives us the edge over people who don't know about 'game', but it's actually just a form of flirting. ''You're pretty - too bad we wouldn't get along and you're not my type'' is a push pull line. But it's just flirting. 

You get the same effect when you flirted with the girls in the playground as a kid by gently pulling the hair of the girl you liked after persuing her. Didn't even need to read books on it back then. 

And flirting is great. It shows that you like her. But using 'push pull' doesn't make her attracted. It doesn't make her like you back!

Most other 'game' techniques are just things to keep the convo going and try to build some intrigue. Cold reads for example. Good stuff. Doesn't make her attracted though

Eliciting values - same thing. Doesn't force attaction in her

Disqualification. Qualifying her - KINO!! same thing

The closest thing (in theory) in terms of 'forcing attraction' using 'game' is things like 'dhv' stories - (tell her about how you were recently in Vegas wit your ex GF but you had to get up early because she had a modelling job with Victoria secret and bla bla bla''). Shows pre-selection for example which might increase her attraction by 1 or 2 per-cent. But in reality, it's nothing special. It's not gonna 'flip' some girl from not being attracted to wanting to bang you

The rest of 'game' in terms of 'attraction building/creating' is really stuff that everyone already knows. For example, humour. Girls tend to like guys that are funny. No shit. Good body language. etc etc - however, it really won't cut much ice if you're not her type and she's not physically into you

None of you need coaching or to buy more products. 

Approach more. Find the girls who are into you. flirt, or even just open direct which eliminates the need for 90% of 'game' that you study. You can't force the girls that aren't attracted to you to be attracted to you with 'game'. Nobody can.  Stop paying people who are probably no more successful at this than you (despite their ''1000 lay count'' (*cough* 'bullshit') or whatever) lots of money for stuff that is already available all over the net for free which you can go out and test for yourselves. Stop looking for a magic bullet.

Your edge is in the fact that you approach more girls than the average dude. And you are good at spotting IOI's. And you can show intent where others are scared. Things like that. NOT in some seecret technique that you're yet to discover despite reading 65 PUA books and watching 20 programs.I did a cold approach at my uni. I approached a set of 6 girls lol. I opened with "Excuse me, I was eating my sandwitch right there and You have caught my eye". I was nervous as fuck, but got smiles from all the girls. The one I wanted didn't look at me or show any IOIs which is not strange given my nerves, bad tonality and body language,  but she gave me her messenger after a little hesitation. I ejected after like 2 minutes of the convo (mostly other girls were talking and asking me questions) cause of the nervousness so I won't expect much from this but for me even approaching is an IMMENSE SUCCESS!! FUCK YEAH