Keep up the good work.

Edit: thanks for the awards. I'm happy my post was so well received.**Edit:** There seems to be some confusion and misundertanding. To be clear I am not saying that the COVID-19 outbreak is good. It is incredibly sad how many people are sick and dying and how many hospital workers are overwhelmed. This is someone's mother, father, grandmother, grandfather or sibling who is affected. I have a lot of sympathy for them and it sucks that they have to go through this. This pandemic is **not a good thing and that is not what I am happy about**.

**Edit 2:** Here's an article how 77,000 lives were saved in China just by reducing air pollution alone: https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffmcmahon/2020/03/16/coronavirus-lockdown-may-have-saved-77000-lives-in-china-just-from-pollution-reduction/#35c09aee34fe

This post is only to point out the silver lining of this terrible outbreak. We desperately needed this pause in society and to pause the cog in the capital machine because climate change is accelerating at an alarming pace. It sucks that it took a deadly pandemic to do this but people would not have slowed down otherwise. We had to pause our industry and emissions at some point or face the dire consequences of rising heat levels and sea levels.

TL;DR: While people are suffering the negative economic consequences of COVID-19, I am mildly happy that it happened because the world is finally slowing down and the environment is finally able to breathe for a while. Mother Earth deserves a break from all the exploitation we have done to Her.

This world has always been about maximum productivity, profit and constantly pacing. At least this is the case for the 21st century. The demand for the newest smartphone every year, new clothes every so often, extreme amounts of meat and food to consume is breaking our poor Mother Earth. 

She gives us everything we need and more. But somehow, we decided that we need to suck out the blood of the Earth to feed this insatiable hunger that most people have. That has led to the current climate crisis and our infinite desire has also fueled ignorance.

Now with the COVID-19 outbreak, the world is actually slowing down for the first time. Schools, offices, studios, factories and so many places are shutting down. People are being advised to stay home and travel less. The result has been outstanding on the environment. The waters of Venice are clear and cities in China have reduced NO2 emissions and they have clear air. 

Mother Nature loves us and she will do everything for us. But we, as a species have returned the favour with greed and lust. Now we are finally facing the consequences of what happens if you take things too far. I am not saying that I advocate for death and we deserve what's happening. The current situation is simply the consequences of our sometimes really bad actions.

People are losing money, the economy is slowing down and there are fears of a global recession. That doesn't bother me in the slightest, even if it was me in that situation. I am just happier that Mother Earth finally gets a break, even if it's very shortlived. We have done enough damage to Her. Sadly, I know we will go back to our normal ways once this is done. 

We are here on this Earth for a short time. Living in harmony with the environment and with your community is an extremely important part of this life. I wonder what it will take for people to satisfy their infinite hunger inwards and with God/The Universe instead of this material world and without draining the blood of Mother Earth.You are on exactly the right path great one. 
You can relax. 
You can allow. 
You can let go. 
Following your deepest knowing will bring you great joy. The consequences will be few. The rewards will be great. There is no reason to fear. 
Everything is aligned, even the things that seem out of alignment, for they help you to create clarity around what does feel aligned for you. 
Everything has always been perfect, and will continue to be. 
Aligning yourself with this perfection will allow you to step into a higher vibrational time line. 
Reality literally shifts as your vibration increases or decreases. What you see and who you become will be determined by your ability to follow your hearts truth.

EDIT: TypoThe more you try the less you be and the less you see my friends.Oh and I'm just as lost as you areI wish you a good day with a lot of love!Just know that you are never alone. And you are  deeply loved for who you are and the life you are living.Wanting to be nowhere. Wanting to do nothing. Wanting to be responsible to no one or no thing. Wanting to leave friendships, relationships, jobs. Wanting EVERYTHING and NOTHING at the same time.

Me too. You are not alone.

Sit in it. Be in it. Feel the energy that comes with this intense offering of simply wanting to be.

Don't overthink. Don't judge it. Don't judge yourself. Don't contemplate, debate or force. Just feel it out and let flow be around you. Surrender to it.

It feels like something is coming, or something is meant to happen. But where is it? When is it?

Remain open. Opportunities will come to you that are meant for you but you have to let yourself be in this moment.

There is a large collective of us who have this calling right now. It's easy to label ourselves, the situation, and this time. There is a lot happening to the entire collective and majority of people are operating from a place that is rooted in fear. Stay in love.

Let yourself be in this nothingness right now because this offering has a purpose. I don't know what, I just know it's meant to be.

EDIT: Thank you for all of the love. I'm so grateful that so many of you felt seen and heard by this message. What brings me the most joy is seeing how each and every comment has multiple upvotes. Do you feel that? That is expansive LOVE. Stay in love.Be Receptive & ready...

[Be the part of our community >>> ManifestationValley](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source)I feel called to write this to share with any adults who devote their time to spirituality and have/ want kids. I’m 17 and about to be a senior. my parents are very conscious and present day to day. they take time to meditate, read, explore/travel, eat clean, exercise, spend time in nature, they keep open minds as well as keep the communication between us very open. they expose me to so much cultural and religious diversity. i couldn’t begin to explain how ahead i feel having parents like this. i notice that my peers and teachers often tell me how emotionally intelligent i am. i get compliments from teachers daily commenting on my intellect, boundaries, social skills, self awareness, communication skills, and most often how i navigate my way through conflict in relationships. raising your kid in a spiritual way is all about showing up for yourself in healthy ways. your kid will learn much better watching you than listening to you. teach them to question everything and have mature conversations w them early on. they are smarter than you think and they will be so intellectually inclined having held such mature conversations from a young age. all love.Backstory (skip to “Story” if tldr): (24M) have an older brother, Mike 26M) with whom I share a very strong bond. After I was born, Mike and I were inseparable. I was his number two of sorts. Mike was incredibly smart for his age, and at 7 was planned to fast track elementary school by a year or so. He was wicked smart. Mike and I early on began sharing out-of-body experiences. We often told our parents about experiencing astral projection and sleepwalking. I was talking to my neighbor who’s lived next to us our whole lives. She’s a very spiritual woman like my father. She said that when we were kids we would often separately describe dreams we had, but experienced congruently and shared in sleep. In retrospect, we were lucid dreaming, like most children. Anyways, Mike and I had a very strong, spiritual bond that resulted in a lot of ESP-like experiences.

In 2001, we were both in a near fatal car accident when a drunk driver ran a red light and t-boned our car with my 7 year old brother in the front seat. His head was hit by the truck through the window, his brain slammed the lefts side of his brain, and his head came back to red in the grill of the truck. I (5 at the time) was unbuckled and went flying under the seats where I was pinned. I lost consciousness instantly, but I survived with a broken collar bone. My brother was not so lucky. Mike nearly died on impact. He had severe brain bleed and was rushed to the hospital. That night, he nearly died multiple times. He honestly never should have lived, and it is, without a doubt, a miracle he is alive. My mother has an incredible story about the power of prayer, but that’s a for another post. 

Story: Mike is alive today and doing well. He could never make a full recovery as the damage to his brain was too severe. He lives an entirely different life now because of his disability. Externally, it all seems incredibly tragic, and in many ways it is, but Mike is one of the happiest, and most spiritually connected people I’ve ever met. He had a ton of incredible experiences when he was in a coma. Mike, over the years, has been able to recall some of his experiences. Unfortunately, my parents each have their own brand of spirituality/religion so they projected a lot of their beliefs onto his experience. I decided to ask Mike again what he experienced right after the car hit. I was expecting Mike to say he couldn’t possibly remember, and of course his disability severely inhibited his memory. But no, he launched into what happened with little hesitation and spoke with an irregular clarity. 

Right after he was hit by the car, Mike said the force of the impact pushed him out of his body. He said he rose above the car, and could see everything. My father interjected to say he was flying around, and I quickly asked Mike if that’s what he meant. He said no, but rather he felt everything. That his sight was less physical and more innate. I almost cried when he said the next part. My brother is still very smart considering what he’s been through, but his disability makes it hard for him to understand some concepts. But he said that while he was feeling everything around him, he also had this knowledge that he was a part of everything but at the same time nothing. This was pretty heavy for him so asked him to go further. “We have two selves, and I knew I wasn’t my body.” I was blown away. He’s never talked like this. Mike typically said he met a version of God, spent years in “heaven” and then made a promise to sacrifice part of himself to return. He’s always talked about a duality of self, but never like that. He went on to say something that sounded like an alternate timeline to avoid death. It’s hard for him to remember and harder to make sense of it all. He is confident that he spent a significant amount of time in an alternate plane of existence that is “inside” not “above” he would remind.

He’s a remarkable human and I hope to learn more about his experiences. He remembers things from being in a coma but not what happened 3 minutes ago. It’s tough to piece everything together, but I know whatever my brother went through caused his awakening (at a great cost). I’m going to keep an active dialogue with him and try to record everything into a sort of timeline, although he said time was pretty non-existent.

Thank you for reading. I love an excuse to talk about my favorite person, and I thought this would be interesting to share. Let me know if you have any questions for him/me or theories and I’ll ask.

Love alwaysWe all spend our lives thinking we’ll be happier when we achieve that thing we think we need. We spend our lives searching for that thing we believe will make us happier than we are now. That thing can be a better job, a group of friends, a romantic relationship, a stronger and healthier body or even a feeling or situation. STOP thinking you’ll be happier when you achieve that. You have to learn to be happy RIGHT NOW. Why do you think you’ll be happier in a future if you don’t know how to be happy at this moment? The future is now!!!Stop waiting around for them to text you, stop waiting around to go on that walk, or go see that movie. Stop waiting for someone else to do something before you do. Trust in yourself, trust in me delivering this message, trust in the Universe that if you see this it’s for a reason. I could’ve been doing about 7 other things right now, but I’m making a message. For your dumb ass who isn’t living like they should. It sucks sometimes, it’s gonna suck sometimes. Life isn’t all peaches and rainbows, but there are peaches and rainbows in life, so make sure you take time to enjoy them. Live YOUR life, because as silly as it sounds, you are the main character, and this world was made for you.



Edit: Thank you all for letting my words reach you. I’ve seen a lot of thank you messages, but thank you, for letting me bring this message to you.Me: Hey Universe. 

Universe: Hey.

Me: I'm falling apart. Can you put me back together? 

Universe: I would rather not. 

Me: Why? 

Universe: Because you aren't a puzzle.  

Me: What about all of the pieces of my life that are falling down onto the ground?  

Universe: Let them stay there for a while.  They fell off for a reason. Take some time and decide if you need any of those pieces back.  

Me: You don't understand!  I'm breaking down!  

Universe: No - you don't understand. You are breaking through.  What you are feeling are just growing pains. You are shedding the things and the people in your life that are holding you back.  You aren't falling apart.  You are falling into place.  Relax.  Take some deep breaths and allow those things you don't need anymore to fall off of you.  Quit holding onto the pieces that don't fit you anymore.  Let them fall off.  Let them go. 

Me: Once I start doing that, what will be left of me?  

Universe: Only the very best pieces of you.  

Me: I'm scared of changing. 

Universe: I keep telling you - YOU AREN'T CHANGING!! YOU ARE BECOMING! 

Me: Becoming who? 

Universe: Becoming who I created you to be!  A person of light and love and charity and hope and courage and joy and mercy and grace and compassion.  I made you for more than the shallow pieces you have decided adorn yourself with that you cling to with such greed and fear.  Let those things fall off of you.  I love you! Don't change! Become!  Become! Become!  Become who I made you to be.  I'm going to keep telling you this until you remember it. 

Me: There goes another piece.  

Universe: Yep. Let it be. 

Me: So...I'm not broken? 

Universe: No - but you are breaking like the dawn.  It's a new day.  Become!! Become!! 

 JOHN ROEDEL 

(I replaced God with Universe. Use whatever resonates with you)I love this saying because it's so true. You're in control of your own mind and your own thoughts, the only reason a bad day happened was because you let it (unless of course something actually really bad happened).

Gotta stay on top it and when you think you're having a bad day, take a step back, take a big breathe in and start thinking of all those great positive things that happened today and what has made your day great, besides that one or two minor things that were negative. You can always outweigh positives from negatives.

Even if it's the little things you have to look at; grateful for being healthy, grateful for a roof over my head, grateful for the family I have, grateful to be on this journey.

Rant over, enjoy your day/night people!!!!!may God heal your wounded heart, remove your pain, stress, depression, anxiety, worries and problems. And replace them with good health, everlasting happiness and peace.Just a reminder, whenever I remember this it takes alot of needless thinking away and grounds me.Something I have noticed in general on here and in real life is that people tend to automatically label emotions such as anger, envy, guilt, jealousy, sadness as ‘bad’ and low vibrational; while emotions such as gratitude, happiness, joy etc becomes ‘good’ and high vibrational. 

I personally do not resonate with the idea of classifying and viewing emotions like that. I personally refer to them as difficult or uncomfortable emotions instead. 

The reason being: when I label emotions such as anger as ‘bad’, I notice my mind and body start to unconsciously reject feeling or acknowledging it because of the meaning we tend to associate with ‘bad’. Then, I start to think “no, I should not feel this” and then I start to suppress it and start to bypass or invalidate my emotions.

This is also what I notice people tend to do when they experience these emotions. They start to feel ashamed for feeling these emotions because they believe it is bad and low vibrational. They think experiencing these emotions will affect their spirituality in a negative way. They think they are straying off the path of spirituality by feeling angry, jealous or sadness etc. So they try to make themselves stop feeling them by suppressing them or avoiding them. 

In the beginning of my journey, I prioritised feeling only gratitude and joy, because I read that this means I am being high vibrational; and that emotions such anger, jealousy, guilt will lower my vibration considerably. I was ashamed for experiencing emotions other than gratitude or joy. 

So avoidance is what I did. I avoided and bypassed the uncomfortable and difficult emotions, only to wonder why I was still feeling numb, depressed and why I was still in so much pain after a while. 

By avoiding the anger, jealousy, guilt, I missed out on the opportunity to truly understand what they were trying to convey to me. So I went within again, this time I acknowledged them. 

Then I realised all along they were just trying to show me that I had not healed from my childhood trauma. That there was still a lot of things to work on and heal. That I was still very much affected by everything that happened during my childhood. That beneath all the emotions was a very hurt inner child. 

I find that if we allow it, these emotions actually show us and teach us a lot about ourselves and what we need to heal from, albeit often in a very uncomfortable and painful way. 

I honestly learnt so much from just holding space for anger, envy, jealousy etc. How can emotions that teach us so much be ‘bad’ or low vibrational? 

Spirituality for me is about the introspection of self and self awareness. How are we going to look within and heal when we are already rejecting the difficult emotions when it shows up? How are we going to heal when we are not acknowledging our deepest pain? 

No emotions is better than the other. They all have different purposes for showing us. They all show and teach us different things. 

It is normal and okay to still experience these emotions no matter where you are on your spiritual journey. We are only human. Go easy on yourself. 

Balance is key. It is okay to experience all emotions, there is not one emotions that is ‘better’ than the other if we can learn from them. They are all teachers. Just like yin and yang, too much of either creates an imbalance and is not ideal.

Hold space for all your emotions.


EDIT: Thank you to everyone who has read this post and those who commented to share their thoughts, perspective and experiences. 

I am currently trying my best to respond to comments, and I will not be able to respond to all of them. Just know that I read all of them. Thank you to those who let me know that they resonate with my post and that it helped them; and also thank you to those who have different views from me who also shared their thoughts. I have learnt new things and seen from new perspectives from reading all your comments even if I may not resonate with some of them. 

Just a necessary disclaimer: I do not in any way condone any sort of abusive behaviours and this was not what my post is talking about. I am not normalising abuse. I am normalising letting these emotions arise within us as we work through it, in a way that is not harmful to ourselves and others. I am normalising still feeling these emotions even when we are on our spiritual journey. When we respond instead of react to our emotions, we will be able to learn a lot about ourselves.All the emotions and happiness we search for externally- such as validation, acceptance, compassion, understanding, and love- are all things we crave from ourselves. This is why you already have everything you need to be happy, you just have to be willing to work on it until you see it.Once you make any decision, it works around that decision. There is no right or wrong, only a series of possibilities that shift with each thought, feeling, and action that you experience.

If this sounds too mystical, refer again to the body. Every significant vital sign- body temperature, heart rate, oxygen consumption, hormone level, brain activity, and so on- alters the moment you decide to do anything… decisions are signals telling your body, mind, and environment to move in a certain direction.
- Deepak ChopraTwo  years ago, I got so depressed I walked out on my job of fifteen years  to kill myself.  Turns out I missed that boat and had a spiritual  psychosis instead.  It last weeks, a slow burn, until one day I had a  bonafide mystical experience.  A few weeks after that I crashed so hard  into depression from thinking I was a prophet I ended up in the mental  hospital.  Got a fancy bipolar I diagnosis from the ordeal, so there's  that.

The point is that I was a  pretty public figure in a pretty public place.  And I had been slipping  for a long time, and one day I disappeared.  I heard the rumors.  They  were awful.  And I've been living in shame ever since, sequestered away,  hiding.  And I've been chasing that dream of awakening, hoping that it  will save me from myself.  Ha, what a joke.

Because  it doesn't work like that.  I have recently been going for walks in  public, facing my fear.  And sure enough, in a small enough town you  start bumping into people.  I remember so many people, despite having  disappeared for two years.  And I cringe when they pass.  But I'm coming  to a realization.  Most of these people don't even remember me.  And if  they do, they really don't give a shit.

So  what's the point of this post?  That I'm finally realizing that  everybody else's ego is too busy worrying about itself to worry about  mine.  Nobody gives a shit, man.  People forget.  And even if they  remember it's not like they think about it, all day every day, like I  do.  Nobody out there is judging me, and if they are, I'm probably never  going to find out about it.  My spiritual journey is, among other  things, to overcome my fears and move on with my life.  I feel like I've  had a breakthrough.I was cooking this evening when it hit me:

My job, the way I look, my mental health, my lifestyle, I have everything I wanted to have back then.

I started crying, never felt more grateful than today, when my mom kicked me out of the house, I should’ve felt desperate, but the universe gave me the strength to start a new life and here I am, in my own house, co-living with my plants, taking the time to meditate, found my true self…

I am SO happy, in peace, in love, in total harmony with the universe 

I wish you all the same 

Much love, this sub helped me a lot 

I love each one of you...take care of yourself Okay! Be peaceful. Know that you are worthy and deserving of happiness and the life that you envision for yourself. 😃

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;EDIT #3:
Alright, since some people do not have a FB account, here's the sub: r/communers

EDIT #2:
So, a good bunch of people have shown interest in starting some sort of self-managed commune(s). The imagined form of such commune(s) varies from one person to another.

This is far too early to talk of any serious project, but since there seems to be some serious interest in this, I thought of creating a Facebook group in order to connect and keep these people in touch.

Let's be very clear about it: the intended goal of this group, at least so far, is not to start something tomorrow morning, but rather to build a community of like-minded people. From there on, if this community manages to grow, it will serve as a starting point for people to come together and actually start something.

It will also allow each of us to indicate our location and describe how we can help (skills, knowledge, financial participation, ressources,... and so on).

I had to come up with a name to create the Facebook group, so I choose "Communers", but of course we can change that.

As you noticed, my original post contained the word « spiritual ». I’ve decided not to use this word anymore, since spiritual/religious practices are personal.

Here's the link to the group: https://www.facebook.com/groups/2802735179971308/?ref=share

I truly hope to see y'all there soon!

EDIT #1:
alright everyone, since this post is getting a decent amount of interest, I've decided to create a FB group so we can all have a place to connect. definitely no serious project for now but it'll help keeping in touch! I'll keep you guys updated when the group is ready.”...and if you can do that then suddenly you’ll be in a whole different universe because the universe we all exist in is the one where we’re all so terrified of the judgement of our peers"It would have cost me $20 for the patch. This is the first time I’ve recognized such direct and clear good karma, it’s pretty neat

Edit: A lot of you are saying that it would’ve been free anyways. I’ve been to the same place 3 other times and paid $20. I live in a larger city (Orlando) so I doubt anywhere here would do that for free, there’d be a line out to the road. On top of that, the first guy told me a 2 hour wait. The guy that gave to me for free, said he’s got it in 20 minutes.I do not like this “detachment” phase i’m in. I don’t feel like i have a “place” anywhere, or with anyone. I feel very isolated. This all sounds bad but, we are shifting. Detachment doesn’t mean we don’t have anything, it means NOTHING has us. Attachments bring fear and anxiety. Allowing them to stay in your life can bring great disappointment, constantly. It isn’t a bad thing to feel the way we do. It’s just a new clean energy for us. This is the integration phase. We’re in the process of shedding all that doesn’t serve us so we can make room for the people & things that are in alignment with our soul. Isolation is key for removing all attachments so you can reconnect to source. Keep pushing through, sending love and light.type 11:11 if you are ready!I wish all of you to have an amazing day.  If you end up checking the clock at 11:11 don't freak out, know the universe has your back.I was feeling alone and forgotten today. Aloud, I said the words “Family, I feel sad and unloved. I wish you would call me and say you love me.”  Then I let it go. A few hours later my mom called. Then my daughter called. Neither of them have called in awhile. Both said they loved me. Thank you universe.I don't know much about you, but there is something that I *do* know, and it's this:  *you are fighting a tough battle called life.* 

How do I know this? Because everyone is fighting a tough battle. We all have our hurts, disappointments, missed opportunities and mistakes that we carry around. 

But you are not alone. So hang in there. I wish your future is blessed with prosperity and happiness. You will get through the tough times. 😀Since i’ve been in lockdown with my family, my dad keeps starting conflict with me in situations. He keeps condemning my beliefs and starts arguing with me. I initially tell him “it’s okay for him to believe what he believes and for me to believe what I believe” but he doesn’t accept and pulls me into the argument. I ask him why and he says it’s because he can see the transformation in me and wants to experience that too, so out of empathy I engage in the discussion.

I try to explain myself but find myself being more and more frustrated due to his ignorance, anger and resistance. 

Then I realised I was fighting a losing battle all along. Whilst I was exerting myself to fight for his understanding, he left me drained of energy with no real intention of trying to understand.

“It’s not our job to force people to see our truth. It’s our job to live our truth and to be there for those who seek it”

The truth of who you are, ONLY if realised, will set you free. The truth itself will not set you free. Even Jesus said in one of his parables that “You will KNOW the truth and the truth will set you free”, without that deep sense of knowing the truth is meaningless.

It’s not your job to heal everyone in your life.

Just a mini revelation I had as I caught myself getting pulled into a low vibration based on ego and fear.I needed this message. Maybe you do, too.\-Osho.I love you-Chinese Proberb (The mind Journal)xoxoYou need not be afraid, but it’s okay to be so.I’m grateful to be alive. I love you. That’s all.Dont forget to stretch and drink water, and try to practice forgivness.  We're in this together. ❤In moments of uncertainty and difficulty, remember that you are more than just your three-dimensional existence. You are a divine being, a bright star, a powerful soul. There is no one like you, there never has been and never will be. THAT is a super power.You’re tying to be who you were before the trauma, that person doesn’t exist anymore, because there’s a new you trying to be born. Breath life into that person.It has happened to me twice now, that I’ve met someone who was so much like an older version of myself. I felt so wronged by others but when I see I must have appeared externally, I can see why people responded to me the way they did (usually with annoyance or frustration). 

My current housemate for example, is exactly like me a few years ago, and in some ways it is cathartic to meet someone who is like an older version of myself, to see how far I’ve come. I also understand now exactly why my behaviours annoyed some people, because her behaviours annoy and frustrate me, and yet they’re so familiar. 

Has this happened to anyone here? 

Do you think this is coincidence, or part of our growth and learning?I know I'm being unrealistic because it's hard for most people to change, but everyone would be much happier and less insecure if we gave people the benefit of the doubt instead of only caring about ourselves and making insensitive judgments towards other people.Take credit for trying. Take credit for your progress. The little things matter. We always think that success means the final result, or a sudden leap from where you are to where you want to be. The baby steps, the small accomplishments, and the days when you want to give up can be difficult, but the fact that you try a little harder is what counts. This is a sign for you, a sign to not give up on yourself and a sign of hope. Give yourself credit. You are trying, and you are a work in progress.

Don't forget to upvote, if you liked it to spread good Vibe to more peoples.

r/ManifestationValley (Join us here for more)If I had to sum up to someone what spirituality represents, it would be something along the lines of this quote. Spiritually is ones own spiritual journey, not a religion by any means but a place where you can share your views and hear other views with an open mind and discuss. This quote though overall represents what we ALL are getting at, at the end of the day.April is locked down.

If two weeks felt like agony and you can’t find your light.... you better get in formation now because the next month(s) will reflect what you’re made of.

Get your routine in order.  Make a list of all the things you have in your control, be grateful for them.

Make another list of projects, sprinkle them throughout the week.

If you work from home, ensure your office space is impeccable.

Do not commiserate with low and negative energy.  

You have full permission here on out to do well, feel amazing, and produce quality work.

Don’t fuck it up.
Sometimes I get scared about it or sad about it. Sometimes I’m happy about it. Other times it is what it is.

I can’t believe we randomly float on a flying space rock in the middle of nowhere? And we are made of these elements? Who made this all up? And what is that thing even? Even if we manifested ourselves? The intelligence, who created intelligence? Like whattt??The whole thing is sooo wild. & everyone is running around acting like their problems really exist! They go home feed their dog and mow their lawn and they don’t think about this?

The fact that we can think? And breathe? & contemplate our own nature? Why is it this way? If infinity could be anything why are there still some restrictions? Like I don’t have 5 eyes and can go invisible. So weird. 

The mind and consciousness aspect of our existence is the wildest part. I’ve learned in a deep depression and anxiety how messy it can be in the mind and dark. That even that exists too? 

How the heck does even the gurus know what this is? How can you??
I quit my high paying job as it didn’t seem to serve my life’s purpose and there was fear based motivation. I couldn’t take it anymore. Now questing my own decision and feel lost as everyone was questioning me. I don’t even know what to do. Few low. Medicated for a few hours today feel even more lost. Please help and guide. I am so low. Trying to open third eye. Came very close. Any guidance would be really appreciated.

Update: They just accepted my resignation after getting multiple feedbacks from me and deliberating for one day. I was worried that they might provide me a different accommodation and I would be back to square one and back to something I hated doing. 

I am now manifesting my future and meditating with a stronger belief, faith and strength. Thank you all pure souls for providing guidance. Indeed I am not alone on this journey. Bless all.

Bonus: I had accrued vacation time during Covid and I will get paid for those 4 months in lump sum.

Note: There is a lot of collective wisdom and similar experiences shared by folks please do yourself a favor and read those.

Edit: 2/17/2021 family is slowly getting behind me and supporting me more. Again asking what exactly I am going to do and I tell them don’t worry all will work out.  Not sure what else to say at this point. They want details but I am like just wait :)Much love.(continually updating this post as I go) 
Quit my stressful job that was ruining me on many levels. I moved away from family that was abusive and controlling towards me. 
I had fake friends that didn't give 2 shits about me. I realize the friend I've needed most is myself and the divine. 
Today I'm in Flagstaff, Arizona. No concrete plans. Just know I'm here to heal myself, start a new path, and pursue my calling in life as a psychic/empath/spiritual healer/guide.
Though the road seems so uncertain right now and I have many many doubts and the logical part of me is wondering what even tf is wrong with me for doing this..
I've felt afraid since I got here. No plans, no contacts. I'm lost. Been without a phone a whole day. But our ancestors survived on much much less. 
But I've also been guided.. the clock says 636 right now. I went to McDonald's my receipt said 222, I went to sizzler, my total was 555. I make a wrong turn and I'm filled with doubt, turns out I was meant to make that wrong turn and I see 7777. 

The energy here is so much, too much for me ego to process or understand. 
I now see the power in being such a sensitive empath. In the city I'm at the mercy of others so often, but out here in the wilderness I am king. Power and healing energy flows through me at such an intensity that everything stopping me from finding my true self is purged immediately in waves.

I know not where I go next, nothing feels certain being so damn empathic and socially anxious. But I can do this. It's such a difficult thing to trust. My logical mind can't take such a degree of freedom after living with controlling narcissists my whole life. 
Im completely free now and I don't know how to handle it. 
Please pray for me and send lots of loving and healing energy. I'm rooting for all of you that find difficulty in trusting. I'm rooting for all of you that have felt so chained, and controlled by others.


Edit: about to go drive from Flagstaff to Sedona right now. I feel such an outpouring of love from many of you, I'm almost in tears. The energy is very palpable. Im extremely grateful, after my adventure today we'll talk some more. 
Thank you again ❤️

Edit update: I was meditating on Bell Rock with my aura down.. I felt the pain of so many, raw pain, sadness, anger, confusion. 
And then i was told "your path is to love this too, to learnt to rise above this and empower yourself. Since you take on others pain and empower yourself regardless, your purpose is to understand people in ways that are above their current level of consciousness and then empower them to learn how to do this for themselves. 
Basically to learn to trust yourself no matter what, because as you trust yourself you will empower others to trust themselves." 
And i broke out in tears. 

My phone is at 2%, going exploring again. 
Thanks again guys. Will reply more later. 

To the one who told me they would totally listen to me as a guide/healer if I made a blog or videos I am beyond grateful for your encouragement. ❤️
Thank you so much.

Edit: I have been through some very trying times as of late, not to make this negative, but it's very tough being without a home and without a phone in an unfamiliar place while adjusting and healing on so many levels. 

But on the positive side: i was sitting in my car contemplating it all, partially wondering what is wrong with me for doing this, and then I thought back to you guys, and the empaths that have helped me and I decided it's time I make an empath empowerment group here. 
I see myself meeting a girl through this as well, a blonde girl. 

Oh let's see, what else..

I felt guided to buy a lottery scratch off. It was $30 and my logical mind made me choose a cheaper one.. got out to my car, realized I won nothing, so I turned around and went back to the original one I chose despite it being $30. 
Turned out it was a winner and i won $50. 

There's a few other stories I have but I'll save them for when I have more time! 
Will get to messages and comments soon, haven't forgotten about you!1. LET IT GO:
NEVER RUIN A GOOD DAY BY THINKING ABOUT A BAD YESTERDAY.

2. IGNORE THEM:
DONT LISTEN TO OTHER PEOPLE. LIVE A LIFE THAT'S EMPOWERING TO YOU.

3. GIVE IT TIME:
TIME HEALS EVERYTHING

4. DON'T COMPARE:
THE ONLY PERSON YOU SHOULD TRY TO BEAT IS THE PERSON YOU WERE YESTERDAY.

5. STAY CALM:
ITS OKAY NOT TO HAVE EVERYTHING FIGURED OUT. KNOW THAT IN TIME YOU'LL GET THERE.

6. IT'S ON YOU:
ONLY YOU ARE IN CHARGE OF YOUR HAPPINESS.

7.SMILE:
LIFE IS SHORT. ENJOY IT WHILE YOU HAVE IT.

Don't forget to upvote post, if you liked it.

Source >>>  r/ManifestationValley ( Join Us Here )People calling others 'normal people'  calling themselves 'outsiders' and judging pointlessly that they say are not as aware as them. This just shows how you value your own superiority over your morals and that you're not that far from those you call superficial.

Edit: I am NOT attacking personally the growth of anyone, I didn't talk only about the egocentrism of these people, but also all the praise they've been getting because so many people in this sub probably identify with them.

 I am no spiritual guru and  I'm also a beginner, but if your spiritual growth is about sunshine and flowers and no discomfort at all you are going on the egocentrism side. People are replying to this as if I am attacking a specific group of people. Treating egocentrism as if it is a personality trait that is welcome in spiritual community.I am gonna share a little story with you from a very famous book,  


>Enlightenment - what is that?    
>  
>A beggar had been sitting by the side of a road for over thirty years. One day a   
>  
>stranger walked by. "Spare some change?" mumbled the beggar, mechanically   
>  
>holding out his old baseball cap. "I have nothing to give you," said the stranger. Then   
>  
>he asked: "What's that you are sitting on?" "Nothing," replied the beggar. "Just an old   
>  
>box. I have been sitting on it for as long as I can remember." "Ever looked inside?"   
>  
>asked the stranger. "No," said the beggar. "What's the point? There's nothing in   
>  
>there." "Have a look inside," insisted the stranger. The beggar managed to pry open   
>  
>the lid. With astonishment, disbelief, and elation, he saw that the box was filled with   
>  
>gold.    
>  
>I am that stranger who has nothing to give you and who is telling you to look   
>  
>inside. Not inside any box, as in the parable, but somewhere even closer: inside   
>  
>yourself.  

\---- Eckhart Tolle, *The Power of Now*

I spent my whole life yearning for love. Searching for it. Praying about it. Dreaming about it. *Hoping. Wishing. Yearning. Longing. Thirsting. I was a thirsty man in the dessert and love was the water I was dying for.*

You see like many others, my parents were broken people. They did not know how to love, not having been loved themselves. So I wanted the opposite of the pain my broken parents showed me.  
I was a child who read cinderella stories, and wuthering heights, and gone with the wind, and pride and prejudice. And I grew up into a very disillusioned adult. I could no longer read a book. Scrolling social media for 10 seconds at a time is what I had time for. Oh and the quick instant gratification of sex. Sex without love. I didnt believe in love or relationships anymore.

So when I saw happy couples in love as a young woman in my early 20s. I felt a deep stabbing pain instead of being happy for them. 

So I gave up. I have had enough. I was determined to find love. And find out how I was gonna get it in my life. 

So I embarked on a spiritual journey. Many different teachers. Many different traditions. I learned energy healing. I learned reiki. I learned the whirling of the sufis. None of them gave me the answer I was looking for.  


Until someone gave me the big secret:

I *am* love. I *am* Source. Love comes from within me. Not outside of me. Love is not something I seek outside of myself. Because if I keep looking for love from outside I will be looking for the rest of my life and creating more lack and more of love not being there.

*People only reflect back the love for me that I have within myself* ***for me.***

It was a shock to hear, but **I am the source of all the love I am ever going to feel. I create love in my life by feeling it within myself and tapping into it within myself then it shows up outside of me as** ***a reflection of what I already have within.***

Why do we love children so much? Cause a child is a pure source of love. Deeply and unabashedly in love with itself and life and in wonder of every thing around it. No one programmed a baby with negative messages telling it that it is not good enough. Children are born loving themselves. The world conditions them to fall out of love with themselves. 

**Love only manifests in your outside reality as soon as you connect with the love** ***within.***

so look no longer for something outside of yourself that you are the very source of. To know yourself is to Know God. Because God is love. And you are love. *And you are God. You are the unending ever living source of all that you will ever experience, including love.*Your time is coming. It's about to happen for you. So many breakthroughs. So many blessings. Keep believing. Keep 
praying and watch your life change for better. 

Message From The UniverseCan anyone else relate to this? Like i get the same feeling that I’d get as a kid from people and things but i still am 18 year old me it’s like deja by kinda the feeling or thought will just pass by.This is the time, friends❤️ Isaac Newton discovered gravity while in quarantine and Shakespeare wrote King Lear, along with Macbeth, and Antony and Cleopatra.Like why was society set up this way, it didn't have to but it wasHas anyone experienced this before? We have been together 11 years and I’ve never felt a pain like this. He went missing for 36 hours before police found his body but the night he died I felt it. I can feel him in the wind and in the trees. It’s something indescribable.

I hope time takes this pain away. It’s something I wouldn’t wish on anyone.Today is my birthday and I’m so excited about it because this is like the first birthday where I’m actually happy to be alive!! Normally I get super sad/existential on my birthdays but I finally don’t feel that way anymore......such a big accomplishment for me. I love myself and I’m proud of how far I’ve come🥺❤️

Edit: I’ve been depressed for 7 years now and I’m finally coming out of it. This is the first birthday since I was a child that I’m actually excited about.

Edit: You guys are so sweet OMG TY FOR THE GOLD AND RHE OTHER AWARD I FEEL SO LOVED :’)❤️❤️❤️I began my awakening journey this year and boy, is it a lot. Yesterday, I had a zoom call with my close college friends for the first time in about 2+ years. For some reason, I just didn’t really even want to participate in it because I just felt we’d grown so much from each other and just felt there wasn’t really a need to continue dragging out superficial conversations and pretending we’re all the same group of friends and people we were in college. Life happened, we all live in either different countries or different states, working different jobs, in different relationships and just moving on with our lives- and the conversations we had yesterday were still pretty superficial and have no depth. Now I’m not saying they are bad people, but I literally FELT that I was being dragged down into a lower frequency when speaking to them. None of them know or understand what I’m going through for the most part (nor do I expect them to), so I just felt the need to be quiet in the call and just listen. I didn’t have that warm fuzzy feeling anymore of being with that same group of friends, I really just had anxiety and wanted the chat to end as soon as possible. 

I’m grateful for the loved ones and friendships I do have, but I don’t think you have to hold on to other relationships or friendships the same way as you used to once upon a time once you’re in the process of focusing on your own spiritual journey. Just wanted to share.So I’m going through a really really rough patch. I was seriously considering ending it all but I decided to give it one last shot and I asked the universe for one last sign of a butterfly to show me life is going to get better. I’ve gone through spiritual periods of my life but I’ve never felt as connected to the universe as I do right now. I’ve seen 8 butterflies in the past hour. Between seeing a pair of butterfly earrings to getting sent a picture of a quote saying “don’t just exist. live” with a butterfly on it to seeing an old picture of a butterfly I drew 9 years ago, the universe is really speaking loudly to me. I think it may have saved me.

Update: an hour later and I’ve seen 11 butterflies in total today!

Update 2: you are all so sweet ❤️ thank you all so much, wishing you guys the best xxxFor anyone who comes across this, I love you. I had got so caught up in the void lately that I forgot to love. Love is our purpose. We are all love. You are so deserving of love. You’re worthy for just existing. You’re worth everything. I love you. I love you. I love you. It’s all going to work out in your highest good. ❤️She passed away and it was hard, I’m sitting in the tub and I can’t stop crying I have family here and it still hurts I miss my mom I feel alone I really miss her I mis you mamaAll of the sudden being spiritual is popular but sometimes we confuse it with doing yoga and burning palo santo...

 Spirituality is looking at yourself, identifying those ugly spots and transform them graciously. 

That comes in a lot of ways, practices and belief systems...

It doesn't matter what is your way, just chase it 🎈That's just how I see things. I'm done running from it. I don't care if I'm not understood. I don't care if I'm not accepted. Everything I perceive is sexy. This is *my* truth. I'm a sexy being in a sexy world, and I wanna feel sexy. I wanna be sexy. I wanna do sexy things. I wanna see/think/create sexy stuff. I've been afraid of sexiness, of being the way I am, of seeing the world the way I see it, which is sexy. Fear of being shamed or misunderstood. Fear of my inherent sexiness, of my perception of reality to my body which is the tool of this perception.

It's all so sexy and I don't give a *FUCK.*Other “spiritual” people make it so much  more complicated than it is. You don’t have to be into astrology. Your house doesn’t need to be filled with crystals and plants. You don’t have to listen to only positive music. You don’t need to wear bright colors. You don’t need to be vegan

You do whatever the fuck you want. 
Spirituality is about your own journey. There are no rules, there are no laws, there are no commandments. 

Personally, my one and only “rule” is you do what you want. Just don’t hurt anyone else in doing so.Illuminate illusions. Nothing real can be threatened. Nothing unreal exists. Herein lies the peace of God.I promise, everythings gonna be ok.  Try to find deeper meanings to Love.  Proud of you, Love you.  You are real and it matters. ❤Very random I know lol but I’m feeling extremely positive just wanted to share some of itI just want to go home. Back to where my soul came from. I don’t like Earth at all. I hope I don’t fail in this life because I don’t ever want to come back here. 

I know life is supposed to be a roller coaster but I’m just not into this place. Everything just feels wrong. I don’t believe in the need to suffer or worry or die. I feel things way too deeply and see how easily the world’s issues could be solved but it just a bunch of heartache here. I think home doesn’t have any of those things. I can’t even believe I willingly came here. 

NEVER AGAIN.

Edit: Thank you for the awards. I appreciate everyone’s response. I can feel your love.

Edit: Again, I really, really appreciate every single thing everyone has said. I’m glad I’m not alone and that I can go on Reddit and receive more kindness from strangers than the people I’m surrounded by in my life. I hope I get to meet you beautiful souls somewhere, someday.When there is true love of yourself, hate towards any other becomes impossibleLet people be. Let yourself breathe. 
How you decide to spend your life does not make you better than someone else who lives life choosing to be aware of different aspects of their humanity. Killing your ego does not make you better than those who never have. Being aware of your eternal power does not make you better than those who “aren’t awake” to you. If you believe in spirituality, do you not also believe in oneness? The simplicity of life and the power inherent in all beings!?Fear based media and people who conduct disgusting behaviours (ex: hate crimes) has been a major turn off for me during the pandemic. I am aware that most religion promotes and encourages you to love every human being but I feel really disconnected with unauthentic human beings that are clout chasers, malicious, and manipulative. 

There's a quote about not letting negative people rent a free space in your mind and 'Long Story Short' song by Taylor Swift which lyric resonates with me when it states: "your nemesis will defeat themselves". Thus, I am learning to let go of the past, fear, and people that no longer serves my growth in life. The UNIVERSE and karma will take care of evil people because there is no space for them to hide.First, there is a HUGE difference between toxic positivity and learning about yourself to understand which of your beliefs that can create suffering. Otherwise..

You are only creating more suffering for yourself and others by avoiding your full experience as human beings. 

The more you avoid anything that doesn’t feel ‘good’ the more you are creating fear in your inevitable experience, and the more fear you have the more you will suffer. 

You are using spirituality as an escape from reality and thus creating more suffering within yourself and others. 

I’m saying this because I’ve been there. Trying to feel ‘good’ all the time is not realistic, sorry. You will never be able to spread love and light in the world if you can’t show up for your best friend, significant other, or yourself when they are really hurting and need it. If we are never really ‘there’ when hard times hit we are never actually growing. We will always be in our own little fragile bubble that we retreat to because it’s safe and the only thing we (feel like) we do have control over, so maybe we (including me) should continue to try to figure out why we have such a desire to retreat into this space in the first place. Yes it feels wonderful but what’s the flip side we don’t want to feel? It will always control us until we find out. 

Life, light, or love, cannot exist without growing within the darkness that was once feared and now reconciled.

EDIT: Just to clarify a little bit better since people are confused. I am not by any means saying we should not choose to try to better our experience or ourselves or our viewpoint of anything we experience. What I am referring to as “toxic positivity” is, for example as a commenter mentioned, when a friend or family member experiences the loss of their wife and children, we shouldn’t go around saying to them, “you’ll be okay, just focus on the good memories and use the law of attraction and good vibes to attract someone new into your life.” YES they can do this when they are ready but to deny the reality of someone’s current pain (even if it may not be obvious to you) is just a real twist of the knife and can often create more damage.Do not expect anything from anyone. Strangers that don’t smile back, let them be their authentic self. Be authentic yourself, but never expect someone to respond to your energy a certain way, no matter what your energy is. This is giving space, this is love, grace, and how you can truly give back. Find your confidence through expecting nothing. soon you will see who you really are when you’re not afraid of how they respond to your energy. Seek peace and delight not in the external world but in your true self. Journey within. You already *are* everything you've been looking for : )I love you friend :)How do you interpret this quote and what is the overall lesson to be learned here?~ jukez
The Mayan calander was misread, originally people thought that 2012 was the end, but it's not it's 2020. It's not the actual end of the world either it's the start. A Paradigm shift into a new world of perspective and knowledge. Tomorrow the planets will align and the Bethlehem star that hasn't been seen for around 4,000 years or since around the 15th century will be visible, whether it be in a litteral sense or metaphorical sense. It's coming, check my post history for more info on Saturn and Uranus, Saturn is going into Aquarius. Jupiter and Saturn will finally be in conjunction at 0° Aquarius. In the next 2.5 years, the fight is not against “them”, but against our own limiting beliefs, against what keeps us small, enslaved and out of integrity. Most importantly, Saturn in Aquarius is about acknowledging the value of humanity. Saturn in Aquarius is about how we, as individuals, every single one of us contribute to a better world, by helping ourselves, our fellow humans and other living beings. The highest manifestation of Saturn in Aquarius is the sum of the sustained actions of each individual to make the world a better place.

Much Love, Ram Rama Ram <3Just thought someone needed to hear this today 🌝So I’m now at that point in my sobriety journey where I do a mental reset and delete social media from my phone (not permanently, just until I feel I’m ready) so my bipolar mind doesn’t have an opportunity to cling on to anything negative that isn’t realistic (jealousy, envy). Not being able to consume information that doesn’t serve me directly..

So I just thought I’d make one last post here for the sake of leaving one. It’s still very early days, and I’ve been told too many times that I’m likely to fail because of the amount of things I’m quitting at the same time. And no I don’t plan on going off my meds, why? Because they make me normal. I know all I need to do is keep doing what I’m doing, and maybe do some research on what foods I should be eating. It will be nice to wake up social media free tomorrow.Nobody has any idea what the **fuck** is going on. No need to get caught up in petty things created by our silly mind.So while we're in bed, before we fall asleep let's visualize beams of white light shooting up from our heart verbs into Earth's atmosphere. And all those beams of light connecting to eachother to create a grid over the Earth..sending healing, loving energy..to blast the darkness, and to lift our frequency. 

I think it's worth a shot. Just a small visualization and it doesn't take long.  

❤Your light has come back. You’ve found strength from the pain and have embraced everything - even parts you hate. You’ve found yourself again and I am so proud of you🤍🧿🌞There’s this new trend of girls putting rose quartz in a guy’s car to get him to like her because of this famous TikToker named paeka. It’s evolved to girls carrying rose quartz just so guys can be attracted to them. It’s amazing how spirituality has been turned into just another way to feed the ego and post the evil eye emoji. It’s purely for aesthetics and superficial practices now. These type of people do no actual work to improve themselves and it’s almost insulting.The world if fractal.

The Universe is fractal.

Life is fractal.

Metaphysical things are often fractal........

&#x200B;

Sometimes, a single short moment shapes the rest of your life, whether in a positive or negative way.

Understand that life is not linear. Nature is not linear.

Do not apply an over-simplistic mindset to a complex reality.

Love to all.Good afternoon everyone! An encouraging quote on perspective from Allan WattsJust do it.My psychologist said this yesterday in our session. It spoke to me deeply and I told him I would be writing it on my white board and sharing it because it truly is a beautiful thought. I hope you all have a wonderful day.This message isn't for everyone. 
It was written just for.... You 
If your reading this then it successfully reached you. I give thanks to others for helping it travel 

This year has been the most unique year in your life ever.. More tears have been shed than you thought possible for a grown up. 
These have been a release of built up junk that you are letting go off. Things that don't serve you anymore.. Past negative energies that you have held onto for to long.

You continue to evolve, you have just shedded your skin once again. A new version of you rises. A version of you that is more in touch with the divine source than ever before.

You have been lonely, to far ahead from your old group. Don't quit on them yet as you are helping indirectly. Even though sometimes you feel like you have to force their eyes open to see what you see. They are rising up because of you as your energy has influence over them.
They will come into there own power and continue there journey with less prompts soon. 

I'm so proud of you for sticking with it. You've felt an extreme of emotions, from deep pain to powerful burst of unconditional love. Which still lingers as we speak. You can feel it in your gut ,your heart, your soul.
You deserve all of the love energy you are feeling as you have done the work. 
As its stronger than you could have ever imagined at times. You are finally getting what everyones talking about. This is just the beginning, as you taste the divine light it will grow. 
Let it flow out of you onto others.This goes out to all those here who have shitty relatives who were physically/emotionally abusive or simply just can't accept that you have found your own spiritual path.

They are not your true family. True familial love is unconditional. Find your tribe. Find people who love you for ALL of you. Not just parts of you. Most importantly find somebody who values your worth and would never mistreat you. Once you've found those people...then you've found your family.Often in the spiritual community, you see people “wake up” and discover a whole new world that they’ve been missing in their life. It’s new, it’s exciting. You’re finally understanding what all your favorite philosophers mean, you feel a real connection with the world around you, you understand your suffering is a human concept, you just “get it” and what do you want to do? You want to share it with EVERYONE! 

Sharing your newfound knowledge leads to some harsh judgments. You unintentionally show your inflated spiritual ego thinking that you can change everyone around you to think like you and be like you. You think by doing so, you will help their life be better for them. It worked for you, you want to see your friends, family, and coworkers happy and free from the suffering of this world, right? 

We must remember that the path to spiritual enlightenment is not a destination, it’s the road that we all walk. We must remember that every person is on their own special journey in life, many of which will never “wake up” and that’s okay. We must remember that our light, our compassion, our actions, and leading by example is how we change those around us, not by preaching and judgment. 

Yes, I also get frustrated by closed-minded, materialistic, “normal people” (for a lack of a better word, I apologize), but instead I consciously do my best to greet them with kindness and compassion, not judgment. Not knowing or seeing the world as I do does not make them any less than me. Or better. I like to describe it as being on a different plane of existence than they are. Not better, not higher, just different. They will either have a spiritual awakening at some point in their life, or they won’t, and that’s okay. They are still a human like I am, with their own struggles and experiences and emotions and dreams and desires. Just because they do not see the world as I do does not make them wrong. 

Learn to appreciate each human life for exactly what it is, rather than try to change them. Lead by shining your light, not by judging and preaching. Let go of any notion that you’re somehow “better” because you’re “woke”. Love a lot more, judge a lot less.

Edit: wow! thanks for the gold award! 😊Everything you've experienced in your life has led you to where you are, right now, at this very moment, reading these words.

And you are perfect, exactly right now, exactly how you are.

Behind all of the mess of anxiety and stress that society and culture have glommed onto you like a mud suit, you are perfect, boundless, and the pure embodiment of peaceful, blissful, observance.

You don't have to be anything, to anyone. You don't have to prove anything to anyone.

You are good, right now, right on the inside, down to the basement layer where everything has been stripped away except the *real* you.

You know it's true. I know it's true.

Time to let go of old pains. Every day we live and learn and grow together, towards enlightenment, either in this corporeal form, or in the adventure that comes afterward.

Everything is going to be okay.

Even if everything is hard right now, in the long run, everything will be okay and you will end up precisely where the divine purpose of the universe intends for you to end up.

Breathe in. Close your eyes. Relax your shoulders and unclench your jaw.

You're allowing the conscious will of the universe to play out just by showing up and participating in life. It's a crazy dance, and we are all making up the moves as we go, but when you relax and just flow with the music, you'll notice there's a peaceful harmony to the rhythm which is hard to explain, but feels "right" nonetheless.Take a break. Take a break from social media. Take a break from society. Take a break from the expectations made from your egoic mind. Take a break from news and politics. Take a break from outside sources. You aren’t missing out on anything. Your soul is craving your self love right now. 

Why are you in a rush? Who are you trying to impress, and why? It’s okay, don’t feel bad, our ego driven society is a very very strong pull. Your pure soul came into this world (using our mind and body as vehicles) alone, and you are exiting it alone. And if that felt lonely to read, don’t worry, we are all connected beyond the flesh. Yet, we do not need others validation to feel full. 
There is only one person here to impress, and (s)he is standing in front of the mirror, asking “did you forget about me?”. In case you forgot, the universe already has everything planned for you, and will only give you exactly what you are ready for.

While you are here, say hello to your inner child who had infinite amounts of joy before our ill society left its stain. Follow your inner child’s lead, for it knows the way. Follow your excitement. That child is still there. It’s still within you. It is you. 

Sending peace and love to you as you read this. Vibrations really are such a cool thing, eh. I want you to know you are enough. You will forever be enough. 💫

Thank you for your time. Namaste.

Edit: oh wow, my first award. Didn’t expect this to get so much love. Thank you so much 🙏As I was laying in bed last night, I finally understood what people mean when they say you have to surrender to the universe. My want for control is what causes the majority of my suffering(aside from mental issues and trauma). I won’t win until I release my control, so I did. Before I went to sleep, I said “I’m letting go/You have control now and I’ll stop fighting”. So this morning I woke up feeling nothing but inner peace and contentment/bliss. It feels amazing. 🤍🌙🌞Inaction breeds doubt and fear. Action breeds confidence and courage. If you want to conquer fear, do not sit home and think about it. Go out and conquer the world! 


https://youtu.be/AyeIjIEB-osSit in silence, drive in silence, do the dishes in silence, work out in silence, go somewhere that is silent. Do everything in silence and limit the outside noise. Do one thing at a time, mindfully. Unravel your thoughts. Start going in, back to center.The concept of social media has been disgusting me lately. Reddit is different, it’s for enjoyment rather than for fame and clout and it’s not fake cause it’s anonymous. I feel very free, I’d rather experience connections w people in real life than them seeing the fake perception of myself on social media. I want to start staying lowkey so my real in person self is more amazing. I am really cool and I feel like it would make me cooler to keep everything I do private to those who know me. Social media is so crazy. I cannot believe how tightly it holds us in its graspTomorrow is my first day of work at new job.I need this job badly to survive.Can someone please wish me luck because Im gonna need it.Thanks in advance,have a wonderful dayTo my procrastinators, absently minded and physically drained. 

Good for you for doing the bare minimum, because that’s a sign of someone who has learned to do just enough for themselves. My cousin used to always say “celebrate the small victories”. So that pile of laundry you finally got taken care of? Kudos, you climbed mount Everest. Those dishes you finally got to? Way to defuse that ticking time bomb! Got around to calling your mom for the first time in a while? You just made her damn day and she is lucky to have raised you! 

Your worth cannot be measured by the tasks you’ve completed, but the achievement of finally getting around to something speaks volumes towards your resolve and that also deserves a golfers clap. God bless and namaste. 🙏🏻❤️👏🏼I truly like this sub a lot. There's a lot of positive energy, positive feedback, and a general understanding that there's something out there although we're all on different paths to getting there.  


However, I do recognize that some of you guys are trying to grow faster than you're "meant to" and trying to reach multiple spiritual breakthroughs. It's like watching a little child trying to become an adult similar to a human trying to become a yogi when they are not ready. Once you tap into intuition you will know when you're ready. Look to nature for answers similar to how water flows, it neither pushes nor pulls.  


Also remember that although we are "spiritual beings having a human experience", we've come with the intentionality of having a human experience; so *be* human. Stay connected to the spirituality we've discovered but also stay grounded in being human & having experience to know ourselves. Do what you want and be what you want as obtaining that experience will allow ourselves to know ourselves better. Remember to not neglect your human needs. Love you guys.I did it. I met my spirit guide and for once in my life I can feel myself. It’s 1:49 and I can’t sleep. I’m so overwhelmed with joy. Thank you to the universe and thank you for my beautiful life:)➰💕I could really use all the good vibes, thoughts, or prayers I could get. Love y’all, and thanks in advance.I read this sub and my heart goes out to the people that are suffering emotionally. I've even seen some that simply don't want to live. I'd love to scoop them all up, give them a hug and invite them to live with me for a while.

I am not trying to boast or brag, but I lead an incredibly happy life. My wife is the love of my life. My children are great kids. The four of us have great relationships with each other. I have friends in real life and even some friends I contact through the Internet. We're constantly getting together and doing things.

Even the simplest things from sunrises to sunsets to stary nights to moon-filled skys - it's all just so beautiful. We're out here in the country where it's quiet and these things can be enjoyed easily almost every day.

I feel very fortunate to have woken up spiritually. It really wasn't my choice. I wasn't seeking it. It's the awareness of all this that is the root cause of my gratitude. Furthermore, I believe my gratitude is the cause of my happiness. I am sending out these positive feelings of gratitude and receiving those same feelings in the future in the form of happiness 

I just cannot express our thankful I am to be here. This is a wonderful time in my life. I just wanted to take a minute to broadcast it out there.

Thank you for listening.I mean, money is important to have so you can pay your bills, eat and have a comfortable house. But other than that, I don't give a fuck about money. It's a status symbol and something people use to buy love with or to be superior to others.Love, light and peace! ✨✨✨This subreddit makes me sick tbh. For a person to tell another human being that they've chosen their life Whether it be raped, abuse, neglect or murder of any kind is appalling. I'm almost in a disbelief that people honestly believe in their hearts that a person in a shipping container being sold out for sex CHOSE that life is heart breaking. A lot of you lack empathy. You say "Your path is one you've chosen before you were born" Have Absolutely NO PROOF of that. Yes this world is so confusing that we try and find ways to make sense of it. Whether you believe in God or Spirits or Universal consciousness is fine. But what WE DO KNOW AS A FACT is that we are all human on this planet together and we should be more empathetic and compassionate to one another.

I think I'd literally puke if I heard someone tell a woman whose been raped that it was her choosing, she chose it before she was born. Go ahead and read your spiritual books, say your mantras and meditate all you want, but don't be that person that cast judgment on others.

This world makes me fucking sickIt’s a beautiful psychology mix spirituality 8 episode series. I love it binge watching it now. I definitely recommend thisThis is for you.

Your feelings are like magnet. Whatever you FEEL you attract more things that make you FEEL the same way. You attract FEELINGS. Not same situations. Not same people. 

It is important to pay attention to your reality and pay even more attention to how it makes you feel.

If what you see, hear or smell makes you feel opposite of wonderful. STOP right there! 

If you expose yourself to situations and experience that makes you feel worthy, you will attract more of those feelings. 

What you will attract is situations that makes you feel more worthy and loved. Sometimes same, other times not. It doesnt matter, situations arent important. They are just projections of your feelings.

Always, always create feelings that are in your best interest either by exposing yourself to wonderful situations or creating those situations that makes you feel wonderful.

Be honest with yourself and what you feel. Nobody can do it for you.

You are the creator of your reality. This is a fact.All of us here know that in this life we will have to die to ourselves and be reborn multiple times. This metamorphosis into new life and growth is certainly not alien to us. Such transformation is usually marked by a period of darkness and depression, before we shed away the old and break through to what life awaits. 

From what I can see, the human collective is currently going through its dark night of the soul. Everywhere we see how our systems, the collective ego, no longer serves us. It no longer pushes us to grow and evolve. We all know what happens when we try to cling to dying egos...the universe will *force* us to die. The more we hold on to our neuroses the more painful it becomes.

In my own culture and community I see people starting to really question these things. They're starting to open their eyes, like a waking up from a terrible dream. Is this happening to your community as well? Do share your experiences.Everything about the culture of Christianity is about looking outside of yourself. Towards Yahweh, Towards The Bible, Towards the Church, Towards a Priest etc.  Just basically anything but looking inside you and your own divinity as a person. Sure Jesus did say that we are gods in one of the Gospels but 99.9% of Christians don't know or care that he said that. There's a reason why even gang members who rape and kill others are Christians who often have bible verses and crosses tatooed all over them. Christianity requires no real soul growth or transformation and many people prefer to be comfortable then to actually have their consciousness elevated. 

Btw I'm taking about Christianity in its most mainstream form. Not Esoteric and Gnostic Christianity. That's a whole other thing.Except reddit ofc but that’s because im not tethered to anything here. Most of us probably grew up using social media right around the time we got phones that could do so. Instagram, snapchat, twitter, etc. looking back you’ll see how much you’ve grown and how you aren’t the same person anymore. It was bittersweet deleting the accounts but thats all the more reason I deleted them. I felt that I wasn’t free at all with seeing what was new in the world and people’s lives. I want to be free and happy. I want to do things without the unconscious thoughts that I am doing it because others are. I like reddit because I actually learn cool things here and we are all anonymous. I view this as a learning tool as opposed to the other apps where I just felt tethered to trends and memes. I’m not shitting on anyone for enjoying the outlets as I am aware of the positives. For myself however, i want to be free. I don’t want to wake up and the first thing I think of is who sent me a notification. I want to live and truly live for myself. I want to take pictures for my own satisfaction. I want to discover things on my own path and not from something I saw from an acquaintances story. I want to embrace myself as the main character. To whoever is reading this, I don’t know you and you don’t know me but I hope we both find that peace we are searching for. 

Gonna start learning to meditate tomorrow. Gonna go and try to heal my inner child n shit 😂😂😂 

sending y’all love ❤️ .


Edit: yo I didn’t expect all this love! thanks y’all 🥺 
And to the people saying reddit is social media as well I can’t say you are wrong. However like i said i use this platform like a tool kinda like if you used google maps to find a place!
Each of us has a journey that is beautifully unique and individual to each of us, and sometimes it can be so easy to look at where everyone around us is in life, and feel bad about ourselves. It’s important to remember that when we try to make someone else’s path our own, it only holds us back from finding what our own path has to reveal to us. 

This year, we need to be gentler on ourselves. We have to be attentive to ourselves. Listen to your body, and what it is telling you it needs. Let your emotions flow, and face them. It’s healthy!!

As we work to heal ourselves, learn to find self-love, and embrace our uniqueness, we not only better our own lives but we affect the collective vibration. THAT is how we will bring about a more beautiful world, by being accepting of others, ourselves, and embracing our truth. Know you’re on the right path! Trust that gut instinct within you, your intuition, and trust the process. 

Be kind to yourself, and tune in,

Nessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)Keep going!

I feel sad/ nervous bc today’s the day we find out what’s up w my mom 
3 times she has been coming out abnormal for cervical cancer and today we find out what’s up and the next step (doc said if she does she has 10 yrs) but I’m just praying it isn’t the case and she’s actually okay and if anything there’s still hella options bc fuuuk especially since she’s been through a lot already and barely had her life start 

I just wanted to ask if you could please pray bc I’m really scared and just want a miracle to occur and am hoping that a collective prayer will carry a lot of strength 




I’m caught in multiple perceptions rn
“Where was god when people went through fucked up situations”
“There needs to be a balance that’s why shit happens and it isnt okay but it is how it is and just pray”
“Higher powers know she’s been through hell and know she’s barely being happy therefore she will receive strength love and light she isn’t done living it’s barely starting this will be a wake up call for her to enjoy more”
“You’ve witnessed miracles this shall be one”

I have faith hope love and know gods on our side please sent hope love and healing energy please pray for a miracle thank you.
I neeed her to see me grow still and to experience she’s barely living a happy lifeWe all have secrets, problems that we have buried deep down, hoping to never have to deal with. We have all made mistakes, stayed for too long, left too early, not read enough, loved too quickly, run away at the first sign of having our feelings hurt.

Everyone reading this has insecurities and fears, but the only thing we have to fear is fear itself. It’s all inside of your head, let it out. Share your story, share your journey, share your life you are the person that you are because of your experience, the books that you have read and the people who you have shared or had your life interrupted by.

You didn’t ask to be born, you didn’t choose your family, you were born innocent. So never feel guilty for existing, if you have privileges acknowledging them and then taking down barriers that have been placed in the way of others, will set you free.

Mental barriers that we all develop over time, because we have been hurt, wisdom coming from pain….But now they imprison us, some find it difficult to love, so difficult that they never love again.

Many develop spiritual barriers, never really connecting with themselves, because they are scared of what they will find within their own thoughts, they are worried about what they have buried deep within in their subconscious. Worry is interest paid in advance on a debt that you may never owe. Building up emotional debts to yourself is horrible.

“Feelings are just visitors, let them come and go”

Mooji.I feel as though social media is one of the main contributing factors holding us back from true spiritual evolution.

Social media keeps us stuck in the ego. We think that others want to know what we’re doing, where we’re going. We love sharing about ourselves and being the center of attention on social media platforms. It keeps us stuck in our ego and disconnected from the whole. I’m tired of spending my life just to take a nice picture to get that dopamine rush when “27 people” like my picture or post. 

I’m so tired of living this way. I don’t like obsessing over how I look because of how someone else might perceive of me. I’m letting go.

The world would be a better place if we all stepped back from social media. If we all stopped obsessing about who we are and who we portray ourselves to be to others on the internet. 

And don’t even get me started on all of the spiritual teachers who claim to be so enlightened but their ulterior motive is the profits they gain from selling merchandise or crystals or jewelry. 

Don’t get me wrong, it’s great that they are doing their business through social media and thriving but I feel like in spirituality, we are taught to let go completely. Of our self image/ego (which comes solely from how we dress.. wearing jewelry, certain types of clothes, expensive items) we put such an emphasis on living to impress others with our “spiritual aesthetic”.. are we really even spiritual at all? 

I wish we’d all stop using social media and live completely in the moment. When our babies are born, instead of having a professional photographer in the room, we’d enjoy the precious moment fully without any cameras. When we go on vacation, we wouldn’t be worried about snapping the perfect picture to upload to Instagram, when we go to a concert, we’d watch the show in its entirety instead of recording 100s of videos that won’t ever compare to what we saw in person.

I just want us to recognize who we are and how disconnected we’ve become through social media. I’m going on 3 weeks no Facebook, no Twitter, no Instagram. I keep Snapchat just to snap back and forth with a few close friends but I’ve noticed how more whole I’ve been feeling since I’ve quit everything.Recognizing your own self-worth exists outside of the opinions of others and striving only to compete with who you were yesterday, answering only to your own inner compass, and looking at every imperfect venture as a 'process of elimination' rather than a 'failure to acquire value' 

https://youtu.be/kBJrKHFtpwgI’m so desperate for a miracle. I’m struggling a lot right now and I just need a little positivity. PleaseEverything that's in alignment with your frequency will express itself through you effortlessly. You don't have to put any effort to be who you truly are, everything feels forceful when you start pretending to be someone you're not. 

Alignment doesn't mean comfort, it simply means your truth. When a bird chirps it's not in its comfort zone, the bird is simply expressing it's authentic frequency. Now the bird doesn't have to start barking to evolve, it simply has to just be. 

The human mind just can't comprehend the art of being, to just be is the ultimate awakening. Whatever comes naturally to you just be that, everything that you have to force yourself to do, you have to drop that. Stop pretending  and start being. 

The ego will definitely make you think that if you don't force yourself to do something you're not gonna make it but you gotta be courageous enough to follow your higher self and choose alignment over hustle

You can't mess up anything that is meant for you, so stop being so scared of what will happen. Trust your intuition and let your heart and soul guide you on this journey. I promise you, you can not mess anything up that is meant for you..

Because if what is meant for you will never miss you and what misses you was never meant for you, then there is no need to worry or fear.

*Edit:*  ❤️🙏🏻 *thank you for your love and awards.
         Thousands of 🕯️ can be lighted from a single      
         🕯️, and the life of the 🕯️ will not be 
         shortened. Happiness & Wisdom never decreases 
         by being shared* 🙏🏻❤️I love you. You are on the right track. Everything you need you already have, the choices you make guide you to the next step in life. Nurture yourself. Love yourself. Heal yourself through eternal love and unconditional self acceptance. Remind yourself that forgiveness will set you free.A while ago i finally opened up hard at heart and shared that i may lose my wife, best friend and soul mate to cancer this year. She comes from a family who is has a few members that have had a few types of cancer. She is in the high risk area, above 70% for asophogeric cancer which has no cure, and is very deadly. After the biopsy, we were a train wreck until the results were. There was no trace of it, even though the last check up, confirmed that her gut and inners were severly inflammed with no other explaination. 

We cried, as if winning this year right out of the gate. It was a bittersweet, beautiful weight lifted from our shoulders that everything we both kept hidden came out in one big emotional cleanse. That alone was rough, but it was part of the healing process. Now that she has an extension of years, she wants to be more pro active on her health, mind body and spirit. So we made a plan to relocate, start fresh in a small town where we can go out more with nature. Canada may have to wait until we are centered again as a couple. 

I want to thank you all for your prayers, words of affirmation, empathy, and honest to God humanity in such an inhumane state of affairs. We hermits tend to keep remote an selective with those we reach out to, so thank you for your beautiful good intentions. 

Namaste.


A few days later: 

I had no idea my humble thanks and coloful story of overcoming odds would move so many. I honestly dont now what to say further but another great thanks for all the love you send us. I recieved a few emails from work about training to advance my position, i applied some time ago but got no response back during the holiday season so i simply let it be. If i am successful in passing this training and advance, we will finally make enough to relocate to a more stable enviornment closer to nature. By doing this, my son, daughter and wife can literally breath better air and go outside to play at reasonable hours of the day. Itll be the first time my oldest has been in a park since his sister was born with an illness that kept us indoors for much of her early stages. So my son doesnt know how to ride a bike or climb a tree, play soccer or just go exploring on hike trails yet. Fingers crossed things go well and i can teach them how to fly a home made kite. Its the smallest events of our hermit family that truly have no price tag or replacement in this digital, viral human era. We made be millinenials, but we live like old people lol. 

From my house to yours, may this year open doors, and windows, create pathways up mountains, and may milk and honey protect your body and soul from all the harsh elements in every step and breath we take each day. This is my blessing to you for this new year of great change. Go and make beautiful changes. 

*hugs*I've noticed this in multiple spiritual people and I've also identified as being single and deeply spiritual for a majority of my life. I know that the only person that can make me happy is me which makes the desire to date-- not strong. I can withstand long periods of solitude and find great meaning in helping people.  I know this doesn't apply to everyone just something that I've noticed. Thoughts?me too though so it's chillKeep pushing yourself no matter what.  You can do this and you will be stronger from it.  Keep yourself up, and don't feel bad when you fall apart for a little bit.  Just don't do it too long.  Give yourself a day its ok.  I promise you are more powerful than you believe.  Love and light friends I believe in you. I'd love to hear what epiphanies you have all had that you really felt deep

Edit: Thank you all who have responded and given me more to think about. 

I had always thought of myself as an independent thinker, not dependent on anyone, diferent, open, loving etc .... but recently it's like I see myself anew.



This trick has actually served me beautifully 😂
For the last 3 months my phone password has been : iamhappyherenow
I figured that happiness and peace is the only thing I truly want from ALL my desires so I made that my password and every time I typed it I would put a gentle smile on my face and FEEL some happiness or relief.😂it took some time but these days I experience a good amount of happiness and my desires are actually coming to me one by one. I open my phone probably every two minutes so you can guess how many times that has been typed 😂.its sinked into my subconscious and the subconscious mind is the boss!!.
Peace and joy and beauty to YOU my lovely one.
Be still.I just realize this and I had to put it out there. I’ve had suicidal thoughts every day for at least a year and pretty frequently for a long tome before that, but gosh it’s probably been three days without one. That might sound small, but it’s pretty huge for me, and I’m all jazzed up about it. 

Thank you Alan Watts, thank you Buddha, thanks to any and all spirits watching over me, thank you me for sticking through, and thank you for reading. 

Fuck yes!YOU are the only person who can create the life YOU WANT. It’s not anyone else’s responsibility. It’s YOURS.

There are some people who live by this principle… but the reality is MOST PEOPLE won’t take that responsibility. Most people would sooner MAKE EXCUSES than look in the mirror. The problem is always OUT THERE… it’s never IN HERE.

Earl nightingale said it best: 

“We are all self made… but only the successful will admit it.”

We’re all self made in our health, fitness and physical shape… but only the fit will admit it. We’re all self made in the joy we experience every day… but only those who are happy will admit it. We are all self-made financially and in EVERY OTHER SENSE… but only those who like where they are will admit it.
Step by step I will climb until I get where I intend to go.

It’s NEVER EASY… but it is very straight forward and IT IS ALWAYS WORTH IT!.

I WORK ON MYSELF… 
I IMPROVE.
I LEARN MORE…
I IMPROVE.
I NEVER GIVE UP…
I GROW STRONGER… and that NEW, IMPROVED, STRONGER version of me creates BETTER RESULTS than the old version of me.

I FIND A WAY! I FIND A WAY to create the life I want.

If I want a better body or better health… I know a prescription is not going to give it to me… I know I can’t get it from an infomercial… The only way I can get it is through my own WORK and my own SELF-DISCIPLINE.

It’s up to me and me alone… and I wouldn’t have it any other way.

*If you don't sacrifice what you want,
What you want becomes the sacrifice*

*At the center of every person, lies the hidden spark of divine, waiting to be explored and expressed*

*the future self is watching you right now through your memories*

Thank You for reading and have a Spiritual day ❤️🌞Every moment. 

The sun, when it warms your skin, in that gentle, soothing way. Blanketing you. Coaxing you into dreamlike states. Notice, feel it.  The subtle arrival of crisp chills of autumn, redefining your edges. The faint smell of burning leaves. Piercing vibrant colors, beautiful gradients. Excitement. Wonder. An air of... transformation. Winter, the stillness, the powerful silence, standing in a field of freshly fallen snow. This is rebirth. The cold air, purifying your being. And spring.... warm, humid rain, the smell of the earth, flowers, blooming back to life. The universe is loving you every moment, if you tune in. Nature is dancing for you. It’s blessing you. If you turn your awareness to it. Tune in.Take a moment to recenter yourself. It’s always important to check in.Meditation, eating healthy, getting enough sleep, exercise, physical and creative outlets... sometimes it overwhelms me how much effort it takes to maintain mental and spiritual homeostasis. I know I’m better for it and better for the amount of discipline I apply to myself but damn. Does anyone else ever get this feeling?Put 8 monkeys in a room. 

In the middle of the room is a ladder, leading to a bunch of bananas hanging from a hook on the ceiling. 

Each time a monkey tries to climb the ladder, all the monkeys are sprayed with ice water, which makes them miserable. 

Soon enough, whenever a monkey attempts to climb the ladder, all of the other monkeys, not wanting to be sprayed on, set upon him and beat him up. Soon, none of the eight monkeys ever attempts to climb the ladder.

     One of the original monkeys is then removed, and a new monkey is put in the room. 

Seeing the bananas and the ladder, he wonders why none of the other monkeys are doing the obvious. But undaunted, he immediately begins to climb the ladder.All the other monkeys fall upon him and beat him silly and he has no idea why. However, he no longer attempts to climb the ladder; A second original monkey is removed and replaced. 

The newcomer again attempts to climb the ladder, but all the other monkeys hammer the crap out of him. This includes the previous new monkey,who, grateful that he’s not on the receiving end this time, participates in the beating because all the other monkeys are doing it. 

However, he has no idea why he’s attacking the new monkey. 

One by one, all the original monkeys are replaced. 

Eight new monkeys are now in the room. None of them have ever been sprayed by ice water. None of them attempt to climb the ladder. All of them will enthusiastically beat up any new monkey who tries, without having any idea why.

That is how #traditions, #religion and #ethnic profiling get established and followed.

Think twice before following a tradition, religion or negative ethnic profiling. It would make more sense if you get your own understanding to it!

Have an isolated and informed perspective on all decisions that govern and determine the way you live your life.
There is only one of you and you can’t be replaced. Treasure that....you must show up with self love and self respect for yourself, that way not only will you be filling your own cup, but because the way that others treat us is a mirror of our own internal environment, and we all deserve to be treated right!!

It all starts and ends with you. 

No one in your life is more important than YOU! 

Be kind to yourself my friends. Have a beautiful week. 

Nessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)Please, please, if you’re reading this, send me warm thoughts, prayers, whatever you can offer. I’ve never needed it more. Thank you💛I've been trying to get a job for a year. Your positive energy is so very appreciated!

Thank you ❤🙏❤

Update:
I am deeply touched by everyone's light and support! Thank you from the bottom of my heart ❤. The interview went really well, and I should be hearing back from the hiring manager by Wednesday next week. Thanks again to you all, so very much! 💖When we are aware of our weaknesses or negative tendencies, we open the opportunity to work on them. 

Our shadow is needed now more than ever. We heal the world when we heal ourselves, and hope shines brightest when it illuminates the dark.

Our work is to integrate and eventually transcend darkness and light altogether by holding them equally in a state of interconnection. We only find ourselves, individually and collectively by doing so. ⛓🖤

Don’t be discouraged in embracing your shadow, it’s part of the one and only, amazing YOU. 

Bw with peace this week,
Vanessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)Woke up this morning, my 13 year old dude walks in and goes "dad it's stupid for people to get all worked up over a number change. 2021 isnt any different, it's just another day."

I said 'you're 100% right son, so what causes all those changes for people each year?'

"Their intentions"

Damn. He's way more wise than I was at 13... sometimes I legit wonder if my kids are my spiritual guides. I learn more from their wisdom than anywhere else, it seems.“Once you make a decision, the universe conspires to make it happen.”  
― Ralph Waldo EmersonIt feels so beautiful to sit quietly and just watch others experience their life. I feel so peaceful.If you ever find yourself hating this world, hating people or your life, you have to come to the realization that the only one you hate, is yourself.

This can create the experience of hell on earth, where everything seems hopeless, and misfortune follows as you daily manifest pain and misery.

Its really hard as humans to be aware of your every day thoughts, actions, words, choices, because not everyone does the inner work.

I hear at times people say life is a roll of dice, some are lucky, others are not, I'm here to say to you that this is completely false.

There is no randomness, everything happens for a reason, and that reason is you.

You are the master of your own Universe, you are God, you are the Universe, you have always been here, and what you experience is merely a temporary human experience.

The world is our playground, we are here to express our authenticity. We all have our art, our craft, our passions, our dreams, and the more we follow our hearts, the better life we will have.

This is heaven, if you want it to be.

All it takes is for you to let go of the illusion of lower frequencies acting like its the default, there is no default in this Universe, all that exists is a balance between light and dark. We are the light and we are the dark, stop running away from yourself and find that love frequency that will guide you to the best life you can possibly imagine.

Don't concern yourself about what happens outside of yourself, and find your light.

Its inside of you and its always been there, and it will always be there no matter what.We can do a lot of introspection and nit-picking.  "This is anger, this is wrong".  "This is hyper activity, this is wrong".  "This is seeking validation, it's wrong".  Basically we can try to nitpick every little thing and try to say "it's ego".  And if we're not sure, there will be flocks of people happy to point it out to us.  Look no further than this sub!

But at some point you just gotta own what you are.  You wanna love?  Then love.  You wanna sing?  Then sing.  Something pissed you off?  Then get the fuck pissed off.  

You wanna fuck?  Fuck.  

Why do I get the feeling that we hold ourselves to an impossible standard in the name of spirituality?  Is that really spirituality?

Or is it more spiritual to just be the human being that you are?  You know, the fucking ANIMAL that you are. 

Y'all seen that movie *Ferris Bueller's Day Off*?  There's that scene where the gang discovers that they're not able to hide the fact that they took Cameron's father's Ferrari for a joyride.  And Cameron says at some point, **"I'm gonna take a stand, and I'm gonna defend it.  Right or wrong, I'm gonna defend it."**

This looks to me like where integrity comes from. If not you're just gonna live your whole fucking life being pushed around.  It doesn't fucking matter if you're "wrong".  Own it.  Do what you feel to be right, FOR YOU, and be willing to eat the consequences, too.  But don't be so god damn wishy washy.

I'm not saying to be stubborn.  If you fall on your ass and find out you're wrong about something... then change!

But I feel like the spiritual path is not about some philosophical shit.  Don't hypothesize about truth. Fucking LIVE truth, or what you feel to be true. And when you make a mistake and fall on your ass, then you can learn.

But then it won't be some shit you read in a book, or shit someone told you and you took at face value. It's rooted in your being.

That's where integrity comes from.  And with it joy, peace, and all the other good shit we want out of this life.Have patience and allow the universe to bring you what you need. Have a beautiful day/night :)What you wear

What you eat

What you drink 

What you smoke

What music you listen to

If you meditate 

If you believe in God

If you believe in mother earth

If you are religious 

If you are New Age

If you like crystals 

If you're left wing

If you're right wing

If you're a "good person"

If you're a "bad person"

If you watch Netflix 

If you wear make up

If you like sex

If you don't like sex

If you're straight 

If you're gay

If you like pop music

If you like rap

If you've studied scripture 

If you've read The Power of Now

Everyone is spiritual. Everything else is ego.You did what felt right at the time. You made the right choice FOR YOU. Never beat yourself up for that. None of it was your fault. Life happened and you did your best. Keep your head up, you’re not alone:)For anyone else on this spiritual journey who's going through this right now. It could be argued that that the entire collective is going through this right now.Consciousness creates your universe, a reflection of the whole as described by the metaphor of Indra's net.
Our concepts create a hologram universe which is an overlay of duality and Maya upon the whole. We live in our world not the world.
"you" are ultimately the universe and more, but haven't realized that yet.
The way to the realization of what you are is an inner journey. Drilling into the core reveals the universe hidden within one's central void.
That the whole world is inside you : in your perspectives and in your heart . That to be able to find peace , you must be at peace with yourself first ; and to truly enjoy life , you must enjoy who you are ; and once you learn how to master this , will be protected from everything that makes feel like you can not go on , that with this gift of recognizing yourself , even when you are alone , you will never be lonely. 
 
*Under the running sea of our theories and scientific explanations lies the aboriginal abyss of radical amazement.In the ineffable essence of all experience as pure presence, everything is light.Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness that most frightens us.Each thing is a surprise, being is unbelievable. We are amazed at seeing anything at all.*

When the ego dies, the soul awakes. 

If anyone wants to understand visual way or video. I recommend watching this video by awaken the world channel. 

[Inner World Outer World. ](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLD8E5F0D70B62BEFE)I’ve seen a lot of LOA and Manifestation misinformation being spread around. This “focus on positive and only positive thoughts” seems a bit problematic and fear mongering. 

The idea of spirituality does not surround itself around you needing to be a person of “love and light” 24/7. Be human you’re here to BE HUMAN and have a HUMAN experience. That consists of occasional negative thoughts and intrusive thoughts. That consists of straight up not wanting to talk to some people some days. OBSERVE it for what it is, you are okay. 

The goal is for you to find peace within yourself. You don’t find peace within yourself when you constantly stress yourself in trying to suppress every natural emotion of yours. It’s exhausting.Have an amazing dayOne of the best quotes I know. I was on a walk yesterday just thinking about stuff, and it hit me hard.. It's so strange that I am alive and conscious and experiencing anything at all. It made me realize there is value in even the most mundane of things. This is a game. It's hilarious, I can't stop laughing thinking about how absurd it all is. It's absurd in a good way though. Is there a point to anything or is it all just...here, existing. I know this is probably a common theme, but I'd like to hear what others think. I'm terrible with words, and I'm having trouble putting into words what I'm thinking. We are so limited by our language! (REPOST BY ANON)I’ve been fucking EXHAUSTED

Edit: Ugh......I really don’t wanna go into work todayJanuary 1st I stopped looking at r/all on Reddit. This was my only source of news.

I truly underestimated how greatly this simple act would improve my life.

No one talks about the news. They all assume you're up to speed. It's great. I take advantage of their misconception that I am informed and they simply never bring it up. I know nothing about the world beyond my senses.

We now live in a rural area. I see birds and deer and wild turkey and the beautiful landscapes created by mother nature. That's my universe.

I am really grateful that I unplugged from the news. I cannot say that even once in these seven months have I regret it.And you are so wonderfully made and pure at heart, you want them to be happy for you.  

Every feeling you imagined life should be will beam from your presence

Everywhere you walk, you will change the vibration of the street, you will raise the frequency of the room.

Your voice will penetrate deep, your truth will open up hearts.

The book of your life will resonate a story they will tell when time no longer exist.

You will know everything that exist can be yours but you still chose the good things.

If you agree.  Promise me you will find me one day.  Somewhere in time.  And let me know.  Ok.In the past, this level of loneliness would’ve caused a lot of negativity, but I really enjoy it. I’m learning more about myself, getting in better physical shape, reading a lot.

I just wish that there was someone else in my life that was interested in this as well. I’m 19 and most people my age (at least that I know) are caught up in the more usual, daily troubles. The only person I can talk to about it is my mom, but I’m about to move back to college and won’t see her very often.

So I guess the reason I’m making this is to ask, is this normal? Will I meet more people with the same goals?Have an amazing winter solstice everybody! Today has so much potential for good I can just feel everyone’s energy. Stay safe and focus on love today ❤️ remember that you are divinely protected. Blessed be!Because of this truth, let us then continue to look within for the answers we seek, and develop ourselves into whole, healed souls. I love all of you soul family, and I wish you true discovery of your souls highest purpose, as well as everlasting peace. I wish you all a very lovely day and encourage you to embark even further on the beautiful journey within. 

No Journey is linear, but all good things take time and dedication. 

Love and Light,

The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋🪐 (On YouTube)Hello all, this is a sticky for recommending reading material to others, and I will organise them into a list for newcomers or those who are wanting more reading material.

This is just a copy from the old sticky with a different title, I was seeing a lot of posts about book recommendations and thought perhaps the title wasn't as clear as it could be that this was a compiled list of useful sources.

# Wellbeing/Zen/No Woo

also try : r/zen

For personal, more grounded wisdom for your journey

>**Eckhart Tolle** \- [The Power of Now (book)](https://www.amazon.com/Power-Now-Guide-Spiritual-Enlightenment/dp/1577314808/ref=sr_1_1?crid=29Q81PBEHOYTX&keywords=eckhart+tolle+the+power+of+now+book&qid=1566743929&s=gateway&sprefix=eckhart+%2Caps%2C243&sr=8-1) \- This is great for anyone, spiritual or not, and is recommended by many in this sub.  
>  
>**Alan Watts -** [The Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are](http://www.freespiritualebooks.com/the-book.html)  
>  
>**Thich Nhat Hanh** \- [The Miracle of Mindfulness](https://terebess.hu/zen/mesterek/Thich%20Nhat%20Hanh%20-%20The%20Miracle%20of%20Mindfulness.pdf)  
>  
>**Marshall Vian Summers** \- [Greater Sprituality Community](https://www.newmessage.org/the-message/volume-2/greater-community-spirituality)  
>  
>**Sadhguru** \- [Inner Engineering](https://isha.sadhguru.org/us-en/ie-book/)  
>  
>**Anthony de Mello** \- [Awareness](https://www.amazon.com/Awareness-Opportunities-Reality-Anthony-Mello/dp/0385249373)  
>  
>**Jack Kornfield -** [After the Ecstasy, The Laundry](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/341631.After_the_Ecstasy_the_Laundry)

# Spiritual Cosmology/Pantheism

also try : r/pantheism

Oneness, simply the idea that we are one, can be said to be the core of many spiritual teachings.

>**Law of One** (free) - [https://www.lawofone.info/](https://www.lawofone.info/) \- The Law of One is pretty renown. It was done by three people channelling a so-called entity called Ra. I recommend starting with the [introduction to book 1](https://www.lawofone.info/results.php?q=intro#book-i-introduction). They have released all their material free on their website.  
>  
>**Edgar Cayce** \-  [https://www.reddit.com/r/EdgarCayce/comments/ckxcsm/my\_favorite\_edgar\_cayce\_readings/?ref=share&ref\_source=link](https://www.reddit.com/r/EdgarCayce/comments/ckxcsm/my_favorite_edgar_cayce_readings/?ref=share&ref_source=link) \- Links to Law of One material. Accesses information from Akashic Records/Book of Life, a lot of information here.

# Afterlife/Near Death Experiences/Reincarnation

also try : r/Reincarnation, r/pastlives

Near death experiences are a very common occurence, where people might see a range of things such as heaven, angels, their loved ones, other worldly realms, or even just themselves on an operating table.

>**Eben Alexander** \- [Proof of Heaven (book)](https://www.amazon.com/Proof-Heaven-Neurosurgeons-Journey-Afterlife/dp/1451695195/ref=sr_1_1?crid=2OWY479AFVDMV&keywords=eben+alexander&qid=1566303852&s=gateway&sprefix=eben+al%2Caps%2C893&sr=8-1) \- Neuroscientist who had a near death experience accounts what he experienced and how it changed his view on god and heaven.  
>  
>**Michael Newton** \- [Journey of Souls (book)](https://www.amazon.com/Journey-Souls-Studies-Between-Lives/dp/1567184855/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=michael+newton&qid=1566222685&s=gateway&sr=8-1) \- a regression hypnotist who became a past-life regression hypnotist after accidently taking someone back before their birth.  
>  
>**Ian Stevenson** \- [https://www.near-death.com/reincarnation/research/ian-stevenson.html](https://www.near-death.com/reincarnation/research/ian-stevenson.html) \- Research and evidence into reincarnation in case studies across the world.  
>  
>[NDERF.org](https://www.nderf.org/Archives/exceptional.html) \- **Near Death Experience Research Foundation -**  An archive of testimonies relating to near death experiences.  
>  
>[https://swedenborg.com/emanuel-swedenborg/writings/](https://swedenborg.com/emanuel-swedenborg/writings/) \- Examination of the afterlife, published between 1749 and 1771.

# Psychic

also try : r/Psychic

>**Lynne McTaggart** \- [The Intention Experiment](https://www.amazon.com/Intention-Experiment-Using-Thoughts-Change/dp/0743276965/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=the+intention+experiment&qid=1566303918&s=gateway&sr=8-1) \- (book) Describes science around the world regarding psychic effects.

# Sychronicity

Been experiencing weird coincidences you think are more than coincidences? These might grant you more wisdom about what you are experiencing

>**James Redfield** \- [The Celestine Prophecy (free pdf)](https://www.pdfdrive.com/the-celestine-prophecy-d33435242.html)  
>  
>**Carlos Castaneda -**  [A Separate Reality (free pdf)](https://www.pdfdrive.com/carlos-castaneda-a-separate-reality-e5719883.html)  
>  
>**Carl Jung** \-  [ Synchronicity, An Acausal Connecting Principle (free pdf)](https://www.scribd.com/document/223463118/SYNCHRONICITY-An-Acausal-Connecting-Principle-Jung) \- Carl Jung was a famous psychologist, friends/rival with Sigmund Freud, whoms belief in synchronicity was at odds with Freud

# Psychonaut/Psychedelics

also try : r/Psychonaut

>**Graham Hancock** \- [Supernatural (book)](https://www.amazon.com/s?k=graham+hancock+supernatural&crid=1KXWPLL0JAGT9&sprefix=graham+hancock+%2Caps%2C243&ref=nb_sb_ss_i_3_15) \- Explores ancient use of ayahuasca (DMT) and how it shaped development of human creativity and beliefs about the afterlife.  
>  
>**Aldous Huxley** \- [The Doors of Perception (book)](https://www.amazon.com/Doors-Perception-Classics-Go-ebook/dp/B07PJV5NL9/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1566223080&sr=8-2)  
>  
>**Timothy Leary**

# Occult

also try : r/occult

# Starseed/Wanderers/Lightworkers

also try: r/energy_work

>**Carla Rueckert** \- [A Wanderer's Handbook (free)](https://llresearch.org/library/a_wanderers_handbook_pdf/a_wanderers_handbook_unabridged.pdf). The channeler from the law of one gives advise to those who feel they are "wanderers" from places other than earth in order to help humanity.

# Science

>**Rupert Sheldrake (website)** \- [https://www.sheldrake.org/research/morphic-resonance/introduction](https://www.sheldrake.org/research/morphic-resonance/introduction). This is a scientist who researches a multitude of strange effects for example "morphic fields".  
>  
>**David Wilcock (Divine Cosmos)** \- [The Science of Oneness](https://divinecosmos.com/book/19-the-science-of-oneness/) (free)  
>  
>**Michael Talbot** \- [The Holographic Universe](https://www.amazon.com/Holographic-Universe-Revolutionary-Theory-Reality/dp/0062014102/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=holographic+universe&qid=1570018891&s=gateway&sr=8-1) \-  "He starts with physicist David Bohm's work in conceptualizing the  universe as holographic in structure, and builds on this to incorporate  diverse anomalies (e.g. out-of-body experience) which would typically otherwise to clash with a purely materialistic worldview." - u/personalidea

# Ancient/Traditional Teachings

Spiritual teachings often are never original, simply because we are all describing the same basic reality of which never changes. Thus spiritual teachings can all be seen to have their roots in ancient history.

>[The Kybalion (free pdf)](http://www.kybalion.org/TheKybalion.pdf) \- The Hermetic Philosophy of Ancient Greece and Egypt  
>  
>[I Ching (book)](https://www.amazon.com/Ching-Book-Changes-Bollingen-General/dp/069109750X/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=i+ching&qid=1566640506&s=gateway&sr=8-1) \- Chinese divination, written over centuires in China  
>  
>[The Book of Runes](https://ia800504.us.archive.org/24/items/The-Book-of-Runes/Book_of_Runes.pdf) \- **Ralph H Blum**  
>  
>[Tao Te Ching](http://sourceoflightmonastery.tripod.com/webonmediacontents/1935012.pdf) \- 6th Century BC Chinese Taoist philosophy/religion.  
>  
>[The Upanishads](https://www.amazon.com/Upanishads-Translation-Tarcher-Cornerstone-Editions/dp/0399174230/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=the+upanishads+vernon+katz&qid=1566755482&s=gateway&sr=8-1) \- ancient Indian philosphy and spirituality  
>  
>[The Kolbrin](https://www.realityfiles.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/AAAA-KOLBRIN-FULL-The-Bronzebook_COMPLETE.pdf) \- Uses a variety of various ancient teachings and wisdom, and so could be seen as representing the universal spiritual human experience.I have always had a great fascination for death in my life. I never feared it because I have always felt that death was essentially a door to another life. 

In the past, my attachment to death would manifest as suicidal behavior until I learned that in ending my life via suicide, I would not only put my loved ones in a state of great grief but I would also have to repeat the Karmic lessons that I came into this current life to balance. 

My soul can often feel tired on earth in this life, as if I had put thousands of hours into a video game and got bored of the game and wanted something new. In my heart I find myself really wanting to go back to the realm of light, death is something most people fear but for me, their is this unbound curiosity to see what is on the other side. 

I post on here because this is not a subject I can openly talk about with most people because they just assume I am either depressed or suicidal when this is beyond the case for me. I love my life and I have amazing friends and family, I am grateful for how my life has gone thus far, even through the hardships. I am not trying to rush anything and I realize my loved ones will miss me a lot when I pass but I cannot wait until I clear my karma in this life and my time comes. I am fully committed to figure out what it is that I need to do to balance my karma so that I may move forward.

EDIT: Wow guys, I did not expect this post to get so much traffic and I really want to thank all of you whom have added to this thread thus far with your wisdom and insights 🙏 Thank you all so much! Some of you have mentioned feeling suicidal and so to this I feel called to share:

 it is important to note that “wanting to die” doesn’t mean we stop trying to live our lives to the best and healthiest way we can. We should constantly stride to get to know ourselves so we can best express ourselves and create in this life. Do not wait for death, and certainly do not live on the edge and try to force it! As curious as it may seem, let it come naturally and in the meantime, seek to figure out how you can impact those in your current life with the gift that you are right now living in this life ❤️Here in Chicago, you always get strangers coming up to you talking about weird things, usually they’re not all there in the head. You learn to ignore it. That’s what I thought this was. But, this was a bit different. As I was waiting for the bus this guy comes up to me and says “Hey, you’ll be okay. I know you’re going through some stuff right now but you’re going to be okay. Alright?” I smiled and said “Thank you, too too”. He says “Don’t worry, you’re going to be okay”. And I was like “Thank you, have a nice day.” 

I have been going through a tough time in life and I feel like this was the universe sending someone down my path to reassure me that everything will be okay and whatever I’m going through right now is temporary. Just wanted to share this encounter. ☺️


Edit: Thank you all for the love and positive vibrations! I’ve been feeling so much more energized and in a great mood today and don’t ask me how but I just *know* it’s from all the love and energy you guys have been sending to me. I can just feel it. Sending you lots of love and positive energy, beautiful souls. ✨✨❤️❤️I had a traumatic childhood.  Even at 44 years old, I still lash out and say things that I have to apologize for. I have come a long way in the last three years since becoming aware of spirituality, but I need to dig deeper and heal these things so I stop hurting the people around me.

I will be really honest here.  I am not sure how I go about that.  Any advice you have would be welcome.

I have to go do more work, but I'll check back later.

Thank you.Letting go of the need for things to go the way you want them to go has been the most liberating realization that I’ve had. 

It’s okay for things not to work out. There’s always going to be another day and another chance to live and experience life. When I realized this I understood how small most of my imagined problems really were. 

If I fail my exams I can try them again. If my relationship ends I can start another one. If someone is rude to me at work it doesn’t have to ruin my day. There will always be more customers and opportunities. 

When you cling onto the idea that things are supposed to go a certain way, you become rigid and stiff. You spend so much time and energy trying to perfect things that may or may not be in your control that if things don’t go your way you become devastated and it takes longer to bounce back than it should. 

I don’t think there’s any doubt that things aren’t going to work out for us at some if not most points in our life. If we can accept that it allows us to live in reality and to respond quickly when faced with undesirable outcomes. 

We can move on freely instead of holding on to an idea of perfection that only ends up holding us back. 

I want to be a writer/musician and I’ve been working on stuff for years now without releasing it because I wanted it to be perfect and received  exactly the way I wanted it to be received.

If I had instead just put the stuff out I probably would have been way further along in my career by now. 

I understand now what I need to do... and it may not work the way I want it to.

But that’s okay. 

So what?Hope December brings you the happy ending you deserve. You made it this far for a greater purpose. Be ready for new energy, grand turning points, real alignments, clarity, love, unexpected blessings, & true miracles. It's your time.

Source >>>  r/ManifestationValley ( Join Us Here )I feel like plants have really helped me get out of slumps and raise my vibration! So many of the plants I own are very forgiving to me, so if im ever feeling down and don't have the energy to tend to them, they still hold on long enough for me to get back to them. It's like they wait for me to start feeling better so I can make THEM feel better! 
Even when they don't hold on well and end up dying, it's still a lesson learned or a teachable moment, like maybe I should start taking things slower, I shouldn't rush things, or I should be patient. And Everytime i water, replant, and talk to my plants I always feel so~ good. It's a really awesome feeling, and I wanted to know if anyone else feels like this too! :)I’m a teen who me and my mom are strugglingIt's OK if you don't care about self-improvement, career goals, buying fancy stuff, "making it" in some way or another.  It's OK to just take naps and chill and play video games and dick around.  You gotta put food on the table but it's OK if you settle for a lower paying job that you like instead of a higher paying one that you don't.  It's OK for you to take help from your parents.  If's OK for you to take help in general.

It's OK to follow your intuition.  It's OK to listen to your heart.  It's OK to not take advice from anybody.  You don't have to be open minded, sometimes that stuff is just noise.

It's OK to show the world who you are.  You don't have to hide it.  You can just be honest.  You don't have to be your best self.  You can just be your self.  It's OK to love who you want to love.  It's OK to feel the way you feel.

It's OK to just do stuff because you like it rather than making a competition out of it.

It's OK to be selfish.  It's OK to do what you want.

It's OK if you're not perfect.  It's Ok if you get angry, get sad, have doubts sometimes and wonder if it's even all worth it.  None of that stuff is even a barrier to being at peace.  The only barrier to being to peace is being fake about it.

We put a lot of restrictions on ourselves, then we wonder why life sucks.  We never stopped to ask "hey, what the hell do *I* want to do?"  No, we're always measuring ourselves up to some impossible standard and chasing the future.  We're afraid to follow our heart.  There seems to be safety in the crowd, even if the crowd is completely screwed.

At some point you gotta just stand up and say, actually, I don't think all that crap is for me.  I'm just going to love myself and be true to myself.  I'm just going to enjoy life, and live my life lovingly. I don't care if I have to go it alone.  I will go it alone.  Who knows?  I may inspire others.  But above all, I deserve it.

It's OK to love.  It's OK to follow your heart.  It's OK to enjoy life.

It's OK to be happy.So, I'd like to ask, how people would deal with this..

THANK YOU ALL FOR TAKING TIME TO RESPOND, MUCH LOVE, CALM, HAPPINESS..NAMASTE.As I grew as a spiritual being, my understanding and appreciation of sex completely changed. I now know myself as more than a physical being, but also an emotional and energetic/spiritual being. Since then, I haven't wanted casual sex that only unites the physical bodies. My sex drive hasn't changed, but I only want to have sex with people I can connect with on all levels. I also took a long break from dating, to do some deep healing, and to unlearn some old patterns I was raised with (ego stuff, attachment, expectations, etc). Has anyone else had these experiences? Or not?I see some people feel really terrible about themselves. To the point of suicide.

Either because of poor choices made and actions they have taken or through shame, guilt and low self esteem.

For some reason I feel compelled to say that, *whatever* you've done and *whatever*  you've been through, *whatever* the situation - I believe that you deserve love.

And you always did. I hope it gets better soon.I'm saying this because I'm a guy and I feel very feminine now in the sense that I've become more gentle, caring, loving and compassionate. Of course, anyone can be those things regardless of gender, but I just feel those qualities are more associated with women. I've always been those things but I think it's more stronger now since becoming spiritual. Have you experienced something similar?Your suffering will end when you see how it began. No matter how great and powerful you are, until you conquer your mind you are a slave. Only the self disciplined are truly free.Hey soul family!

It's natural for us as humans to analyze the way that we measure up to the others around us, but that doesn't mean we have to allow it to influence the ways we view ourselves. 

Jealousy can be a very hard issue to deal with, but when we truly find self love and find contentment in our own presence, the approval or thoughts of others about us and our lives won't affect us as much. In my most descent video, I talk about how to get over jealousy, and some methods that helped me. 

These are just a few tips that have helped me in my own journey, and I hope that they help you as well. 

Sending you all SO much love,

Vanessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)When someone judges you, it isn’t actually about you. It’s about them and their own insecurities, limitations, and needs. 

When you find peace within yourself, you become the kind of person who can live at peace with others. We’re all just humans navigating through this crazy journey of life, (especially lately!) so always remember to be kind to others and kind to yourself. It really does go a long way. (:

Sending you SO much love this beautiful day,

Vanessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)Be patient, everything is gonna be ok. :)"Sex is the ultimate exchange of spiritual information.

People downplay the spiritual nature of sex as if it isn't literally used to reincarnate spiritual beings into the physical realm.

The quality of any sexual exchange depends heavily on the spiritual maintenance of each individual (which in turn impacts their mental, emotional, and physical maintenance).

There are many names used to describe the energy flow within the body, but the Chakra System is pretty well-known terminology

We have an evolved 9-chakra system.

Each chakra representing it's own non-linear form of consciousness; meaning you can have "3rd eye consciousness" (ajna chakra) and a completely jacked up solar plexus chakra.

Sex, on a base level is experienced thru the Root (Survival) and Sacral chakras (Creation/Pleasure).

But it also contains the energy \*or lack thereof\* of the remaining chakras.

Virtually all sentient beings understand survival consciousness. Everything from single-cell organisms to human beings reproduce to prevent extinction.

Yet, not all beings use sex for pleasure.

The ability to have multi-chakra sex makes us somewhat unique.

And it's important that you don't diminish your whole 9-chakra being (that also seeks intimate connection) down to just sacral pleasure.

There are virtually millions of people that can give you sexual pleasure.

But not everyone can tap into your intuition, connect to your mind, ease your vulnerabilities, empower your nonphysical being, be in tune with your emotions, etc.

7-, 8-, and 9-chakra sex require a totally different level of worship.

And it actually intensifies the sacral energy/pleasure.

This is how gods build their kingdoms.

With intention, focus, love, clarity, and direction.

Communal and societal change means we need more people focused on BUILDING in this way.

Someone wanting to fuck you is not a compliment.

What have they built for themselves?What have they built for others?How do they carry themselves?What energies do they bring to the table?Are they expanding and evolving?Or are they stagnant and complacent?How do they treat people?How do they treat themselves?

Because that's the same energy they are gonna bring to anything you build together.

Someone who is self-destructive will bring destruction into your life.

Someone who always has bad news will bring bad news into your life.

Someone who has unhealed traumas will bring unhealed trauma into your life.

Many exchange moments of pleasure and end up trying to build a kingdom with a court jester.

There is no amount of social or government reform that can make up for a lack of SELF-GOVERNANCE.

You are the CREATOR of your own reality.

You have to BUILD with intention.

Our sexually destructive society feeds off of brokenness, lack of discipline, and immaturity.

Exchanging with those who are not your equals in spirit, only bring your energy levels down.

If we truly understood the importance of sex, we'd BUILD in a completely different manner.

We'd govern ourselves to become the change instead of waiting for change to come.

But most people will tell you that sex isn't that deep."

&#x200B;

&#x200B;When you don't take sides, you'll often become the enemy of everyone. Their tribal nature will position you closer to the other side than themselves, and you will, by default, become the enemy, in an 'if you're not with me, you're against me' mentality. This, however, is exactly what makes you powerful. When you align with yourself, rather than a side, you give yourself time to pause, reflect, and decide what serves you. You don't let others dictate your thoughts or ideology. Not one side can satisfy an entire human being. Go against the crowd, don't submit to the pressure and shaming tactics, and choose what is useful and discard what is not. Take responsibility for your beliefs.I am truly stubborn, which is why it had to get this bad. I have suffered so fucking much, but it is going to allow for abundant expansion, growth, and love. I suffered so much at this young age because it allowed me to choose the career path I am supposed to be choosing before graduating college. I am going to open my heart as much as I can for the rest of my life and I am going to help people become their best selves. Because of the amount I have suffered, I am more intelligent and awake than I ever could have possibly been without it. I have a great purpose. Only light can drive out darkness. I am patient as amazing things are in the works for me. I trust the timing and the process. The suffering is still very much here but it isn’t, because I keep that future version of me in my heart at all times and I know she is coming.I am so proud of you. Really, I am. Thinking about how much you have grown as a person. I know sometimes you worry about not living up to your potential, but the fact that you have come so far in such a short amount of time means you will grow so much more. You are incredible, for making small steps to discover yourself and life. This is the year of letting go and trusting the universe. Somehow, everything is working out. I want to continue to let go of my ego, work on being a better person, stay humble, and heal the world in some way.

I don't know what the future holds but I am excited. It will require me to step outside my comfort zone and really test my spiritual growth. Not only test, but for you to grow even more. Life is about learning to ride the waves better. I love you, unconditionally. All parts of you. The developed, underdeveloped, and undeveloped. You are whole as you are. There is nothing you will find externally that you cannot find internally. Hey folks!   I used to go support groups in the beginning, and that was most helpful to me!  If you're interested in knowing which ones, drop me a comment.  Anyway, one cool part about those groups was that you always got a lot of love on your sobriety anniversaries.  Well, I'm not going to those groups anymore, partly due to life circumstances, partly due to other stuff (feel free to ask about that, too).  But I do like to commemorate my big day.  Since these communities are a big part of my support network, well, what better place than here?

I guess 8 years ago I wasn't really in a position to be giving advice.  I was doing really poorly.  But life is funny.  Often times it's the people who've faced the greatest tragedy who later have the most wisdom.  I don't claim to be especially wise, but I do know that going so low forced me to take an honest look at myself and my life.  And I'm really grateful for that... because everything got better for me thanks to that.  A lot better.

I've picked up a lot of things over the years, many of which I post about on here regularly.  But the one thing that I've been focusing on a lot lately, and that I want to share today, is this:

**It's about getting engaged in your life.**

Before, I was always on the sidelines.  Nothing ever really touched me.  Yeah, I liked a lot of girls.  But I didn't really own it or express it to them.  Yeah, I had a miserable time in high school.  But I didn't ever really get really frustrated, angry, or sad about it.  I just kind of went through the motions.   I remember my cat died.  I loved that cat, but I didn't even cry.   I never cried back then.

I never fought for what was right for me.  People pushed me around and I just let them because I thought I deserved it.  I would go along with things I didn't really want to go along with.  I wouldn't say things that I really wanted to say, because I was afraid.  But even the fear didn't really run that deep.  Again, since I knew I was never going to take any action, there wasn't that much to be afraid of.  It seems that fear runs a lot deeper once you actually start letting yourself take some risks.

I just got kind of dragged around by life.  Things were the way they were, and that's that.  No getting around it.  I kept waiting for a miracle to happen.  It never came.  I was always stuck in the same old rut.

My solution?  Drugs and alcohol.  My life was very gray.  Drugs and alcohol gave it color.  Finally, I was *alive!*  I had my first kiss on MDMA.  I was so drunk that I barely remember anything about that night, but I remember the kiss.  And all sorts of other things.  Socialization was easier, music sounded better, and everything just felt like it clicked.  But it was fleeting.  I always needed more and more, and I ended up having some really bad consequences due to my irresponsible use.

Life is funny, though.  I guess in the end a miracle did happen.  Things got so bad that life kind of knocked me out of my sleep.  I woke up one night after a bender and just felt something like the warmest embrace I had ever experienced.  I knew it... life is meaningful.  Life is precious.  Life is beautiful.  I felt *love*.

Things got so bad, I think, and so unsustainable, that I couldn't sit on the sidelines anymore.  It got too real.  Too visceral.  Finally I was engaged with life again.  Even if it was somewhat against my will.

But I didn't see something ugly, scary, or evil.  No.  What I saw was the most beautiful thing I could have ever imagined.

And that's life.

Since that night 7 years ago today, I haven't had a drink or drug.  And I haven't needed to.  Because life has become a real gift.

Sure I still have problems, absolutely, and sometimes I ask myself if it's all worth it.  Sometimes it sucks, yeah.  But now I really *own* the suck.  It's not just some "welp, life sucks, that's that" type of thing.  No.  It's some real shit.  I feel it *deeply.*  And somehow, in that depth, I see color again.  And even if life sucks, well... it's still life.  And that's something.  A big something.  And guess what?  You can fight to make it better.

So that's the thing.  Before, life was all gray, all boring, all monotonous and dull.  But by finally getting engaged with it, by owning my experience, by feeling the highs and lows, by opening myself up and fighting for what's in my heart... well, in doing that, I've been able to get in touch with a world that is so wonderfully bright and colorful.

It can be scary, certainly. If it weren't we'd all be doing it.  But sooner or later, I guess, one decides to take that leap.  I guess in my case it was kind of forced upon me.  Or maybe gifted.  Grace, if you will.

But since that time I've been taking leaps on my own volition.  Just taking little (sometimes big) risks  to follow my heart, and to be deeply involved in my journey.  As much as I can, I say what I want to say, I do what I want to do, and I love who I want to love.

I don't know guys.  But it's really a beautiful thing.

Thanks guys for letting me share.  Thank you all for being part of this community.  And best wishes to all of you.I don’t have much to say. I can’t contain my love. I feel warmth in every cell of my body. I wanted to share it, maybe to motivate someone or maybe just because I want to share

I LOVE YOU ALL 🥰You're infinite.

Unlimited

You have always existed and always willThis is what I’ve received during meditation after days of feeling stressed and low. realize that your feelings set your experiences.your feelings set your intentions.your intentions set your actions. Your actions set your manifestations which will set what you receive back.Don’t let illusions formed by the mind knock you off track. the universe doesn’t forget you. you will always receive things/people that matches your vibration,whether if it’s bad or good don’t forget you have supreme control over your self.My husband and I went swimming in the pool last night and he kept complaining about the mosquitoes.. He couldn't enjoy the stars, the beautiful water / air or any of it really because he was so focused on the bugs. 

I decided to float on my back - like the way you do when you're whole body is under the water including your ears but your eyes nose and face are above it to breathe / see (I always love this it's so peaceful) I was looking at the stars and feeling just grateful to be in that moment.. I even laughed to myself a little because as I was looking up I could see all the bugs flying by but they weren't bothering me because I had chosen to move to a place that they couldn't touch me. 

I shifted my perspective - instead of sitting up in the fray of mosquitoes where my husband was miserablely swatting at them and having a terrible time - I was simply watching them fly by.. Enjoying the beautiful clear night sky warm water & fresh air. 

It felt like a little light bulb moment for life in general - I can either choose to fight with, be annoyed by & let the pesky things that fly my way ruin my time - or I can remove myself from the fray, change my perspective and simply watch the pesks fly by.. Actually enjoy watching- truly appreciating that this is their world too but I don't have to be bothered by them if I choose not to be. Perhaps an example of live and let live? 

Or maybe an example of pesky thoughts? 
Law of attraction? 
Not sure what exactly this relates to but it felt like a realization you all would understand ❤for so long I tried to force myself to fit into the crowd, to be a typical “sorority” girl, to have “cool” people my age like me. and the more i tried to force that, the more it wouldn’t happen and the further my happiness would be. id become even more frustrated and further from connection to my higher self and making general deeper connections. i’ve realized that it’s okay to not fit in to the typical crowd, it’s okay to just do what makes me happy, it’s okay not to have many friends and not do what everyone else is doing. i just wanna do what makes me happy and i want to always be my most authentic self, and i want to surround myself with people who appreciate my most authentic self! i don’t have to fit into any category. i can just be me, and just being me is always enoughYou are more than enough. You are worth more than the gold and silver. You are blooming and blossoming into your destiny without even realizing it. Power and Love are your strength and hope. Fear not of the outside world, for you have conquered it already with Love.You have forgotten, But  It's time to remember you are the light. You are the unconditional love that you seek. 

You are worthy of feeling love right now as you are it.

 Nothing to attain nothing to achieve, you are already perfect in your form. 

You are the pure awareness not the label that is past onto you.

Feel the energy flow through you. You are connected but you are only connected because you are it, no distance needs to be travelled. 

The only blockage is you not remembering you are worthy of unconditional love.

Drop the guilt as you are perfectly imperfect you are forgiven right now. 

Feel the grace of the spirit.I went through a traumatic relationship which broke me down but l’ve been on a healing journey for 2 years now and l have so much peace now. I travel solo and do a lot of things including going out to eat by myself and l enjoy my own energy and company. People think l’m crazy l travel alone on my birthday to places but l find it really amazing. I feel safe in my own energy without anyone’s else energy throwing me off.

I know my discernment or spirit will tell me if someone who comes into my life is genuine or not but l worry sometimes this level of comfort might make me miss out on romantic opportunities but at the same time l might be dodging bullets because l always have a negative feeling about certain people l can’t shake off“Make your own Bible. Select and collect all the words and sentences that in all your readings have been to you like the blast of a trumpet.”  
― Ralph Waldo Emerson“You cannot find peace by avoiding life.”

Dont use the spiritual path to avoid life, use it to face life.1. You’re more intuitive
2. You’ve become more selfless
3. You feel happier more often
4. You’re not as easily triggered 
5. You judge people less & accept more
6. You see the beauty all around you
7. You feel connected to animals & natureSomething I know everyone needs to be reminded once in a while. Stay strong and know that the shortcomings/trials you may be facing right are temporary and will allow yourself to grow into the person you are meant to be.Try to calm your vibration Lovingly.happy valentines day to everyone who is reading this. Whether you are celebrating with a significant other or just yourself, remember you are worthy of love every day. You are worthy of a love that lasts, a love that does not cause you to compromise, a love that is secure, a love that you deserve. Cherish each other and most of all, cherish yourselves. 

Sending you all good energy and love.An interesting quote from Carl Jung which is extremely relevant in our modern times with Covid-19 dominating the media.We as humans couldn't understand that concept, mostly everything in the bible about "thou shall not" is all elitism garbage.

Jesus was trying to disseminate the concept of Oneness, and did not want to be worshipped.

Edit: these conversations are dope so keep em coming.  No viewpoint is to aggregous.

Edit 2: also a "Mystic" to me insinuates Jesus meditated, healed using his energy centers(charkas) all that good stuff.

Edit 3: https://www.lawofone.info/

Edit 4: The Ego is simply a mind made program that is running you, and pretending to BE you.  It is not autonomous, it doesn't have free will, it is just reacting to stimulus, and forcing you to give in to it's reactions and triggers.  

The Ego is a reflexive mechanism that COMMENTATES on your instincts, intuition, and Intentions.Have a great day and remember to be grateful!When I'm in conversation with someone I'm close to who "get's it", I feel my consciousness expand very quickly. It's like at the start of the conversation we're trying to put together puzzle pieces, and we can't quite get them to fit. As the conversation continues, we find a few pieces that go together. We realize we're talking about the same thing. At some point the pieces form a real image, and the words fit together more and more easily. As we see that we are both describing the same image, we become more aware of the unity of our experience. Fewer and fewer words are needed to communicate because it becomes a shared feeling. Finally, we sort of just look at each other and smile, knowing we've said everything that needs to be said. It's a beautiful experience.Does this mean anything and if so what?If something is meant for you, it will come to you. As long as you feed it positive energy, nothing and no one can prevent it from finding you, but you. Hang tight and avoid fueling feelings of doubt otherwise, they will create resistance.

[Be the part of our community >>> ManifestationValley](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source)That's all.  I'm just over here rocking to the rhythm.I've been seeing a lot of posts on this sub (and on other spirituality related subs) about this, and I think it's dangerous. I don't know if you'll agree or disagree with me, but here it is anyway. 

It seems to be a recurring topic to ask things like "I've been diagnosed with X mental illness, but could this mean I am opening my psyche?" or "I went through Y psychosis episode, is this a part of my awakening?" (Which is fine to ask). 

But it worries me that I've seen so many people reply that "yeah, you could have been misdiagnosed and it's actually your gifts coming to surface" (things like that). People... This is dangerous. Spirituality needs to stay on its lane and let science stay on its lane as well. Mental illness is a real, complex thing that has been studied by professionals for decades. It's not our place, as people on the internet that are not professionals and don't even know the person asking those questions to say their mental illness is not a mental illness. That the "demons" and "people" fabricated in their minds are actually real, that the neurosis is a sign of their "awakening". 

This is so, so dangerous. People can stop taking their meds because of comments like this. People may be in denial already and just want that little push into believing their doctor is full of crap. People may experience a decline in their mental health because of them. They may get hurt or worse. Those kinds of comments can do such harm, and I see too many of them. They shouldn't exist, and yet there they are. 

Again, mental illness is real and we have no business telling someone who has been diagnosed that their mental illness is nothing, that their experiences are not related to their on brains, but something spiritual. Mental. Illness. Is. Real.

Edited: I came back to reddit go 400+ upvotes and 72 comments, and I decided not to respond to any of them (because 1) there are too many and it would take me a long time to answer because I know I would keep writing essays over and over and 2) I feel like people would reply to my comment and this would never end). Thank you so much for the words of support! I did not expect this post to get that many at all (to be honest I was prepared to only get hate from this) and for sharing your experiences! Even though I didn't reply to any comment, I read all of them!. Also, by reading some of these comments I hope you understand what I'm saying. Some people don't even seem to believe that menta health is real... This is very concerning. Thank you again!With everything that's going on in your life right now, please remember, this too shall pass!

You are loved and you are strong.The person reading this - I hope you not only accept yourself but cherish and celebrate yourself for who you are, for your flaws and not despite of them. You are an amazing person.Hello everybody, how's your day going?

This is my first time making a post here, and i would like to address something which i have seen in quite many posts and comments here on this subreddit.

I know we are all trying to be a better person, be less egoistic, some of us wants to help the world to be a better place to live for our next generation (can't say all people do cause it's likely there are people who don't want that). ***To get to the point, which you may have guessed from the title is.You are  neither better nor worse than people who aren't spiritual and are driven by consumption of this era, or driven by ego. I know we all have freedom to do whatever we want, but for your sake. Don't write comments or posts where you judge non spiritual people or people you see on social media/irl. For me it seems some people here do it and they do it in a way that looks like it was doing of their ego.***

We all have our own path to self realization, not everyone does have to came to this realization right now, or in this life...

If you believe in the law that says that we only experience ourselves and our version of the reality, and you see simply said "bad" people (they are not bad, just wanted to make the explanation shorter) , just stop and think about yourself, why is that you see so many of these. Maybe you will find something in yourself that needs to be changed.

&#x200B;

Thank you for your time if you read the whole post. I may be wrong, and if you think i am i will be glad to read your opinion about this. Just keep in mind, don't be hateful to other people and by that don't be hateful to yourself :)

Have a nice day/morning/evening/sleep,

farren

&#x200B;

EDIT: Corrected mistakes

EDIT:  I recommend reading this comment, clarifying what this post is about, it may give you another way to look at this thing. And please if you want to give me an award, give it to him/her, he/she deserves it a lot more:[https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/k8dg7y/dont\_put\_yourself\_above\_nonspiritual\_people/geygvzj?utm\_source=share&utm\_medium=web2x&context=3](https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/k8dg7y/dont_put_yourself_above_nonspiritual_people/geygvzj?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3)I just wanted to share. A few days ago I had a very profound interaction with my God. I worship Demeter, the Greek Goddess.  I channeled her for two hours. She said I took things too seriously and didn’t laugh enough. She also said a lot of things I did not know and could not have known, that were later proved to be true, but that’s another post. 

Anyway. She told me to pull more pranks and tell more jokes.  So today I got a funny garden gnome and hid it. I watched it for a while and this little kid came up, totally enthralled by it. She seemed to think it was the best, funniest thing! 

It’s the closest I’ve felt to god in a long time.

Edit: thank you so much everyone! It really cheers and thrills me to see all your responses. And thanks so much for the awards, I’ve never been given one before :)Why to stop eating meat.

1. Studies of emotion in pigs reveal that they are sensitive and complex animals. Pigs exhibit emotional contagion, a capacity thought to be the basis for empathy, or the ability to feel the emotional state of another.

2. The literature on emotions in cows and other farmed animals is substantial and confirms that they experience a wide range of emotions and that some of those responses are quite complex. Basic emotions are the building blocks of more complex and sophisticated abilities.

Those are just two examples.

What are emotions?
They are chemical reactions in a body.

So when the cow or a pig is feeling fear ,  body produces specific chemical reactions.

Now what do u think you are eating when you are eating them?

Is it spirtual to help so some life produces faster in bigger quantities just so u can kill it.

Spiritual question.

Why people think a human life is more worth then any other life on this planet?

Life is Life no mather in what form has come to this world.## Imagine that you are going on a mountain climbing adventure. It’s been your dream ever since you were a child to see the summit of this particular mountain, so you’re deeply sentimental and very excited to set out on your journey.

In order to help you on your trek, you carry a backpack containing supplies.  You’re very confident that your supplies will get you to the top of the mountain safely because you’ve been packing for a long time.

You actually started packing wayyyyyyyyyy back when you were just a kid, so it contains literally everything you could ever need – every single one of the tools that got you to where you are today. You know without looking that nothing could possibly be missing, so you tell yourself there’s no need to check it twice.

You set off on your hiking trip.

## At the beginning of the trek, the backpack doesn’t feel too heavy. You’re used to carrying it around with you all the time, so you hardly notice it. But after a few meters of elevation, it starts to feel heavier than it did while you were walking around in more familiar territory.

Determined to make it to your goal, you keep going. You chug along, one step at a time, but you notice your pace becoming slower and slower as you grow weary.

The weight of your backpack starts causing your knees to buckle every time you trip or stumble over the smallest pebble. You become increasingly more afraid of losing your footing. The fear slows you down even more.

Soon you notice that other hikers seem to be passing you from all directions. There is no noticeable difference in the *size* of the backpacks they are carrying, but somehow, they seem to be finding the journey much easier than you do.

## You start to wonder if you’re really cut out for this journey. You start to question your self-worth… “maybe I’m just not good enough”, “everyone else is just better at this than I am”, “these dreams aren’t realistic for me”…

Eventually, you find a bench along the path and decide to take a break. You’re still miles away from your desired destination, but you’re thinking of turning around and heading back. You tell yourself, it might be best to just stay on flat ground, where things are more familiar…you’re more *comfortable*.

”That’s where I fit in.” You tell yourself, “Maybe I’m just not built for hiking.”

At that moment, you see another hiker coming up the mountain towards you – he’s breezing up the mountain… basically skipping...

You feel like you’re on your last calorie and he hasn’t even broken a sweat yet?! How is that possible? Does he have a secret JET PACK on the bottom of his shoes or what?!

“How are you doing this so effortlessly?!" you ask him as he passes.

“POSITIVE THINKING!” He yells as he zooms past you, “It’s like a secret jet pack – and that’s really all there is to it!!!”

…you feel a slight breeze on your cheek as he leaves you in his dust.

“OF COURSE!” You think to yourself, “I’ve been complaining about my backpack since I left the car park, my negativity is weighing me down!!! If I just focus on something else, maybe it won’t be so bad!”

## So with new motivation, you set off on your journey again. This time you make a commitment to yourself to deliberately maintain a more positive attitude. No matter what you actually feel.

“This is going to be easy peasy!” You tell yourself as you set off but it starts to feel hard again almost immediately.

“I’m making lemonade with these lemons!” You cry through clenched teeth “Making lemonade, baby!”

”Ain’t no pain here…nope…I’m just cruising up this mountain!” You say as you force yourself to pick up the pace.

“What a breeeeeezzzeee!!” You strain between short breaths.

”I am soooooooooooooo happpy!” You cry through your pain.

## You start to feel a tiny bit better about your situation, but not much. The pain is still there. The backpack is still heavy. .

.

.

A pebble catches your big toe

.

.

.

You go tumbling

.

.

.

Rolling

.

.

.

All the way down the mountain

.

.

.

## Laying at the bottom of the mountain, looking up at all the hard work and effort you just annihilated…a horrible feeling creeps over you. You really ARE a failure. Your suspicions are confirmed. You’re just not cut out for this.

Defeated, you reach for your backpack…you’re ready to give up.

All of the contents are STREWN all across the ground, so you start gathering up all the spilled pieces. First, your attention goes to the most important things first: the tent, your cell phone, car keys, your water bottle…

\*\*fewf…\*What a relief that those things are still here.

Then you notice…  a baseball bat?? A PS2??? Your (very large) pet rock from when you were 6???!

What the hell…

## You find yourself standing in the midst of an enormous heap of useless nonsense...and it finally becomes clear to you why your journey was so much more difficult than anyone else’s.

You were not struggling to get up the mountain because you were less capable. Your journey was more difficult because your backpack was too heavy… & no amount of positive thinking would have changed that.

## You were carrying around kilos and kilos of unnecessary dead weight that a past version of you put in your backpack because they thought you might need it again in the future.

🪨Your giant pet rock made sure you were never lonely, so you packed it into your backpack when you were 4.

⚾ Your baseball bat helped you feel like a winner back when you played in the little league, so you packed it into your backpack when you were 8.

🎮 Your PS2 helped you escape chaos when your parents were going through their divorce, so you packed it when you were 11.

Even though these things no longer serve you as an adult, you were still walking around with all of them. You didn’t even think to look before you set off on your journey

…that is until life threw you down the mountain.

## The mountain in this analogy is your life dreams. Your subconscious mind is your backpack. The unnecessary deadweight you are carrying around is your trauma.

and that, my friend, is why no amount of positive thinking can help you manifest your dreams unless you first unpack your backpack.

## Positive thinking is only helpful once you’ve gotten rid of the deadweight.

[Read more ](https://artof-manifestation.com/manifestation-blog)We are conditioned to feel guilty about not doing well in school. Not being in a relationship. Not having a job. Not learning something fast enough. Not getting married. Not having kids. Not being social. Not being uncomfortably outgoing. Not being clever. Not being like everyone else. Not being enough. The list goes on. 

I know there are many good things to life, but there are also certain things that feel like a burden such as the ones mentioned above, at least in my case. But regardless, we must keep going. What else can we do. Just know in your heart that you are perfect despite these things.Life is a game, and we take it too seriously. Get too stressed out. Too anxious about our inevitable death, when death is merely an illusion in itself. We are the universe having a human experience, and the universe which loving, and conscious is exactly understands this well. 

The universe has became self aware, hence why life arose, and this beautiful planet is here. I don’t mean everything is beautiful as far as humanity because we certainly are a dualistic species as far as “ negativity and positivity “...  but when it comes to the beauty of nature, the amazing blue sky ( which could of been black all the time, or red or another dark color ) the blue ocean, all living creatures that embody it, the air that we breathe that keeps us alive, all things we should be grateful for and think damn things didn’t have to be this way but hey, we got lucky. 

It’s easy to get down and out, and have anxiety as it is only natural ( survival instincts ), but I think we finally are escaping our old primal ways of survival survive survive, and more in the perspective of, what can I give to the world that gave me life. How can I make someone else happy. How can I give back to the universe and this earth which has brought me into existence. 

when you truly realize that life is a game, and we can play it how we wish.. death doesn’t exist anymore. Just the time you have. It’s like getting on a roller coaster and waiting to get to the end. No, your wanting to experience the ride, just as life should be. Don’t think about the end, think about the amazing journey we are on right now as a people and this experience that we technically didn’t have to have, but here we are :)Whatever you are going through, just hold on. It is temporary. Focus on loving yourself as you can never love people by not fixing yourself first and foremost. just relaxx......Don't waste your energy trying to convince those who are deliberately trying to misunderstand you. Some people are so blinded by their fear based programs and ego driven beliefs that they become absolutely close minded. 

Generational gap is another thing that comes in the way, years of conditioning puts people inside a box and when they don't have any awareness it becomes next to impossible to bring a change in their consciousness, as it's an inside job. You can't force higher consciousness on someone, it blooms from within through deep inner work and unraveling the layers of your own ego. 

When you express your true self a lot of people get offended, they can even blame you for their own triggers. The path of being true to yourself means the path of being a mirror, it's not a path of comforting others but the absolute opposite of that. You show people what they've been running away from, you make them question their own existence and that's uncomfortable af for a lot of people. 

Accountability is not something that people are a fan of, on the contrary we have been conditioned to be really good in pointing fingers at others but that makes us more and more fake and ignorant. Never drift off from your true self just to make others uncomfortable, your mere existence brings a huge shift in the collective consciousness when you stay true to yourself. Dare to be a real soul in this fake world 

It's best to share your energy with people who are open minded and it's not even about convincing others, it's just about sharing your higher consciousness with others so that a spark is created in their spirit and they can embark on their own journey towards awakening.

*Being considered "crazy" by those who are still victims of cultural conditioning is a compliment*

– Jason Hairston

*You can lead a horse to water, 
but you can’t make it drink*Yes you !!! I love you and I am so proud of who you are today !!The thought draws me towards the spiritual, metaphysical and divine, even though I'm in a skepitcal/rational phase atm where I question my spiritual beliefs. I get goosebumps as I think about it. Existence is so trippy like wtf dude, it's like a gigantic dream.Frustrated because you're trying to find yourself and can't? Do the opposite, see if you can lose yourself.

Pushing away negative feelings? Try the opposite and welcome them, see if you can hold onto them.

Desperate to understand? Instead, feel and enjoy the bewilderment and mystery.

Trying hard to be a good meditator? Instead, let the mind run and be the worst meditator ever.

Trying to lose yourself? Instead, see if it's possible to add anything to yourself.

Trying to be happy? Instead, give yourself permission to be unhappy.

&#x200B;

Quite often on the journey, we hear teachings or experiences, and our minds conceptualize or create a goal around them.

When we look at the opposite of a teaching or impulse, we can balance the energies and learn to lay our story down.**You must get serious about your life right now, not later, not tomorrow, now. Take what you know and start your practice, learning along the way. The sooner you start your journey, the happier you'll be. Don't let time cover you in mediocrity. Do your greatest work, and don't feel guilty.**Today would of been my moms 78th birthday. 
The last 3 patients I've dealt with at work today all had the same first name as her. Happy birthday Mom ❤


Edit : First time poster, what a wonderful kind bunch you are, thank you ❤This is NOT about justifying our wrongdoings (you are still acknowledging that your behavior was not right), but rather its about self improvement and self empowerment which is much more effective. This will make you change for the better *without the loss of self esteem*.

Good luck 👍***update*** 
I’ve woken up this morning to so many loving messages, you’ve all honestly reduced me to tears. Thank you so much! 
I would really love to reply to all your comments as you’ve all taken the time out of your days to send such love to me. Please bare with me, I’m still not doing great and I’m just trying to save all my energy. Just please know I’m so thankful and I really feel at home on the subreddit 💕”



I’m 25 and lost my Dad in January, I helped him raise my younger sister since I was 12 so when he passed away she needed somewhere to live for 8 months before she went to university. 

Well my boyfriend of 3+ years didn’t want her to live with us so I had to make the decision between him and her so I chose her because she needed me more. 

I’ve done so much healing in these 8 months, I’ve had a nervous breakdown, slept on a couch for 5 months due to having no where to live and I’ve really grown as a person and found my spirituality in these last couple months. 

However I’ve just dropped her off at university today and I’m struggling, I’ve come home to a empty house and everything is hitting me again. 
I don’t want to fall back into that dark place again so please help me to heal.Nobody.  Ever.  Not under any circumstance.

You are not better than someone because you are progressive and they are not.  You are not better than them because you are open-minded and they are not.  You are not better than them because they support Trump.  You are not better than them because you perceive them as ignorant.

You are not better than them because you are not a snowflake. You are not better than them because you have a stronger work ethic.  You are not better than them because of your achievements.  You are not better than them because of whatever difficulties you have faced that they haven't.

You are not better than them because they are black.  You are not better than them because they are white.  You are not better than them because they are racists.  You are not better than them because they are bigots.

You are not better than them because they have made mistakes.

You are not better than them because you are more "spiritual".

You are not better than them because they are "wrong" and you are "right".

You are not better than them even if they have done horrible things.

Even Adolf Hitler.  You are not better than him.  You (hopefully) have been a less destructive force in the world, but so what?  You are just a human being, capable of as much evil as him.  And what would you have done had you caught hold of him?  Tortured him? Spat on him?  Made him suffer?  So then, are you really any better?

Life is a complicated affair.  We never know exactly what is going on in another person's head and heart.  It is so simple to sit on the sidelines and say "Me?  I would *never* do that".  But you have not walked in that person's shoes.  You have not lived their journey.  You have no idea what you would have done in their situation.

It is so easy to judge.

This judgement, this feeling that "I am better" somehow, is the root of so much of humanity's suffering.  Firstly, on the macro scale.  There is so much division... the history of humanity has been one of conflict and war.  How can you claim to be better than the racist?  So you accuse the racist of holding hatred and arrogance in his heart, while you yourself do the very same thing?  It doesn't mean the racist is right, but it does mean that we must lead by example.  Otherwise, you are a hypocrite.

We are a society of hypocrites.

And on the micro scale, we suffer, too.  As long as we hold on this notion that we are somehow superior to others, we will always be averse to people.  We will hold bitterness, rejection, and hatred in our heart.  And who suffers the most for this?  The individual.  You.

With acceptance, with humility, comes peace.  And with peace comes love.  And with love, joy.It so weird but sometimes like right now. When I think of my family or friends, my little doggy I just cry because I love them all so much. I’m so happy I have them. It’s confusing because I’m not sad just filled with love. I wish I could give them more, words aren’t enough to express how much they all mean to me.

THANK YOU FOR THE AWARDS ❤️❤️Starting this moment decide to live your life mindfully and not mindlessly. Discover yourself, who you really are and not what you are expected to be by the society. Connect with your inner self who is full of love, joy and excitement and does not have dull feelings of sadness, frustration, fear, irritation, regret, guilt, anger and any emotions that do not serve the inner/real you. Set your soul/heart free from your mind. Do what you want to do without fear of judgment, fear or unknown, fear of the future, fear of anything period. You will find joy in breaking the shakles of indecisiveness, do what your heart says every day, then every hour then every minute. That is what life truly is. It the sweetest gift that nature has bestowed on us. Let’s make the best use of it. Live your life fully, break the shakles of your mind, take the reins of your life in your hands and live how your soul really wants to live it. Love you all beautiful souls and Bless you all.  #love #happiness #mindfulness #joy #lifeThis is something I've had in my mind for years now, and have come to find a large amount of people have never considered this at all. I find it's especially important to keep in mind wherever bullying is concerned.that's where the real power ishappiness was always about embracing the person you were becoming. One day, you will understand that happiness was always about learning how to live with yourself, that your happiness was never in the hands of others. It was al ways about you. It was always about you.

r/ManifestationValley (Join us here for more)Synchronicities are great.Thank you all so much for everything I will love you all until I die. You are beautiful no matter what. You are gorgeous. I love you all more than anything. You are forever and ever loved. You are great and it’s not just me that loves you. It’s your friends. Your family. The entire universe. Be grateful that you are still alive. that you are supported by oxygen,connections and energy .You are always in my heart no matter what. I love you and may the universe continue letting you wake up.Continue giving you signs. Life is a journey it’s okay to feel lost. Your supposed to feel lost. Embrace that feeling. May you continue to receive more blessings as long as you keep yourself open to it. I love you. Good dayYou create your own reality

Not one thing in your life was NOT created by you.

You are responsible for your emotions, your beliefs, your thoughts in fact YOU create it. 

You attract what you are, If you vibrate love and compassion this will manifest towards you. 

You can change the old reality within you, with just your thoughts or intentions. 

The situations you put yourself in is all controlled by you, wether it is good OR bad. 

Nothing exist independently of yourself, you create everything in YOUR reality, in YOUR experience. 

You are allowed to get up & change who you are.. laugh more, change your style, be more confident. Quit that job that you do not like, leave that toxic relationship that does not serve you anymore.

We don’t have to be stuck in fear, fear is FAKE it’s a thought that we create, danger is what’s real don’t hold yourself back be more confident. 

We have the power to create it all.


EDIT: Read through comments before saying your opinion on it your answer may be there. Thank you for the comments I appreciate it.Anyone who is reading this, you are special, you are in this world for a reason. Never give up on your dream 💖💖💖I am 20 years old. About three years ago I had a life changing accident that has left me with chronic pain every day since. That’s over 1400 days of constant pain now. At my worst of times I was suicidal, I would think about my body hanging from a tree with a noose around my neck I really just wanted it to end. Not going to lie, sometimes I still do. I met my soul mate last year and she has really helped my suicidal tendencies. Here’s my point, I remember one day I was really trying so hard to find a positive thing that day, something that is worth living for. I looked at the sky, it was cloudless and it’s natural beautiful blue colour. I remember writing in my journal that day “Today pain was the colour blue”. It isn’t much, but I still have my eyesight, I can still watch my girlfriend smile and hear her laugh. I can see the pretty colours all around me. I cannot do anything about my pain and it’s not going away any time soon, but there is always something beautiful even when there is always something dark and unforgiving. This is for anybody who suffers daily. I am not talking about being lonely or mild anxiety suffering I am talking about people who wake up some days and wish it was all over. You always have something, even when you think you have nothing. Positivity is a choice, it may be hard some days but none the less you can make that choice whenever you want. May you all have a wonderful day, namaste 💜LoveI saw this quote from a YouTube video and I really feel like it is an amazing explanation.

Edit: Thank you u/doesntmeanathing for saying the real origination of this quote. Unfortunately you cannot edit titles but this quote is actually from French Philosopher Pierre Teilhard de Chardin.Hello guys,
I have been on a journey for the last year, and I have had profound results with the following practices. I’d like to share some simple exercises you may try if you feel like it that I found to be helpful:

Cold Showers - if you can simply rest as awareness of your mind and body and surrender to whatever sensations you feel or thoughts that appear in your mind, you find yourself simply experiencing whatever it may bring you. This is the act of surrendering to an experienced that is also very calming to your mind. Start with warm water and end with the coldest tap setting at the last 1-2 minutes of your shower.

Awareness of the breath - This is a simple exercise that will not only calm you down but also bring you into the present moment / non doership: Breath in though your heart chakra and exhale through the third eye, breathe in through the third eye, and exhale through the heart chakra. Make these breaths from the naval/belly button and if you are feeling more confident, add the visualization of white light. Our ancestors knew about the power of breathing. Not only is it breathing, but a sacred communion with God. Be grateful for your breathing when you are able to.

Who Am I - whenever you find yourself suffering, ask yourself who you are and who is suffering in this moment. Ask yourself what is lacking and where you are misperceiving the present moment. If your ego decides to come up with an answer,, be playful and curious and inquire deeper into what is shown to you, it may even make you giggle. Ask this question with genuine curiosity and keep asking yourself. If no answer arises, let the silence answer your question.

Meditation - This seems pretty obvious but some people only keep quiet during a “real meditation” and never bring the practice into their daily routine. The same way you notice your thoughts arise during a meditation and fall away after, implement that into every moment you experience. Let your mind have at it, but don’t attach to any though or emotion. This may be challenging at first but don’t give up, love yourself by being patient and attentive to whatever is being experienced.

Mind Observation - Let your mind attack you, and anything else it wants to and don’t take it personally. When you resist your mind attacking you and others, you are ultimately resisting parts of yourself that at asking for attention through unconventional means. For example “me driving down the road smiling, mind says, you are so fucking terrible at driving you are stupid too just die” instead of defending myself by saying that those things are not true, I simply see the thought and feel whatever emotion that may bring to me and investigate where that thought came from without taking it as a personal attack. It’s like a little kid coming up to you and saying your hair is goofy. No offense taken, it is simply a thought. Thoughts are non essential to your being. When you go to sleep at night, you don’t take anything with you. What is the thing that is actually essential to you?

Shadow Work Polarization - When doing shadow work, intensify a “negative” emotion you feel towards yourself, someone, or a situation until you are fully feeling it. Now sit with the feeling and with all your heart, express gratitude towards that. I recommend putting your hands in prayer at your heart chakra and breathing In white light while feeling it. If the emotional feels like a flood gate, open your heart and let the tears flow if they are there. While crying, express gratitude, while angry, express gratitude, while guilty, express gratitude. Gratitude is the match in the dark room. It illuminates the shadows in the room to show you that there are no shadows.

Night Review - Before falling asleep, see what you did today and what you could have done better. For what you fell short on, express gratitude and say a prayer thanking the Source for a chance to improve yourself and to further polarize positively towards love / light. For what you did that made you feel good, express extra gratitude towards that.

Morning 2 Minute - When the alarm goes off, place hands over your heart chakra and express gratitude for waking up, set your intention for a happy day and to try your best, express gratitude.

Daily Mantra - Say these Reiki Principles  EVERYDAY with your hands in prayer at the Heart Chakra and feel it within that heart center. This will reprogram your subconscious mind to be in alignment with your true nature / the higher self. “Just for today, I will not anger, I will not worry, I will work honestly, I will be grateful, and I will be kind to all beings” 
 
Alternative Mantra - This is from the 4 agreements, a wonderful book I highly recommend it. “1) I am impeccable with my word. 2) I don’t take things personally. 3) I don’t make assumptions. 4) I always try my best.

To my Divine Masculine, embody the King Energy, and be the King you truly are. Be a warrior, be a king, be emotional, be angry, be sad, allow yourself to feel what needs to be released to make room for royalty. Forgive your mother and father for their shortcomings, and forgive yourself for allowing it to make you weak.

To my Divine Feminine, embody the Queen Energy, and be the Queen you truly are. Be assertive, stand up for yourself, and set your boundaries. You are the Divine mother, the great creator, the sacred child bearer, forgive your mother and father for their shortcomings, and forgive yourself for allowing it to make you resentful. 

My blessed selves, I love you all. May this help whoever it needs to and guide whoever it does.

Love and light, 

Love AlecJesus was not a christian

Krishna was not a hindu

Rumi was not a muslim

Guru Nanak was not a sikh


True mystics belong to no religion. Go straight to the source for their wisdom: Listen to their words only. Ignore the dogma which arose from the cults that followed.Hello friends,
If in the case you are feeling down today, confused, on feeling a bit heavy from the weight of the world, you are not alone. You are incredible and attractive and everything you desire is with you already. It’s just a matter of coming into alignment with those desires through your thoughts and acting in accordance as if you already have attained that desire. You have the power to create any reality you want to. I believe in you. Now it’s just you that has to believe in you too. 

Sending you so much love and light,
The Cosmic Butterfly (on YouTube) 🪐🦋hi, i’m 20 years old and in the past few months i’ve felt really drained and exhausted by social media. i deleted snapchat, instagram and twitter, the ones i used to sit HOURS on my phone scrolling through. It’s been about a month and i realized that all theses apps r trying to sell me stuff, whether it’s ideas, the news, or actual items. 

I’ve been on twitter since i was in 6th grade lmao and i loved that app. But now it feels like everyone is so negative on there, under every viral tweet there always has to be someone saying something negative or rude, most viral tweets are just people shoving their opinions on what they think is right and whats wrong at you. I remember getting angry seeing tweets that i didn’t agree with and it can be easy to get caught up in needing to reply to others to defend your point of view but i’ve realized that it doesn’t matter and their opinions aren’t personal. Also the obsession with having to post what you’re eating, doing, feeling, etc got a lot because i constantly found myself reaching for my phone every time i had a funny thought or an idea.

in my one month without social media, i’ve gained more confidence, i’ve been able to accept myself more instead of resisting what is. I’ve been spending more time outside, which has been the most fun part, i’ve been playing basketball and learning a new skill, how to skateboard, i feel good about life again. I don’t mean to be dramatic but it feels great to live life without constantly caring about what others say, think, or having everyone’s opinions shoved at you, it’s liberating in a way. 

Now every time i go on twitter and see the trending page, I literally don’t care, in my head i’m like “why does this matter to me”. i think social media can really blur the line on what is important to us, it gives us a false sense of what we should believe in based on what is popular/trending. 

that’s what i’ve learned so far. lastly i recommend everyone to go on a social media cleanse(if u want to ofc) :)I love Alan watts, he was a big part of my spiritual journey and he had created a new view on life for me to look through, listening to his teachings and lectures are really calming after a stressful day especially the ones with calming music behind it, in my opinion he speaks all the truth.This not a happy, high-vibrational post. 
I am truly struggling. Ever since my "awakening" about a year ago, life seems pointless.

Buying groceries is pointless.
Working 40-50 hours a week just to earn fake money to give to invisible people so I can have a place to live and food to eat is pointless.
Day-to-day life just seems so pointless, now that i know there is so much more. 

I know this is a flawed perspective, I would love to hear what you guys have to say.Last night I was reminded of the importance of having good friends, and I was talking to them about the current world events and how I personally believe there is a lot of hidden agendas and how the world is bound to change.

I then got into my experience with oneness and my friends were listening, but then as sometimes happens, when I talk about my experience I cry a lot, because talking about it makes me feel like I'm experiencing it again.

They didn't laugh at me, in fact they confessed they experienced something profound not so long ago.

We are all connected and as you raise your frequency you realize you end up with people who vibe with you.

If you are alone, don't worry, good people will come to your life, they will feel more than friends, they will become your family.

I am really happy, and so will you. I promise.I just want to give a warm virtual hug to everyone especially if you feel lonely.
This journey can be tough and it gets painfully lonely sometimes.
I can now feel and watch my loneliness from a different place. I feel it and understand it, but do not become it and it passes faster than how it used to, making me realize my efforts to discover the divine truth are working. 
Wrap your arms around yourself! And squeeze!"Just as you can’t see through the surface of a lake unless it is still, you can’t look deeper into your being when your mind is disturbed by thoughts"

Sending you all love and light today!! I love you all <31. I am so happy and grateful for the
life I have.
2. I am beyond blessed that I woke up today, many did not have this privilege
3. Thank You for giving me another chance to make my life better today.
4. I am so grateful for all the people that I have in my life.
5. I am so grateful for this loving beautiful, healthy body I have; that continues to get stronger everyday. 
6. I am so thankful that the Universe is SO working for my greater good.

Don't forget to upvote post, if you liked it.

Source >>>  r/ManifestationValley ( Join Us Here )Just remember it’s been said that it’s no measure of health to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society. 

I will elaborate on that and say then it’s no measure of success to be well adjusted to a profoundly sick society either.

So do things that appease you and bring joy to your own heart, not the appeasement of others. Live life at your own pace. Not the pace of society. 

Now breathe annnnnd relax :)The entire world is going through a huge transitional period right now. Consciousness is adapting right now, and these changes are *not* easy by any stretch of the imagination. 

Almost everyone I know IRL has dealt with some sort of rough patch or obstacle in the last few years. I know multiple friends who have died in the last few years, one of my friends committed suicide at the beginning of the pandemic. Things are rough for *everyone* right now. 

To feel a bit crazy, to feel a bit lost, deluded, disconnected, outside of your normal self, during this time period is **completely normal** and I'm not surprised that people on a spirituality sub tend to have out of body experiences. Who would have thought? 

Even if you just begin to dabble in spiritual texts like the Bhagavad Gita or anything of the sort, removing your attachment from your human identity and becoming connected to your spirit body or your multi-layered conscious **Self** is a completely normal thing. It's not mental illness. 

There's a great quote that I picked up from a homeless guy I was talking to one time (homeless people usually have some of the best insight). I'm paraphrasing: "Becoming spiritual in the modern world is like trying to grow a flower in the snow." And it's true. It's difficult to do. Modern institutions have a way of tossing out people who don't fit the mold of greed based consciousness, they become othered very quickly in our fast paced technological world. I would argue that simply living in modern day society is enough to make you feel ill - the way people treat the planet and each other, the way many are led by greed and selfishness. 

People are struggling right now, and that is *okay.* Growth does not come easy. We need to be there for each other. If you need to seek help from someone you trust, please do so, but nobody deserves to be shamed or feel guilty for the spiritual journey that they are on. Shame and guilt are extremely low vibrational states, like moving through sludge - it's not a good place to be. 

**Let's uplift each other more and begin to understand our collective and individual struggles we all face right now. At the end of the day, I believe that we are a part of one consciousness, which is doing work on all of us right now.**

**Treat others, even those you don't agree with, with dignity, respect, and an open heart. Bless everyone.**

Edit: It looks like it's now deleted, but my title was referencing [this post](https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/qmtnix/it_feels_like_80_of_this_sub_has_mental_illness/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share).Don't attack me tho, I'm not enlightened and I know it.I've been through a lot of shit in my life, crazy childhood trauma and adulthood mental health struggles (obviously). At this point on my healing journey (therapy, nature, building and basking in genuine relationships, mindfulness, spiritual/psych education) I have realized the power of just BEING. To me that means letting go and accepting all that was, is and will be, with a calm mind and an open soul. Letting go of the burdens of pain and forgiving the people that have hurt you (they were obviously suffering), letting go of expectations of life being a certain way, letting go of attaching yourself to someone/something else making you happy. Embracing the uncertainty of this world and accepting that we have no control. Being mindful of what you have the gift of experiencing every day (smells, tastes, joys, sights, touches) and remaining grateful for the ability to do so. I guess I've just hit a very balanced place within myself in the past week (after many years of trying to arrive there) and it feels amazing. I feel free, I feel like I'm home. I'm also open and accepting of the possibility of this energy changing and me once again struggling with recentering myself. Life ebbs and flows and all we can do is adapt, accept and dance with it. We all absolutely have the capacity for reaching this place. Just BEING is the wisdom of ages and the only true way to peace. Bless all of you on your spiritual journeys and may the universe guide and protect you 🙏Thank you 🙏🏿My mom sadly lost her fight with cancer in mid October. My family is still devastated; we are a small, tight-knit family and mom was very healthy before she was diagnosed in March. In the midst of the pandemic and all the stress of this year, watching my mom get sick was an absolute nightmare. It all happened very fast and we are still struggling without her.

I had a particularly bad day yesterday. I got into an argument with my husband, and then I learned that my brother is returning to his workplace in person this week, putting him at great risk for covid. I broke down and cried because I wished that I could just call my mom up and tell her about my problems and get her advice.

I fell asleep on the couch late last night and began having a dream that I was back in my childhood home, where my dad still lives today. It was nighttime in the dream and most of the lights in the house were off, and both my mom and dad were home and upstairs. I had completely forgotten that mom had passed away in this dream. I was downstairs, and there were lots of random people going in and out of the house and I kept thinking, "these strangers shouldn't be here, what are they doing here? Do they think this is a party? What if they get someone sick?" I started to get upset and wondered if I was the one who somehow invited them, and realized that having them over was probably a huge mistake.

I turned to leave the kitchen to walk into the dark dining room when I saw her. She was walking towards me, from the other entrance of the dining room across the other side, looking right at me, happy to see me. She was wearing a white sleeping shirt and PJ pants, she looked exactly like she would when we would stay up late and talk in the kitchen. She walked right up to me and outstretched her arms and hugged me, and I hugged back. It really felt like her; I could feel her collarbones and her hair on my face and my hands on her back. She was always a very very petite, kinda boney woman so this was very vivid. Even in this part of the dream, I didn't remember that she had passed away. It just felt like a hug from my mom.

Then I woke up. I sat up on the couch and digested what happened for a few minutes, and then broke down crying. I think that really might have been her, hugging me, telling me its going to be okay.

EDIT- Thank you all so much for your kind words and your stories about your loved ones who you dreamed about. My mom was and will always be the sweetest, kindest most understanding person; the way she always approached any problem with kindess and optimism was like the way lightning searches for the ground...it just came so naturally to her, kindness was her go-to answer for everything. So all of your kind words really embody her spirit <3 I hope I dream about her again one day soon.“Growth is painful. Change is painful. But nothing is as painful as staying stuck somewhere you don't belong.” ~Mandy Hale

Not sure if anyone else has been feeling this lately but I know I’ve been experiencing a very strong need to make time for myself. It’s not like I don’t like being around people, it’s more so even if I have the opportunity to see anyone for some reason I feel like my energy needs to be extremely protected right now. 

I’ve been sensing that any sort of distribution of my energy doesn’t necessarily harm me but for whatever reason I am feeling an extreme need to be by myself and work on myself as I invest more of my resources into my own well-being. I know sometimes people say that this is a sign of depression, but the other areas of my life do not reflect that, so I wanted to reach out to this community because I know I’m not alone in this journey. It’s more so that everything else almost seems pointless—absorbing myself with the world’s drama as well as other people’s drama. 

Simply wondering if anyone else there is feeling hyper sensitive to shifting energies, and feeling the need to just take an extra amount of “me time” lately.

I read a lot of the feedback I received about the post I made talking about whatever struggles you guys are facing, and I feel like this was echoed a lot in that. I think we all are just trying to find people that want to grow and continue to learn about themselves and life. I think a lot of us are just sick of stagnation and at this time, taking the extra amount of time to work on ourselves is what feels right. 

Sending you all SO much love and positive energy,

Vanessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)So much advice and articles written about Twin Flames yet so little advice on how people should actually have healthy relationships especially from 'enlightened' people. 

The Twin Flame concept has become so popular that it is now a trend, it has been commercialized. Twin Flame readings, Twin flame tarots, twin flame oracles, so much that everyone wants to be part of the 'wave' 

Let relationships just be relationships without the need to attach concepts.  It doesn't add or subtract anything to the dynamics of the relationship. 

Back in the day, people met, married, lived together and had healthy relationships without the whole 'Twin Flame' drama. 

People also broke up and rejected each other without spiritual or metaphysical explanations. They did so because it wasn't working out, met other people or wanted something different. 

No one owes anyone a relationship, please don't chase people who don't want you or people who don't want to be chased. Respect yourself and respect people's boundaries. 

Relationships are mutual and consensual, stop being in one sided relationships or trying to force people to finally 'see you' because they are your 'Twin Flame'.

Don't go the extra mile for someone who can't even cross the road to see you. 

Accept when a relationship is over and deal with the facts presented to you at the moment. 

Relationships require love, trust, commitment, responsibility, accountability and if a person is not doing things which bring balance and harmony to relationship, then they need to go.

Don't justify toxic behaviors or shady behaviors in relationships because they are your 'Twin Flame'. If someone is not conducting themselves in an honorable manner, they need to go and you need to step away.

Learn to move on. It's hard and it's painful, that's why you need to take your time to grieve the relationship and go through all the motions leading to acceptance that it's over.

Bombarding someone with phone calls, incessant texts and 'accidental meetings' won't change their mind about you. It's unattractive and borders on creepy and shows you have nothing better to do than chase someone. 

Your 'Twin Flame' can get a restraining order against you or block you and they ain't nothing you can do about it.

Don't try to bypass doubts or your instincts in a relationship because it's 'meant to be'. If something stinks, it probably does, investigate the source of the stink. 

Let's strive for healthy and fulfilling relationships in which our needs are met and we meet the needs of others.

It's okay not to be in a 'Twin Flame' relationship, I promise. It's also okay not to have a 'Twin Flame'.The title of this post is the title of the top post of the month within the spirituality subreddit. And I wanted to spread some more information about this topic.

Firstly I want to say that ¨our thoughts create our reality.¨ is an amazing sentence. And I agree with the sentence. But there is some more that can be talked about when thinking about that sentence.

And that can be done by using the yin and yang symbol

As you know there is a white dot within the black half, and a black dot within the white half. And that's also true for our reality.

The whole universe would be irrelevant if you didnt exist. And if the universe didn't exist, then you would also be irrelevant. Because you can't exist without the universe. So what I'm trying to say is that black implies white, and white implies black. And the universe exists because of you, and you exist because of the universe.

A miracle 

Besides that does our thinking influence our reality. Because when you are thinking all the time, then you are observing your thoughts instead of reality. It's only when you stop thinking that you can experience reality in its purest form.

And there is one last thing that I want to say and that is the fact that your world exists on what you focus upon. You can't focus on everything there is, so make sure to focus on something beautiful, because then your world will become beautiful.

I like these topics so much that I even talk about it in [my ebook](https://ko-fi.com/quintenvanommen/shop).I have a good feeling in my heart, soul and being and I want to give my goodness to you. Pass it on to your neighbor or keep it all for yourself, I love you, me and us. Keep on going, I appreciate you and all that you do.You break generational curses everytime you do something that your lineage was unable to do. When you move with courage and say yes to the unknown, you are walking on a path that's absolutely unfamiliar to the previous generations.

When your parents operate on survival programs because of their own traumas and conditioning, they don't know anything beyond survival. But when you choose to break the cycle you have to take actions that reflect your trust in unknown, everything that you know is borrowed by the previous generations and you can't shift from survival to ascension by staying in the known. 

But the thing is that the ego feels safe in the known and it's really afraid of the unknown. You gotta trust the Universe to ignite the flame of your courageous heart because your conditioning has created a fear of the Universe in you. Fear of the unknown is synonymous with fear of the Universe. The one who trusts the Universe is courageous enough to embrace the unknown. Don't fear the unknown, walk towards it with courage because that's where you break generational curses.

*It's up to us to break generational curses when they say "it runs in the family" you tell them "this is where it runs out"*A few moments ago I sat in the car to travel with my parents, and we couldn't agree on who's music to play. I felt really bad, but then I realized that the reason isn't because I won't hear the music I like. It's because, on a deeper level, I feel like I never get what I want and I don't understand why. Or I don't even know what it is I want. Or I get alot things which I don't want.  For example, someone who gets mad at every little thing is carrying anger towards life. I'd love to hear your experiences of this type of situation.I remember when I first started. I was trying to get everyone and their moms to start being spiritual but now I realize that is futile. 

I then wanted to be “more” spiritual by others so I would want to brag abt my growth, but now I also realize that there’s no need for that eitherWe may not all be the same or have the same beliefs, but we're all human. We all have emotions and even though we can't always explain those emotions or find a reason for them, it's okay. Everything may seem to be going relatively well despite all of the chaos going on, you may feel depressed or lonely and can't pinpoint why. You don't have to explain yourself, sit with yourself and try to understand the feeling because in the end you are yourself and that's all that matters. Be you.i was listening to a podcast the other day (manifestation babe by kathryn zenkina) and something she said really struck a chord with me. sometimes even though we are not satisfied with our lives , we are too scared of the unknown and letting go of our “comfort zone” to actually manifest our desires. for example, maybe im manifesting a car but in truth i’m scared i will have a driving accident and get hurt.

i was meditating and had a VISION. the universe was ringing my bell and wanted to give me money. however there was a BARRICADE of people standing in the front of my house not letting the universe (and its gifts) in.
it was so clear it was crazy.

really the fear trumps the desire. 🤯

i realized then that the reason i wasnt getting a job or was SO scared of my business actually succeeding was SO silly.! i’ve moved to another country which is reallyyyy strict with its rules and i don’t speak the language THAT well. i realized i was DEADLY SCARED of actually receiving/making money bc i didn’t know how to pay taxes! lol ! i saw inside and in my mind i thought i would do it wrongly and they would PUT ME IN PRISON for tax fraud!! hahaha
now that i know this, i can laugh about it ! it’s so liberating 💗

also!
yesterday i said “enough is enough” . i told the universe “please lets get through this fear together once and for all” and OF COURSE suddenly TODAY in my university there’s a seminar on how to pay taxes!!!
i feel so thankful and connected 💗💗💗🦋🦋🦋

i wanted to share this just to tell you to look inside!! maybe you also have a barricade on your mental porch hahaAbout 6 or 7 years ago I was living out of my van at a beautiful campground and trying a bit of minimalism out.


I decided to give away a number of my possessions including a near brand new pair of cherry doc martens to a girl who lived close by because she mentioned how much she loved them.


Now don’t get me wrong, giving them away was a beautiful experience for me and the girl was truly stoked and I believe she still has those shoes to this day but there have been a number of occasions over the years where I kind of regretted giving them away as I could never afford to buy another pair after that!


Well 7 years later and now living in a house my neighbour comes over with a near brand new pair of cherry doc martens and asks me what size I am.


“Oh you’ll fit these!” she says.
“I never wear them so you can have them if you like!”


My doc martens (obviously not my original ones) found their way back to me! Move past overthinking and align with faith. Slow down enough to hear the solution. Trust that everything you have asked for is making its way to you and delays are being resolved. Blessings are always on time. You are the one that is impatient. Remember, Divine timing is always perfect.
Do you agree?

[Be the part of our community >>> ManifestationValley](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source)I just turned 33 today and I'd like to start my bday off right by sending good vibes to all you special people.

 🌞🌞♉✨🌚Always remember that it is your thoughts that transform your actions. It is your actions that transform your outcomes. It is your outcomes that transform who you will be. 

So from today make your thoughts count. Manifest the best, to become the best. 

Say *1111* to empower yourself. 

I write about angel numbers and their meanings on this site. The following post link explains the reason behind seeing the number 11:11 and its inferred meaning. https://enlightenmentu.com/angel-number-1111/Anyone else feel like its really hard to remain present in this world? Like society doesnt put importance to the genuine wellbeing and happiness of other people?I am so disgusted by this because when some ask "if you can manifest wealth, how come people are still homeless, poor, starving" etc. The responses are usually "because they didn't manifest/believe in it hard enough" "they're doing it wrong". How belittling and privileged of you to say that. 

I also really hate the guilt tripping of it all. I felt defeated and ashamed of myself for not being "positive" every day - for having a "low vibration". Isnt that TOXIC positivity? It's literally toxic and yall talk about getting rid of toxic people when in reality, we become toxic to ourselves subconsciously. Why can't we be depressed? Why is it wrong to be sad? Why is it wrong to have anxiety without it being "you have a weak root chakra"? You can literally meditate on a daily and brainwash yourself into thinking your happy, when in reality, nothing is actually going for you. You can literally be anxious and still have a good vibration. You can be depressed and still have happy days. You can be mentally ill and still attract whatever you want by putting in the effort when you can. Why does everything have to be about manifestation?

How come a lot of people who never used manifestation/law of attraction in their lives, become successful nonetheless? Its all about personal effort and commitment. Its because they faced trauma and negativity to get to where they want by doing what they can bit by bit. Success isn't even limited to money. Success is what you define. Why does it have to apply to the law of attraction? 

I feel like a lot of people don't even know the origin of the law of attraction. Its a fucking marketing cult tactic. I have seen so many videos that debunk it and if anyone is interested, lemme know so I can look for the videos.Up until I had my awakening 4 months ago(during quarantine) I hadn’t realized I was suppressing certain memories and feelings. Everything came crashing down on me, making me realize I needed healing from childhood traumas. I found a lot of peace and comfort when I realized we are all spiritual beings having a human experience, but I did feel like my traumatic experience hurt my soul. I’m not able to seek therapy right away, because I won’t have health insurance until the fall, so I’m doing my best to heal in other ways. I get by when I listen to philosophers like Alan Watts. I understand that spiritual awakenings can be scary, is this what that saying means? When we awaken we accept every trauma and face it head on, making it a frightening process? I just want to know what you guys have experienced with trauma and spiritual awakening.I entered this world on this day in 1998 ! Celebrate today with me! Instead of being stressed today be happy. For me. Instead of worrying about the future be here today for me. Instead of thinking about the past be here today for me. Instead of being sad, be happy today for me. Go back to being sad tomorrow if you’d like. For today see all the beautiful wonders of life in front of you. I ask you to dedicate the day for my birthday and make it the greatest day you possibly can. That will be my birthday presentI say good and bad in quotations because really, there's no good or bad. No distinction, no separation. It's all just One. It's all just... Us. All just Love. So much Love... That created everything out of nothing. What a miracle indeed to just be here now.

I Love you all so much and sending loads of good vibes to all of you and beyond. ♥As the days go by I am finding more and more trust in the Universe. Things may not always work out just the way we want them to, but the YOUniverse has a greater plan. We are all interconnected, and our experiences are playing out exactly as they need to be. So often, I personally have gotten caught up in wanting things to play out in my timing. But I have been shown that only in the divine timing of the Universe does everything happen as it should. Trusting the Universe can be hard, but it’s just like any other relationship, if you don’t have trust what have you got? Doubt gets us nowhere. When we trust, we are keeping an open hand, willing to let the universe remove what is no longer needed in our lives, and also allowing it to place even more magical things into it. ✨

Sending you all positive vibrations this day,
- The Cosmic Butterfly🦋(on YouTube)Sending good vibes and wishing for you to have a great week.
Im happy ‘cause I’ll able to excercise again after a hard situation, trying to start this week as positive as possible, hoping the same for you🤞🏼✨I'm seeing this a lot on here lately.

Yes, you can eat animals/animal products and be spiritual.

No, you don't have to have a formal meditation practice or attend retreats in order to be spiritual.

You can have sex and be spiritual.  (In fact I would argue having sex is *more* spiritual than celibacy.)

You can drink, smoke, and play video games and be spiritual.

You don't have to go to bed at a certain time or take cold showers in order to be spiritual.

It's all totally unrelated, actually.  These things may (key word: *may*) help you with your physical wellbeing, but that's not what spirituality is about.  They also may serve to make you *think* you're super spiritual, but that's actually not spiritual.

Spirituality is about surrender, opening yourself up to life, and accepting yourself deeply and wholly.  It has absolutely nothing to do with control.  In fact, if you are trying to control, then you are going the wrong way.  And that's what we do when we try to change habits: control.  "If I get all my ducks in a row, I will get this result, I will be better off."  No.  There is nothing to arrange, nothing to protect, and there is no happiness to be found in the future.

Spirituality is about accepting that truth deeply. And what arises from that is love, compassion, and spontaneity.  And from there, joy and healing.

That's not to say habits don't change.  They can, and they will!  But habits change *as a result* of inner change.  You don't need to bombard your body with junk and other unhealthy things when you are well on the inside.  The bad habits drop away on their own.

Be kind to yourself, accept yourself, do what feels good and natural!  This is what will lead to love and healing.Over the past couple of years, as I’ve dove into my spiritual life and gained valuable understanding of myself and the incredible depth of the human soul, I’ve discovered this wonderful feeling when talking to somebody about things that aren’t small talk— things that dig deep into someone’s soul. It’s a feeling that I can’t describe other than pure intimacy... a love for another person, pure and true, that builds because of the vulnerability they share with me and I share with them. It’s amazing and lovely and I crave to have these conversations with people.

Does anyone else feel this way or feel similarly? And if so, would you please comment and tell me about it and/or DM me about it? I’d love to hear from you and/or talk to youKnow that things can turn around completely as soon as tomorrow when you wake up. 

You provide value, and you deserve abundance. 

Let’s each meditate on this feeling together and send it out to our little community. That way we will multiply its effects. 

Love you all, you are always taken care of! 

Don’t mind me, I’m just practicing my manifestation techniques 😌

*****Edit:I have peace and love overflowing abundantly in my lifeFall in love with yourself. You’re complete, whole, and abundant. You are the universe waking up as a human being. Celebrate every moment of Life. There’s nothing to gain or lose.The moment you realize you have exhausted efforts to find fulfillment externally through the world, one chooses to seek spiritual truths for relief. 

For me, I tried to escape the physical world entirely and focus inwardly. Meditation was all I wanted to do. This brought up new and further predicaments because I felt a resistance to life and couldn't wait to get home to meditate. I was no longer suffering in my old ways, but developed a wanting for more bliss, and a dread of life outside my room. 

In rediscovering your inner being, a new attachment to that is born and you are faced with having to learn how to live both worlds without resistance.

I am now learning how to surrender to life itself and not be afraid of the negative aspects of the physical. I realize now that everything that happens that causes any kind of negativity is grist for the mill to further awaken you. So embrace it!

It is a beautiful experience to feel whole and actually enjoy the body and the beautiful world of form instead of deny it.I started going outside and sitting in the sun for around 30 minutes a day again and I genuinely feel an improvement in the way my body feelsEdit: wow! Thank you to everyone who took the time to read this, comment or award me. This is so special to me. Really. From the bottom of my heart, thank you. 


Today I thought it was over. 
Everything. 
I thought I was going to take my own life today. 
I made a noose out of a wire rope chain. 
Hung it from the steel beams from the patio of my grandparents house. 
I stood on the metal table and tightened it around my neck. 
I thought I was going to do it. 
For a couple seconds I really thought it was time. 
But something told me to get down and sit in the chair for a little while. 
So I did. 
I sat there, still, focusing on the grass, the insects around me, the squirrels, the occasional dog I could see through the neighbors fence. 
I’m not sure why, but I turned around to look at my bike, positioned by the house.
On the seat, rest a praying mantis. 
I normally don’t take much thought into insects, as I live in an old house and see them frequently and without warrant. 
But I was fascinated at the stillness of the creature. 
Marveled at the uniqueness of it. 
I couldn’t tell you if I’d ever actually seen one in person before. 
That moment made me appreciate a few things. 
The creation of life, the unbothered nature of animals, and the stillness of those animals. 
No worries, just breath, consciousness, and the indifference to live. 
There is no drama. 
No fear of the unknown mystery that is death. 
There is no debt, no career, no money ever. 
Which got me to think- what more do we have? 
Almost everything we do in our lives is just a suggestion. We take advice because we want money, security, love, happiness. 
At the end of the day, these are all just extra. 
No other living creature has these problems. And we look at them as problems because often we can’t change them when we feel like it.
We we’re never suppose to. 
We get to experience things differently but can still appreciate the simplicity of this life. 
To relish in the stillness, and free our mind of trivial inequity. 
These trials we face are a gift, a journey, given to unleash the spiritual connectivity we all have in us. 
To give us an understanding of why we are here in the first place. 
This world was given to us- from someone or something I can not say for certain. Nevertheless, it’s a gift. 
The hardship is part of the struggle to freedom. 
Freedom can mean anything to anyone. 
It’s a term to describe the joys of salvation, debtlessness, happiness, being in love. 
We should not take the word lightly but also never diminish its use. 
For the use of it is subjective to the individual soul, and some never find it. 
Given To release the bonds of current and previous lives. 
To understand what it means to be one with the earth. 
Not one of the world, but of the ground we walk on, the trees that surround our sky, the mountains and oceans in all of their vastness. 
I’ve realized that is our purpose. 
That is why we keep going. 
To strive to see the end but never rushing it, because there is always something else to learn and grow from, no matter what age. 
Our soul knows no specific age, it just is. 
It is what it’s always been and always will be. 
It’s our mind and our heart that steer us to believe what we have is never enough. 
When everything we could ever want is already within us and surrounds us. Not in material possessions but in spiritual bliss. 
A bliss so coveting that everything we desire will be silenced. 
This is what I’ve learned today from a praying mantis.145 days left until 2022. Stop doing these 5 things and make this year your best year.

1. Stop trying to be liked by everybody  

2. Stop thinking that you’re not good enough, you are as you are. And you are beautiful the way you are.   

3. Stop overthinking. Just try to experience the present moment, because that's all there is   

4. Stop living in the past, it was a lesson, not a life sentence.  

5. Stop being afraid to be different. Imagine if everyone was the same. How boring would that be.

[Source](https://youtu.be/g5HcVTUEP4I)Any good energy will do. Thank you 💓Quotes By RUMI That Will Change Your Life

[part 1](https://youtu.be/vhNpgDNhFAY)

[part 2](https://youtu.be/ZoXleOhF__o)

Rumi said that. The things you desire are seeking you in the same way you are seeking them. That’s why they appear in your imagination. You don’t need to read yet another book on how to find your purpose in life, or listen to yet another podcast about what is the meaning of life. What you need to do is stop thinking about the future or the past,and live in the present moment. When you’re present, you see things, you hear things, you get ideas. These ideas take you to places of your imagination. Don’t limit yourself, let your imagination grow, let it go to unimaginable places, to portals of creativity, to magical lands. Dream big. What you give to the world, no one else can. When something sparks your interest, follow it. Play with it, make something out of it, and then share it with the world.

Dream Big

There are times when your imagination shows you something remarkable, but you hesitate, you doubt in your ability to achieve that, you question the authenticity of this imagination. And then you let it go, forever. This is why some people always stay at the same place, they never grow, they never live life to the fullest. You need to hold your imagination by the horns and ride it to its true destination. But first you need to know where you are going. What is your big dream?



Act Small

It’s time to plan. Now that you have a vision, a dream of where you are going, you need to figure out how to get there.

Remember, the most important thing is to believe in your self, in your imagination, and take action to turn your big dream into reality.


Look at the people who are where you want to be. Ask them how they got there. Read autobiographies of people that you admire. You will notice that they all share similar qualities, they think big, believe in themselves, and take action.

Start Now

Now that you have a plan, you need to break it down into smaller goals. Having a big dream and a plan to make that dream come true is not enough. You need to do something now in order to get the ball rolling. Like how Gary Keller says, “what’s the one thing I can do such that by doing it everything is either easier or unnecessary?”

There is no need to wait. I’m sure there is something you can do now, which will help you get to where you want to be.Love this quote so much. And also heard this quote doing Yoga at a music festival this weekend:

Nowhere to be, Nothing to do, No one to be

Makes me feel so at ease when meditating and taking the time to be in the present.What you're seeing right now is what has been heralded by many previous civilizations. If you look at the Hindu Vedas, there are different macro cosmic cycles of time known as the Yugas. These different cycles of times correlate with the consciousness of humanity. We have just finished the cycle of Kali Yuga; to summarize this is the cycle where man literally destroys himself. It's a cycle where we have forgotten who we are and experience ourselves separate from one another. 

We have entered the more ascended state of Dvapara Yuga. This is the beginning of remembering who we are and why we're here. It correlates with the spiritual evolution of humanity. It's where we move from 3D consciousness into 4D and 5D (unity consciousness). And the way we do it is by honoring the darkness and our own shadow. It's by becoming the light and love that we are and having forgiveness for ourselves and one another. The way to move forward is through the heart.

What you're seeing right now in the external world is all the fear, manipulation, control, and greed. In order for humanity to wake up, the darkness is being exposed by the light. The 3D reality of separation is crumbling right now. And in order to move and ascend into higher consciousness, we must integrate the 3D. And the way to do that is to see the darkness, to feel it, and acknowledge it. It's served its purpose and now it's time for the light to come in. Let It Go with Love ❤️

Stay grounded, centered, and love thyself as we go through this process. We're already there, we're just living in a previous now moment experiencing the transition.

I love you all and just wanted to share this message.I’ve been reading a lot of tweets from Christians saying how they used to be into the new age spirituality, but then they realized that it’s demonic and that it’s evil. 
I don’t know about you all but I just try to be the best person I can be and try to be grateful for everything. 

In my opinion, being a good person is what it’s all about. I do like crystals and I have found they have worked in certain instances. 

I just don’t understand how Christians are almost hateful towards people trying to be spiritual and figure out what life’s all about. 

I’ve also read one that said something like “saying you’re spiritual isn’t necessarily a good thing, demons are spirits too.” 

I don’t know, I just think religion is a way to control people. And that when you go into the afterlife, God, Source, The Creator, or what ever you’d like to call it won’t judge you based on what religion you’ve been in.Thanks to fellow folks here on spirituality I started watching it today. It so so insightful I highly recommend it to anyone.We are not human beings having a spiritual experience. We are spiritual beings having a human experience.

- Pierre Teilhard de ChardinI was wearing bright blue shorts with no shirt on, and I was traveling in my van with a little blue moped. This guy shows up and claims to have also reserved the same campsite, but the wind must have blown away his tag. He was wearing bright blue shorts, no shirt, living in a camper, and had a blue motorcycle. On his back he had a large tattoo of what appeared to be an ET. We ended up sharing the campsite and at the campfire he shared information with me on how to specifically contact beings of the fifth kind. 

It feels as though he was sent to intersect my path, and imitated me in a way perhaps to send a signal that there were other forces at work. It's hard to describe, but it felt like there was some sort of strange cosmic connection that all brought us together to that one campsite. Thoughts?“We Do Not Have to Be Productive. We Do Not Have to Be Productive. We Do Not Have to Be Productive. I was wrong about something. I had thought that the great problem with our society was its obsession with money. My heart broke again and again as things I found beautiful were trodden underfoot by the cold logic of the market. I ranted about capitalism, about greed, about the inanity of a system that enshrines dollars as the ultimate form of value. It’s clear to me now, after a month in quarantine, after listening to friends, acquaintances, and clients share the pain and anxieties coming up for them, that it wasn’t money that had us in its thrall all these years. It was productivity. The need to be productive is a bigger monster than greed ever was, at least in the American psyche. I have seen multimillionaires who earned their money as honestly as it can be earned curl up in shame for not completing a to-do list. And I have seen people who don’t have enough for groceries worry more about what they got done today than where their next meal is coming from. I feel it in myself, too. The pangs of guilt I feel when I remember how many emails I’ve left unanswered. Even mindfulness and spiritual growth are swallowed whole by this monster. Meditation, introspection, journal writing, any form of self-care needs justifying on the grounds of being productive. When we try to escape, by setting aside unstructured time, time for things to unfold naturally, even then we justify it, quietly to ourselves, as worth doing because it serves a purpose. It’s productive. I stand in awe of this monster. It has been hiding in plain sight, gobbling up so many of our lives, laying waste to joy, curiosity, and spontaneity and offering up instead decades of grim determination and only fleeting moments of satisfaction. And for what? For the illusion of self-worth. For the illusion of mattering. For the illusion of living one’s purpose. We do not have to be productive. We do not have to be productive. We do not have to be productive. We are creatures of infinite beauty no matter what we do with our time. And if we want to live our purpose, all we have to do is live. That is enough. April 13, 2020”

— Healing Heals the Healer Too by David Sauvage

https://www.davidsauvage.com

Edit: I just want to affirm and make it clear that this is not my original content, I am not David. For more of his content check out his book mentioned above(available on kindle unlimited) or you can find him on the various social media’s.The moderator pointed out that anyone who talks about incorporating spirituality and mindfullness easily gets discredited for being crazy. He believes that spiritually and acceptance/mindfullness are pseudoscience and they lack any credibility in actually helping people - based on his experience with these things. And I'm honestly just shocked at how stubborn people with depression and mental health can be, i think this is particularly why mental health is so dangerous. Because everyone thinks they are the most in tune with their realities and their experiences are unique therefore no one understands their situation aswell as they themselves do. And this is particularly why that stubbornness sticks and they throw to the side any sort of advice they recieve and rightfully so because 95% of the advice you recieve are garbage. I speak from experience so I know that stubbornness far too well but to the point where you are just stone walled like the moderator is just dangerous and detrimental to the long term well being, both mentally and physically.Here's all you need to know about death and rebirth:

[https://infinitians.com/death-and-rebirth-all-you-need-to-know-about-it/](https://infinitians.com/death-and-rebirth-all-you-need-to-know-about-it/)As a pessimist with pretty bad anxiety, I have a strangely odd feeling this pandemic will shape humanity in a drastic positive way, forever. 

For a very long time I had a gut feeling something huge would happen in 2020 that would affect humanity. Through sickness, tragedy and death I feel like everyone will evaluate their life and mother earth completely different during the pandemic. 

Anyone else feel this way? It’s definitely scary right now, but I see such a bright new light at the end of this tunnel.After years of suffering - depression, anxiety, betrayal, abandonment - And after people kept on telling me "this is just how life is, you gotta find a balance in it". I refused to believe that "this is just how life is". After years of searching for a solution, I found that loving-kindness meditation is the only thing that actually gave some sort of result towards this. After searching the shallow butcherdization of the western's view on meditation, someone suggested I listen to The Power of Now by Eckhart Tolle. From there, I became obsessed with realizing my true nature. I'd listen to every talk I could get my hands on, and for years I was barely interested in anything else. I'd ly in bed and listen to these talks for hours on end, often neglecting school and work in the process. As a result, here I am, writing this.

> The pain is unbearable.

As I emptied my well of mental scars and blockages, the gaps between my heart closing up gradually became shorter and shorter. Every time I noticed it closed, I opened up again - relax your shoulders, open your chest, open your heart. (When I say open your heart, I mean literally relax the muscles in the center of your chest. This should bring you into a meditative state of mental clarity.... ) Even when it felt like my entire world would crash and burn, and I'd lose my sanity and my life if I did - relax your shoulders, open your chest, open your heart. Let it all flow through you. Even the things that feel like it will end your life. At some point I didn't even know what was causing it to close, as I just opened up immediately without questioning it, resulting just a cascade of releasing of 'bad' energy. This happened more often as I got closer and closer to reality. At one point, while I was playing a game with my friend, and something came up that made me close. I opened by relaxing my shoulders, opening my chest, opening my heart. And suddenly something just flipped. I was no longer just relaxing the muscles, I relaxed the space around it. The entire field around my chest and head area became indistinguishable from myself experientially. Suddenly I realized "Oh" "Is that how it is".

> Opening my heart is difficult.

While it's in reality just muscle contractions, it can help to think of it as a river of energy that flows from the crown of your head and out between your legs. The sensation you are feeling is the built up energy trying to burst through all at once. The longer you allow the energy to build up, the more painful it'll be when you finally let it open up. To allow it through, simply **relax your shoulders, open your chest, open your heart**.  

When something touches the thorn in your heart called "my friend abandoned me" or, "my lover betrayed my trust" or "I lost my parents when I was 6", relax your shoulders, open your chest, open your heart. Watch that feeling flow through you. Even if it feels like your world will end, watch that feeling flow through you, and see what happens. If your thoughts argue, watch those thoughts too. Watch and allow it, the same way you would, if you were watching a cloud pass by. 

By allowing something to flow through you, you allow your body-mind to process it. It is no longer something that wants to be processed but can't. It is no longer something in your system, that you must protect from being disturbed. You are free to live your life without worrying about it. 

This is acceptance.Let me explain.

Lets say you made a mistake while driving and made a bad lane change, you swerve back to avoid an accident. For the next 10 minutes the 'harsh critic' would say:

*You are such a f\*\*kin' idiot, how the hell could you make such a mistake! People are probably laughing at your incompetence. Next time it might be an accident where you will have to pay big time and probably hurt yourself. You pathetic fool.*

On the other hand, the 'voice of kindness' would say:

*You made a mistake. You need to be more careful for the next time and improve your driving. But it was only a mistake and you are human after all. Everyone makes those types of mistakes now and then. The idea is to use this as a learning experience to improve in the future. Everything is OK now.*

You see its **not** about justifying your mistakes, but rather its about replacing *self-criticism* with with *self-correction*. The voice of kindness uses self-correction. In that way you can correct your behavior *without the loss of self esteem*. This benefits you and those around you, its a win-win attitude that allows for personal betterment and growth in the framework self-worth and emotional maturity.We're all going through our own troubles and tribulations. Some of us aren't healthy and I personally pray that all people get well. 

If you're healthy enough to get into shape, you have a world of opportunities open to you. Being an NBA star or an astronaut, is well within the reach of tons of people with untapped potential. They have simply not fully realized their potential.  

I was really good at basketball in grade school, beating all my peers and the middle schoolers at pickup games, lightning fast and could sink three pointers consistently.  Once it got to highschool level, the best of all the middle schools fused into one and the competition became much more intimidating,  so I quit. "What's the point of trying to compete with the next Lebron James?" 

Come to realize, that tons of 5'9" dudes and shorter make it into college basketball and even the NBA. I could have said "alright, time to compete against the next Lebron, let's see how far my potential will take me." 

I was not at the time, fully aware of my potential, physically,  mentally, athletically.  None of it. Living in a twilight haze of youth,  trying to make sense of life and trying to cope with it all, not yet having a developed sense of reality. Perceiving my personal potential took 2 more decades to realize. 

I did two stupid things during that haze, I created an identity based on perceived superiority/inferiority and I let that rule my decision making. I ignored the cute girl sending me signals, I quit sports, I quit band, quit drama, I bought an MP3 player and became that one kid in highschool that smoked cigarettes illegally during lunchtime. 

So you can see in my personal story alone, that the path to being physically active can also be an emotional one, even an existential one. 'Why exercise, if nihilism is the ultimate truth*puffs cig*' 

I've had to make several logical agreements with myself to get past nihilism:

1. If I can create my own value for existence, then Nihilism is made obsolete as an ideology to base decisions on

2. Actualizing potential is thrilling 

3. Life on earth has so much potential. So much in fact that scientists who understand more than the average person are being blown away daily by new discoveries.  

4. Potential is unfolding at an exponential rate at this time in history, I literally showed up during the most exciting time to be alive. 

5. Sure everything is ass backwards and idiotic, but I'm growing increasingly confident that the new generation are going to get rid of lobbying, shit has been getting better for the last 100 years. 

After conquering all of the existential, emotional and mental barriers to start self actualizing, you'll naturally gravitate towards exercise, which makes you feel great, and you feel great about yourself because you feel great, and then the real kicker comes in which is gratitude, making you feel even more great. 

The same way we don't fully realize our potential until our perspective is fixed, realizing how grateful you can be for what you do have and are capable of achieving is another thing we have to come to realize. 

Once that really hits, like when you fully realize how vast the universe is and how it is actually infinite, then you become overflowing with gratitude,  which eradicates all those poor attitudes when it comes to actualizing personal potential, to romantic relationships,  towards people in general and towards life in general. 

Everything you want in life is attainable, it just takes the right series of mindful actions to make it happen and the journey is helped with a strong body, which reinforces a great mindset that will propel you into being grateful for being alive.On August 4th Thomas Hartle was one of four Canadians experiencing end-of-life distress, due to life-threatening cancer, that received an exemption to possess and use psilocybin for medical purposes. These exemptions were the first known individual exemptions granted for psilocybin since this compound/ psilocybin mushrooms were made illegal in Canada in 1974.

On August 12th, 2020, Dr. Bruce Tobin flew to Saskatoon Saskatchewan to treat Thomas with psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy. This therapy includes pre-and-post integration sessions, as well as the medicine session.

Yesterday TheraPsil hosted a webinar where Thomas Hartle shared his experience as the first-ever individual in Canada to receive legal, psilocybin assisted psychotherapy.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1CGcrSzLWPY&feature=youtu.be](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1CGcrSzLWPY&feature=youtu.be)

Summary of what the patient said: 

 "I have had anxiety for so long that I have sort of forgotten what it feels like to not have it. And to experience the lack of anxiety...has been beyond words."  

*Note: psilocybin is an illegal substance and I am not advocating its use. the purpose of this post was to demonstrate its therapeutic efficacy.*its my 18th birthday and people greeted me and I know it would make me feel special but i know for myself that Im special. Remove the illusion of having the need of validation from others, it's nice but its only just a cherry on top. I appreciate everyone around me and Im glad I shared my energy with them and they sent it back to me. Life is precious if we are able to see it.

EDIT: This is my first award/s on reddit. appreciate it!When you enjoy nice things, it does NOT take away from your spirituality. A limiting belief i would always tell myself was that if I liked nice things I was not "spiritual" enough. But you can have both. Don't let others make you feel bad. It doesn't make you less spiritual.In the process of inner work and finding yourself, you get lost in yourself and lose the people around you. And by that I mean when your energy from all the distractions of your every day life and decide to work on yourself people detect  that shift. I don't share the same interests anymore. I don't find amusement in the same things anymore.All energy is infinite. It cannot be created or destroyed. You can change the form of energy but never destroy it.I feel depressed but I know I'm not depressed.
I feel like I have a mental block that's preventing me from seeing my path. 

I've been meditating and doing tons of energy work. 
Idk. I'm at a point where I'm feeling completely lost and directionless. Sorry I'm rambling, but the best way to describe how I'm feeling is I feel like I'm stuck in some sort of energetic gunk/sludge and I feel like I can't "see" a way out. 
Each day seems like and up and down ride of emotions.

Can anyone relate?

Edit:. Also I keep seeing 444 EVERYWHERE. I want to take it as a good sign but my anxiety thinks its a terrible warning.Have a beautiful rest of your day..

I'm actually supposed to be deplugging. BUTTTTTTT I just wanted to share an experience with inner child healing that I currently just had (20 minutes ago actually haha).

Tonight I decided to hop back on my healing journey and do an inner child journal prompt. Mind you, i haven't been doing my healing work since December last year. The journal prompt was basically just writing a letter to your inner child telling them things they needed to hear. So while doing it i teared up a little bit but i tried not to cry. I'm in highschool, so i still live at home and my mom was in the same space as me while i was journaling and I didn't want to cry in front of her (something I might need to work on lol). I would very much wish to be doing this kinda work in my own living space, but that can wait.

So i concluded the later, then i rushed to the bathroom and then started crying. So i got myself up and cried while looking at myself in the mirror. But i visualized my reflection being my inner child and THE CRYING CAME HEAVYYY. *Then i started to tell myself things like "you don't have to run. you don't have to hide. you're safe with me and I'll always love you." and "it is safe to be yourself, who you are is a beautiful and divine soul. you don't have to dumb yourself down for them".*

&amp;#x200B;

And WOW!, this felt really powerful. It was like i was having a sit down conversation with my inner child. I even visualized myself hugging my inner child and telling them that everything is going to be ok. I felt it so surreal, I could feel their tears staining my shirt and their head leaning my shoulder. I know I can use my imagination, but I really want to go back in time and take my inner child with me to a magical place where i can provide and protect for them. I could really hear the exact voice of my inner child crying while doing this and that made me cry even more😂😂. Looking yourself in the eye while you're crying looks like you're looking at your inner child crying. I'll definitely add this to my healing work rituals. I think this might be mirror work, but I'll look into that.

&amp;#x200B;

Thank you for reading <333

Side note: I manifested this post blowing up😭😭I’ve been so caught up in life worrying about everything recently that I forgot to take a minute to literally just enjoy life. I’m going to start saying yes to more things. I’m going to go on random spontaneous adventures just because I can. I am going to talk to people I’ve never talked to JUST because I have the opportunity too. Sometimes life gets hard and I think the world is against me, but it’s all a mindset and I can always do whatever I want whenever I want. I have nothing to worry about. ❤️Just here to drop some positivity during these wild times🤗
I personally suffer from anxiety and depression, and I’m always trying to fight for my happiness and peace of mind. Recently I’ve been trying to instill a sense of gratitude into my daily routines, as this has really helped me keep my light! Life is so short and finite, for instance my best friend’s mom has been bed-ridden with a brain tumor for nearly 10 years now. One of my cousins was involved in a wrestling accident leaving him mostly paralyzed and severely mentally handicapped. Anything can happen to anyone of us at any given moment, so this is the trick that I try to use on a daily basis to reprogram my mind to have a sense of gratitude, you ready?

Instead of saying:

-“I have to get up early in the morning and go to work.”
-“I have to clean my home.”
-“I have to do this or that..”
ETC.

Try saying:

-“I *get* to get up early in the morning and go to work!”
-“I *get* to clean my home!”
-“I *get* to do this or that!”


This has helped me create a spirit of gratitude, which has in turn helped me stay positive even though it can be hard sometimes. Love and light💖✨


Edit: Thank you to u/merespell for reminding me that we do indeed create our own realities. For the integrity of the original post, I will not change the wording, but I will include that I will no longer claim my anxiety and depression. From here on out I will not succumb to the label, and am releasing it from my mind to prevent any future fortitude of the sort.Tears are rolling down my cheeks as I write this.

I consider myself emotionally healthy, but I was just thinking about all that my aunt has done for me throughout my life, and how grateful I am for all that she's done and to have her in my life.

She's alive and well... am I crazy? I'm definitely confused. If I start thinking about the other people in my life, I know I'm just going to continue sobbing, haha.

I've started meditating somewhat recently and been connecting with my higher self. Maybe it's related?

Does anyone else experience something similar?


Edit: You are all such beautiful souls! I'm so glad you're all on the same earth as me, and grateful to have you in my life, too!

Edit 2: How often is it that we have such positive thoughts about or toward others, but never tell them? Reading everything that you all had to say, I decided to tell my aunt how grateful I was for her. I wanted to call her, but choked up just at the thought of saying these things aloud to hear directly. I settled for a text, but it felt amazing to put it into words and send those words to her. She sent the nicest love-filled message back.

You guys are awesome. Bear hugs for all!One of my friends proposed a theory yesterday while we were smoking some weed ( of course ) and said what if all religions are all different puzzle pieces of the same puzzle. That basically the Buddha, Jesus, Muhammad were all spiritually gifted just in their part of the world but they all shared the same overall “ message “... 

Not saying they shared the same message completely as I’m not a religious expert just wanted everyone’s opinion on this.I hate my job, I don't have friends, every guy I've ever loved fucked me over and took advantage of me and everytime they come back is because they expect to use me once again cuz I'm so worthless. I'm so tired, nothing has meaning anymore. Not even music, tarot, astrology, sunsets, everything is horrible and I don't understand what my purpose is here and why the universe has let me had so many lessons that hurt so much still. No one likes me, no one cares. My family is unreliable, I don't have any talents, I'm such a loser. WHY AM I HERE. I'm so tired. I just want everything to stop for a second and maybe not wake up anymore.

Edit: I can't believe the response this cry for help got, I am so overwhelmed with how much love and understanding its actually out there and I thank every single one of you for your advice and general opinion/comment. 3 hours ago when I posted this, I really thought that there was nothing that could give meaning and make me feel safe anymore, but I have found tranquility in the kindness of strangers. Thank you so much you guys, I will keep pushing, I really hope the grass is greener in the other side❤️This isn't going to make much sense so I apologize, I'm just not sure where to put this but just going to put this out there as I feel I have to get this out somewhere since I know if I tell anyone I know personally people will just look at me crazy. 

As an atheist, I feel like my world has just completely changed. 

I'm the guy that needs proof and evidence and don't believe in anything remotely spiritual. But I had an experience I just can't seem to make sense of. I took a very large dose of THC (edibles). I can only explain this as "I know without the shadow of a doubt, that I came into contact with some higher level of consciousness". I got way too high and decided I would simply just sit and meditate, and before I knew it, everything in the world just made instant sense to me. I know I'm doing a poor job at explaining this because words are just so damn limiting. They don't capture the true emotions behind what they actually represent. 

I had questions come up in my head, that were instantly answered. The craziest part of it all is I can't remember the things I was learning I just know they were real truth. It like our brains when sober just cannot conceptualize certain pieces of information. It's damn hard to explain, but I am so sure there is a higher power and a greater plan to all of this. In the presence of such a vast bank of knowledge I just felt humbled, like....embarrassed for thinking I knew anything about life. 

God is more complex than I could have ever imagined. I think religions have an impossible task at trying to make sense of what higher power is. I completely understand why stories are used in each religion to try and convey certain lessons. 

I'm not sure what to do next, I feel like I was in the presence of something way more intelligent and incomprehensible than I could ever imagine (loving, graceful, patient, wise) and I was caught naked....completely humbled.If this isn't for you , You would have scrolled on by .

This isn't exact but this is the only way I can explain the unexplainable.  

There are 2 realities , The physical and Non physical (Astral realm) 

You currently spend %99.90 of your time In the physical. 
This doesn't have to be . 

Figuring out its a "dream" doesn't ruin the game . It just changes the odds so now you start winning more ..alot more . 
As you are the dice roller and The Player and thats O'K to understand 

If your waiting for a sign to finally take action . That was a month ago this is The Reminder.  

Stop analysising what this means and ....  FeelIt’s been interesting, even insightful many times. But I’ve developed this addiction to scrolling and it’s getting out of control. It doesn’t matter what subs I’m on, I get these little dopamine hits like tiny bumps of cocaine, even as I search for information on how to evolve and improve my life. The irony is astounding as I waste away most spare moments everyday scrolling post and reading comments, looking for more ways to improve. It all ends up being another distraction from myself and it makes it nearly impossible to avoid comparing myself to others on a regular basis. 

I keep searching for answers while those answers are already inside me. If I’m ever going to know myself or reality on any deep, meaningful level, I don’t think I can do it with reddit in my life. Yes, it might be boring for a while, but we just weren’t designed to live like this. The constant stimulation and polarizing nature of social media is causing great misery to my spirit. It’s time for me to dig deep, figure out what I really want in life, and focus my energy there. Maybe eventually I can find some of that inner peace I keep hearing about. 

Love and light to all you beautiful people on the other side of the screen. May we all find our highest paths.


Edit: I do realize the irony of posting this but I thought it might inspire others to do the same. Watch The Social Dilemma on Netflix. It’s probably more disturbing than anything you’ll see on reddit. “The struggle you’re in today is developing the strength you need tomorrow.” 

May your future be blessed with peace, love, happiness, prosperity and joy!Don’t say anything to yourself that you wouldn’t say to a 5 year old. Be honest, be kind and be gentle. Don’t sugarcoat anything, don’t lie to yourself, and love yourself.

Edit: be kind to yourself for your short comings.Okay so I’ve been seeing repeated sequences (angel numbers) for the past few months and I’m not sure why. I’ve seen them before in the past, and I know inherently what they mean, but they’ve been blowing up everywhere I look. Is it because of the upcoming shift? Has anyone else been seeing theirs frequently?We all seek to be valued, accepted, loved by the ones who we like and love.  That is very human.  But we also must remind ourselves that we are all different, and that perhaps we are at different places or levels in our journey.  So, to be attached to another, or to expect the kind of love we give to others, may just bring us disappointment, frustration, feelings of worthlessness.

Attachment is not love.  Although it may appear like it is, attachment is the response to feeling empty, lonely, and lacking the feeling of wholeness in us.  No one must be our source for happiness and love.  No one can give us love and happiness, because these are found in yourself, only by yourself.  Let's remind ourselves of that.I discovered this on a Psychedelic trip, all the good/bad that comes with life is the point. It’s all to feel and exist because at one point in our life cycle we did not feel, so this is what we want, but due to the state of the world now, where we are told we Need to “be” something, we lose that meaning and reasoning. So we put the meaning of life into other things, ignoring that we still need to feel these things. 

And also due to the nature of “negative” emotions hurting , we tend to run away. Thinking life is only to feel good

It makes me think this may be why we reincarnate, maybe we are forced but maybe we realized we didn’t enjoy the experience as we should. So we come back in hopes we do not make the same mistake. 

Just a theory I thought of, when I was bored at work and combined with an acid trip. What do you all think?To whoever needs to hear this,

It is completely okay to feel uncertain or scared- that's life, we all have felt this way at some point. But always remember that god, the universe or what ever you believe in puts obstacles in our way to help us grow. These obstacles aren't meant to make us suffer, god never puts us in situations that we cannot handle. And there is always a lesson behind why you experience what you have experienced. If you keep experiencing the same type of situations and you keep dealing with the same types of people then you must not have learned the lesson that you were meant to learn. 

stay strong.  persist. clarity is coming I promise.Yes, you can become obsessed with spirituality. You can become addicted to anything, including (sometimes especially) spirituality. I was going through something very difficult about a year ago, and spirituality was how I coped with it. (To be fair, it’s a very healthy coping mechanism compared to some other, more common ones. But that’s not the point.)

My newfound spirituality was great at first. It was my savior that was going to get me out of the shit I got myself into. I surrounded myself with it. I meditated every day, I read spiritual books, I listened to talks by Eckhart Tolle and Alan Watts. It made me feel special, happy, hopeful. Maybe it *was* healthy at first. But at some point, it became too much.

I started shaming myself for having “bad” thoughts (or sometimes just thoughts in general). I started feeling guilty about being depressed when I *knew* that there was nothing to be depressed about. I started being mean to myself when I wasn’t accepting of everyone I encountered. I hated myself when I wasn’t a “perfect spiritual being.” I started a civil war in my head. A civil war between my thoughts and my other thoughts. I was tearing myself apart.

And then I realized that it didn’t matter.

It didn’t matter that I felt conflicted, or depressed, or anxious, or frustrated. Everything is temporary. Nothing matters in the end. So I decided to do the thing I feared the most, and that was to let myself fall. After all, it didn’t matter.

I immediately took spirituality out of my life. I left this subreddit, I stopped meditating, I allowed myself to indulge in unhealthy habits, I gave up listening to philosophers philosophizing the meaning of life. I let myself do what I felt like doing, and I had a really fun summer doing it. But when I moved back to my college campus for classes, I felt more lost than ever.

My depression was coming back. My anxiety was back and stronger than ever. It *sucked.* So I decided to revisit spirituality.

For some reason, while sitting on the grass in my campus’s arboretum, I felt compelled to look up “Alan Watts 25” on YouTube. I watched the first video that came up, and something clicked.

I don’t know how to explain it. I don’t know why it clicked. But now I just feel relieved. I finally feel no need to run from myself.

My spirituality was suffocating me, and I needed to take a step back from it so I could come back and look at it from a different perspective—a more loving, accepting perspective.

I guess all I’m trying to say is, do whatever you feel you need to do, even if that means giving up spirituality. It’s okay. Despite it having good intentions, *anything* can be abused. Just make sure your spirituality is helping you, not hurting you.I used to think this was bullshit. I’d go, “no way! I don’t act that way. I don’t do that.” But it’d just be in another form. It didn’t look like the way they did it, but it was the same intention behind it. It was the same egoic, shadow side driving it. And THAT was what I resented in others. The blaring display of ego in whatever unappealing form. I’ve encountered so much aggression and upset from others in my life, and I believe it’s because I’m a perfect target for people who want to project. I’m non confrontational, but I’m extremely honest and straightforward. I don’t hide my ugly sides, I put them on the table. And it’s no surprise that anyone who’s gone off on me is someone dealing with a myriad of insecurities and troubles of their own. 

None of us are exempt. I see this happen all the time on reddit and it’s really obnoxious. People say anything and there’s a slew of projections hurled at that person. If we are on a spiritual, conscious path we cannot be that way to others. We cannot judge and condemn. We cannot criticize. We HAVE to see the beauty in all others, or you’re not on the path, and that is crystal clear. You must love wicked people. It doesn’t mean you condone their behavior, but it means you love them because they’re a child of the same divine source you come from. Whether you like it or not, they have just as much value as you. No one is better or worse because we are all expressions of the divine. Some are just lost. And it’s not the lifetime for them to be found. 

There’s no excuse for judgement and impatience. Stop projecting!! Start loving!!

EDIT: those who are finding reasons to disagree... you’re proving the point of this post 😞 I’m trying to share a simple, loving, (I feel) obvious, at least in this spiritual community - message. I don’t understand the need to diverge or make this into a debate it wasn’t intended to be.Getting food is easy. It's not even very expensive and you can obtain it pretty quickly. In a lot of cases you don't even have to cook it. You can eat it in your car.

There are some side effects, though:

1.) The commercial food was grown in way that destroys the soil. Look up how commercial agriculture is causing global desertification.

2.) Commercially grown foods lack nutrition. Our bodies need the output of microbes in the soil. B-vitamins top the list of nutrients that are getting scarce in commercial food, because the food is being grown in sterile soil.

3.) The food must be trucked to the store and then you have to drive it home. That enormous amounts of energy to move all that food every day.

4.) The food always comes with garbage - bottles, containers, wrapping, trays. They have to be produced in factories and they ultimately end up in landfills or in the ocean.

5.) You are missing the benefits gained by physically working for your food. Our bodies were designed for motion. Growing your own food is like a free gym membership that pays you in the form of food.

6.) Buying food makes your dependant on the system. If the system ever breaks and you have no means of providing food for yourself, you'll be in a bad position.

7.) You have no control over what's in your food.

Finally, I believe growing food for yourself is a spiritual act. You are being kind to the planet. You are being kind to yourself. Finally, you are working hard, doing the right thing when you could take the easy way out.

In my opinion, growing my own food is a win / win / win scenario. The only downside is that it takes physical effort. To be really honest, though, I need some of that in my life.

Anyway, I thought I would share.Anybody else been SUPER emotional recently. Little things have just been making me pretty emotional. Sadness and happiness have been pretty strong lately for me.I don’t really know how to explain it but I don’t really identity myself as being “spiritual” anymore . I see myself as a human being enjoying life . I don’t take it as seriously as I used to , like forcing myself to mediate or trying to open all my chakras or even trying to communicate w my guides . I don’t care for much of that. I’m just here to enjoy lifeWhat are your fears?
I was afraid of ghosts when I was little. I'd run to the bathroom imagining something was under the bed going to grab me. There was that part in me that new nothing was there, but the fear was fierce.
In our daily lives we feel a thorny feeling of anxiety. We deep down know we can't contol everything and there's fear in that. Fear our desires won't be met, a partner found, financial peace. I think fundamentally we're all afraid we are not in control. I don't get to control if I can have two cups of coffee today. My belly said no. Ah. I'M ok with that.
I'm sometimes afraid I will be single forever. I run through that ghost by being okay with myself today. Just for this moment, be okay with what is. Its okay.
Face the fear surrender to it. Run through your ghost!Everywhere  I look, especially with politics the way they are, everyone is shouting  their opinions over each other.  No one understands that opinions are  just made up.  ENTIRELY made up.  They're based on facts that you choose  to believe, because there will always be facts that contradict your  beliefs, always.  It's the nature of things.

So  I see people on the political right and left yelling facts and beliefs  at each other and it's all worthless.  They're all angry and bitter and  resentful, they're reacting to the reactionary reactions of other people  reacting.  Everything is a negative reaction.  Everything.  And what's  more, there's something called a duality unfolding.  Opposites are  married to each other, inextricably linked.  What you fight, in a way,  becomes part of your identity.  So the right and the left would not  exist without each other in the first place.

I  am of the left.  At least I was until I decided it wasn't worth it to  deny contradictory information from opposing perspectives.  It's all  just opinions.  Just opinions.  And opinions are worthless.  The truth  is above our opinions, and we find it by looking across that duality.   You can see the truth in your opposite, if you look hard enough.  And  when you jump for it, if you're ready to look past the facts you choose  to believe, you become more whole.  Because you're identifying that the  world is bigger than what you shrink it down to be.  I mean no  disrespect to anyone with fervently held beliefs.  I just can't handle  all the pissy opinions anymore.Grapes must be crushed to make wine. Diamonds form under pressure. Olives are pressed to release oil. Seeds grow in darkness. 

Whenever you feel crushed, under pressure, pressed or in darkness, you’re in a powerful place of transformation and transmutation.

Trust the process :)Do you remember the first time you held someone's hand, romantically? I do. Discovery Place, summer "camp"/aka science class. It was a week long science class and we were studying the planets, eating astronaut space candy and at the end of the week, we went to the (still new) IMAX theater, where I sat beside the cute boy from class and dared to make my move. I remember awkwardly reaching for his hand - trying to touch him "accidentally" and maybe he would let me hold it if my hint was well delivered. When I close my eyes, I can still see the white glare from the screen and feel that gut churning sensation I had when I decided the risk of rejection was worth the attempt to hold the cute boys' hand. The show was about outer space and the concave screen made me nauseous. 

When it was over, I remember being crushed because we immediately had to leave - our parents were there to pick us up. It was the last day of the program, on a Friday. I was either 10 or 11 that summer - getting a boy's phone number and actually calling him was something I knew my parents would never agree to and so... we didn't even try it. We just kind of sadly understood we would never see each other again. (This was 1994-1995, so kids had no cell phones and social media didn't exist.) I went home and wrote about him (and that experience) in my diary for weeks. And knowing I wouldn't see him again, I never told a single soul about our interaction that day...but I've replayed the image in my head a million times since then...because it was my first big thrill with the opposite sex. 

Fast forward to age 35. I've been seeing this guy off and on for about three months. On July 4, he spent time at my parents house, where there is a memory wall. There's a horrible picture of me (age 11), displayed for all to see - of my squinty eyed smile, cheesing hard, in a swing. He saw the picture and a week later, asked if I'd ever been to a summer camp. I told him not really. 

Fast forward another few days. I'm meeting his mom on her birthday - July 16 - discussing people from the 90's in the Charlotte area homeschool group. His parents and my parents knew some of the same people, oddly enough. It's really a wonder Jeff and I never interacted before - how did we miss each other? We were both homeschooled and did similar activities...surely we bumped into each other at some point, right? 

Fast forward an hour. In the checkout line at the grocery store, he randomly looks at me and says, "Did you ever hold a boy's hand in the IMAX theater at Discovery Place when you were younger? Because I held a girl's hand at a summer camp there one year and her name was Rachael..."

 It was HIM. 💕Keep this one with you every day :) Everything that happens - whether it be bliss or sadness, confidence or low self-esteem, triumph or trauma: imagine your image of the universe, cradling you, letting you know you are loved. Letting you know that you are exactly how you are supposed to be, exactly where you are supposed to be, right now :)I see you. I see when you try to meditate but struggle and get uncomfortable due to the deafening silence. When you try to think positive but the world seems to be going against you. When you wonder where you went wrong and cry yourself to sleep. And I want you to know i’m proud of you. I’m proud of you for trying even though sometimes you just want to give up. I’m proud of you for connecting with the universe, and trying to spread positivity. Spirituality is not linear, nor is it perfect. That’s why it’s called a spiritual JOURNEY. Regardless, I want you to know i’m proud of you, and keep going.There is too much happening on Earth right now. Weather and climate disasters, pandemic, NWO, ascension, 3D, 4D, 5D, 5G, toxins, human sex trafficking, The Great Awakening, The Great Reset, fake news, censorship, government, politics, Australia, Texas, Afghanistan, Taliban. WhatEVER topic you're over digesting, caught up in or worried about.

If you need to be proven right you can 100% find information on the internet that validate your views, beliefs and biases. It doesn't matter the topic. You'll find an article or study to prove your point. This perpetuates divide and fear.

There is overwhelm flooding the external collective. It's both devastating and deeply enlightening.

What does this mean?

Close the article, shut off your tv, shut your laptop, walk away from the argument your family member is throwing at you.

Pause. Breathe. **Tap in to your intuition.**

How do I feel? What feels right and true to, or for me?

The only thing we can truly trust right now is our own inner resonance. Stop worrying about the rest. Feel deeply within your soul what is true for you. Turn off the thinking brain and *feel*.

Leave the rest up to the universe to sort out. Stop overwhelming yourself when you can find peace in this exact moment if you choose. All you have to do is shut it all out and tune in to your inner guidance and light. There you will find peace.I've changed within the last year. This time last year, I was meditating all day long - chanting, sitting in silence, flowing in movements through chakra dancing, tantric breathing, kundalini yoga, you name it. I without a doubt was existing in a state of ascension - The trees were waving at me, I experienced light shows constantly, it was amazing and so beautiful. Within the last few months, I have not been committed to these practices and the ascension symptoms have lessened greatly. I also have noticed a conscious difference about the ego and physical based things my mind has regressed back to. But I took a moment to reflect on this and realized that "regressed" is not the word. I am not going backwards in my spiritual journey, in fact I believe that it is impossible for the journey is not linear. But I am exactly where I am supposed to be. The ascension is a beautiful state. It's euphoric and inspiring, but so is Earth.

&#x200B;

Today, I am equally as spiritual as I was this time last year, I am just embodying my physical form and physical experiences as I was sent to do. The life cycle that I am in is one where I am grounded, interested in boys, enjoying indulging in my favorite television, getting stressed out with work and school, and all while loving Source and grateful for the guidance that my angels and guides advise me with every step of the way.

Your journey is not linear, nor is it the same as anyone else's. You are exactly where you are meant to be.

Love and Light Earth Angels <3Drink, eat, move your body, place your focus — all with intention.

Are you drinking enough water? Are you supplying your body with the food it needs? Is your body getting enough exercise? Are you thinking of how to best fill your day or are you hung up on things in the past? 

Take a moment to journal or reflect on what your current body and mind needs. 

Earlier this morning I was so angry for no reason. I let the emotion run it’s course and then I came to this realization of moving myself with intention, once I have freed myself from these early feelings.**Today is the beginning of any damn thing you want ☀️**

POWERFUL saying, I wanted to share with everyone.

You can do this. UP VOTE this post if you feel this resonates with youinfinite space, infinite possibilities, infinite realities, infinite experiences. It's a dream come true. I hope everyone's having a good day ❤I love you so much! Sending good vibes, healing, and loads of hugs to ALL OF YOU!!! 🥰💕☮️Your love life and your spiritual life is flourishing. Along with them, your financial life is going to exceed your most positive expectations.

[Here are the 7 signs that shows your vibrations are increasing/Rising](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley/comments/jdejei/here_are_the_7_signs_that_shows_your_vibrations/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source)With such difficult things going on in the world right now, taking care of ourselves is essential. In order to ever move forward and truly grow without barriers, healing from our wounds is absolutely necessary, and shadow work can be a very helpful tool in doing that. When we are little kids, many positive or negative cues from our parents, teachers and friends, influence the way that we behave in the world later on in life. Whether we realize it or not, some of these developed behaviors may actually be hindering us from being our raw and authentic selves. Figuring out how to do shadow work can be difficult, so I’ve come up with a few questions that may be helpful in your journey of working to heal yourself and becoming grounded and whole again.


What was expected of me as a child, and was I completely accepted?

What behaviors and emotions of mine were judged by my parents?

What parts of myself do I judge and where did I learn this judgement from?

What was the kind thing I needed to hear but didn’t? And how would hearing that have changed the ways I judge myself?

If the darker part of me were to speak its truth right now, what would it say?

What experiences lead me to dissociate and escape from reality?

If I am honest, what negative traits from my parents might I embody?

What would my life look like if I integrated my shadow?

These are some of the questions I’ve included in my most recent YouTube upload all about how to do shadow work. I even made a worksheet in case it makes it easier to do! Just thought you guys might find these valuable, as they were very valuable to me! 

Sending you positive vibrations,

The Cosmic Butterfly ✨🦋 (on YouTube)This life is but a tiny blip in eternity. Love is the only way to truly be consistently happy while living this physical experience. Let go of your attachments and just exist💚I’ve been following that for a few days now and man it’s crazy how many negative things I say (~~even~~ especially a as joke) to myself , I’m even going to stop saying negative things about people, especially if it’s not constructive and it won’t aid in their growth.

I can see it working wonders already.All there ever is is the present moment. The future and past do not exist. They only exist in your mind in the NOW. You think you’ve experienced your past, but how can you prove that? The only evidence of your past are the thoughts you have of it. Yeah, you may also have photos and videos, but you’re looking at them NOW. When you think of your future it is the same. You again think about it in the NOW. 

All you’ll have is this present moment. And in every moment you are being given the gift to choose what to think and do. So choose consciously and choose lovingly.I   was in the mental hospital once.  It sucked.  Of course it did.    HOWEVER.  I had an experience in the hospital that was but an inkling of   what was to come, as I went back into the world, and particularly for   me, went back to AA.  I got a chance to meet the chaplain, while I was   in there.  He was cool shit.  He knew how to speak to people.  He had   this care, a comfort, and a confidence in him that was profoundly true,     and I noticed that his movements, unlike mine which were rigid and   shitty, had a rhythm and a flow.  He spoke with a soothing rhythm, he   moved with a soothing rhythm.  This dude was rocking in the rhythm of   the moment.  Apparently you can see experts of dialectical behavioral   therapy rock in the rhythm also.  Come to think of it there was someone   else in the hospital who rocked in the rhythm. I cant remember what she   did but she was very kind.  Very aware.  At some point, likely after I   told her during my psychosis I believed the 12 steps were inside of  me,  she informed me that she had done the steps herself, and she  assured me  of their power.  She didn’t do them for alcohol, but she  didn’t disclose  what her catalyst was.  Even better.  Just letting me  know the power of  the steps when I doubted the most.  That’s why she  was there, what a  gift.

As I went  back to AA, I  started to notice the different ways that people carried  themselves, and  the ways they spoke.  Some were hunched and mumbled,  some proud and  egoic, but some of them...some of these people were  mutants.  I could  see it in them, and hear the truth for the first  time.  You haven’t  heard the truth until you’ve heard it uttered by an  old hillbilly with  no teeth who hasn’t showered in a month.  That’s  some unadulterated  truth right there.

Its  like once I  saw the rhythm in these people I couldn’t unsee it, and  suddenly they  were like roided up cartoon characters as far as I was  concerned,  heaving with spirit muscle.  But they just weren’t moving.   When a  spiritual person moves, its like poetry.  But the real power is  watching  them rock in the rhythm without moving.  I watched this guy  chair a  meeting, that’s the person who shares their story first.  This  guy told  this crazy story about drugs, and money, and jail time, and  arson.  He  told it with calm and authority.  He leaned back in his  chair, its like  he was at attention and at rest at the same time.  He  was nothing like  me.  But his story was so powerful I found him at his  car after the  meeting and asked him if he had a moment.  He turned,  said my name, and  asked “what can I do for you?”

I   was surprised to say the least.  In a room full of 40 people, he   remembered my name from going around the room at the beginning.  Just   the one time.  He was rocking in the rhythm so hard, he was paying such   close attention, that that reaction came to him as effortlessly as me   yelling “hey.”  Maybe more effortlessly because I didn’t want to bother   him.  The more someone is rocking in the rhythm of the beat of the   moment, the more the moment is accessible to them.  They experience more   and process faster.  They know what to do, they know what to say.   They  don’t move much.  They don’t speak much.  Pay attention to how  people  move, and I guarantee if they have true cadence and flow,  they’re down  with the rhythm.  I also guarantee they see hear, taste,  smell, and feel  more than the rest of us do.  Because they are more  inherently and  solidly grounded to the rhythm of the beat.

It   doesn’t even matter what they practice, that’s the point.  They all   rock the same way.  The twelve steps for instance act as a universal   translator, like in star trek.  You work steps, you’re getting in the   rhythm.  There’s obviously plenty of ways to get in the rhythm, this is   just the one I see around me personally.  You work steps, you find a   higher power, you’re essentially training your brain to understand that   it is without a doubt not even remotely alone.  It’s inside of   everything else.  And you rock in that rhythm instead of your own.  Cuz   your own rhythm sucked.  Check it out if you ever get the chance.   Watch  how they move.  I don’t know about you but I want to rock in the  rhythm  so hard it kicks me back all the way to the cosmic moment, where  it all  begins, the big bang beat.  I don’t dance much but I’ll rock to  that  tune.

Audio version, and other similar essays: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QsWplQ4vfss&list=PL9Z4QUA\_pVoRrtTcPpV0N92CPnX8vyJOh&index=5](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QsWplQ4vfss&list=PL9Z4QUA_pVoRrtTcPpV0N92CPnX8vyJOh&index=5)They say that desire is the root of suffering.  I can agree with that to some extent.  But I think you have to look at what type of desire you're dealing with.  Some desire can be good.  I want to travel the world.  I want to become a chef.  I want to learn to play the guitar.  This is totally good and natural!  The notion that desire is bad comes from when we cling to desire.  "I will only be happy if I can travel the world".  Right now, with Covid, for example, it's not possible.  If you cling to something that simply cannot be, you will suffer.  You are fighting the nature of things.

And this is a key point: fighting the nature of things.  Not only do we resist life as it is - we also resist ourselves as we are.  We are taught to go to war with ourselves.  We are taught to live a certain way, speak a certain way, act a certain way.  All of us.  The conditioning goes very, very deep.  Very few have stopped to think, "wait a minute, what am I doing and why?"  Some of us look at the big questions, like pursuing a degree in art vs. a degree in business.  But it can be more subtle than that.  We carry around a lot of phony beliefs about ourselves and about life.

Like for example: I'm not good enough.  I have to do something with my life.  I have to be somebody.  I have to be perfect.  I have to be strong.  I have to be nice.  I have to be spiritual.  Etc. Etc.

Rare, very rare, is the individual who accepts himself just as he is, without any notion of "should" or "should not".

You can change habits.  You can adopt a spiritual practice.  You can seek out spiritual teachers.  In a way, I encourage the exploration.

But it is my sincere opinion that the root of our misery is because we are living a life that's not meant for us.  It doesn't matter what habits you adopt, or how spiritual you think you are... if you are living a fake, plastic life, then you cannot hope to be happy or fulfilled. You can put in all the effort in the world, but if your efforts are in the wrong direction, then you can never hope to succeed.

Of course, finding oneself can be tremendously scary, painful, and frustrating. It takes patience. It takes courage.  There are benefits to letting others provide the goals for you.  At least you don't have to face your own ignorance and confusion.  There's some sort of comfort in falsehood.

But at the end of the day we only get one shot at this, and as for me, I choose to take the road less travelled. I want to do something cool with my life.  I don't care if I have to be lost or confused or frustrated sometimes.  Life is worth it.  I'm worth it.

If life has shown me one thing, it's that we never know what we are capable of.Anyone else been feeling paranoid? sad? a little uncomfortable. It’s not that complicated. The moon is just in Scorpio and, we all really really need a hug. It’s such a restraining feeling when you want to express all your love to someone but, you know the person doesn’t deserve it.. so, you just don’t. These feelings. These emotions. They are VALID. We all are warranted to admiration that feels and IS reciprocated. You are not anyones free meal to feed on and, then leave you starving. We will get what we deserve this lifetime, It is and so, it shall be. 

You are meant for great things, remember that. You are put here to be the best you can be in this lifetime. I suggest you do the things that matter to you and not allow fear to diminish your goals and, dreams because in the end, you will be the only regret.May this month bring you an abundance of blessings and divine opportunities may you be blessed beyond measure and manifest all of your heart's desires.We are living in a matrix. A complete illusion of what you "think" is real vs "what is." You have been conditioned from the moment you have been born by your parents, society, role models, education, health, science and etc. We live in a world (western) that is essentially governed by institutions that keep you controlled.

You go to school, get indoctrinated, taught that the only way to get ahead is to follow these set of rules, and if you obey them you will lead a happy life. Make money, pay your taxes, have a few babies, retire at a set age and die. This is the illusion of thinking you're free when you're not. It's done by design to keep you in an invisible cage.

But then you wake up. You have a moment of clarity that things aren't what they are. Perhaps you have an experience such as myself - near death experience, brain cancer at 26 - and are thrusted into the present moment. Where the illusion disappears and you see what matters. You begin to connect with a part of yourself that's much larger than your physical form. An aspect of you that is known as your "higher self." The unseen force that gently nudges you throughout life...and at times can turn your life upside down to wake you up. 

This is what happened to me at 26. I almost died (brain cancer) and realized the divine truth of who we are. We are spiritual beings having a human experience. The intent is to grow as the soul from the collective experiences we call life. To learn certain lessons and to evolve as spirit.

What's happening on earth now is a total shift in consciousness. And the human spirit is rising. That's why everything outside is collapsing. The control mechanisms - media, government, science, education, police, and etc are all crumbling. If we're truly going to rise above we need to acknowledge that we've been under control, manipulated, and deceived. And perhaps the most important thing here is to forgive. To forgive those who have wronged us and to forgive ourselves.

If we are truly going to move forward as a species it's not going to happen if we keep victimizing, blaming, shaming, and killing one another. We need to love, have compassion, and have forgiveness. This is the way of the spiritual warrior.

Stand strong my fellow brothers and sisters. We got this. It's already been done. Love and light always prevails.In this current state in time, humanity is heavily weighted on the side of ego. Most humans are only concerned with themselves. This has created a lot of suffering.

Hence, it is easy to vilify the self. "Selfishness is the root of all evil!"

If the scales were turned in the opposite direction, however, we would be slaves to our instincts. We would not have any free will and or field of experience would be very narrow.

The universe uses our instincts to nudge us into a certain direction. If we are too absorbed in our ego, though, we miss the signals. From my experience, we miss out on life's greatest adventures by holding fast to the ego to "sticking to the plan".

It is not ego death that we need to achieve.

We just need balance.

We take our intellect and temper it with our instincts.

We meditate to become more sensitive to our gut feelings.

It is a gentle idea coupled with observation and action that leads to the blissful existence the universe is trying to nudge us into.Exercise for physical health.

Study for mental health.

Meditate for emotional health.

...

Love to you all from your friend, Bear. ♡I know a lot of people believe that the way you are reincarnated in your current life is due to your karma from a past life. (Ex: do good things, get born into a better position / do bad things, get born into a worse position.)

But some of us were born into intense amounts of childhood trauma. Some of us were born into households of abuse, whether it be physical, sexual, emotional, neglect, etc. For those of us who were born into this, I don’t think it’s healthy or appropriate to believe we were born into this because of bad things we did in past lives. (This is a thought that used to haunt me when I first began opening up to the concept of reincarnation.) The universe is full of love and encourages us to grow. Being born into abuse as a form of punishment for past actions seems too unloving to be the truth.

What if, instead, we were born into these families because we are the ones who the universe believes can handle the pain? My family has been dealing with intergenerational abuse for as far back as I can trace my lineage. It feels self destructive to believe I was born into this family because I did bad things and wracked up negative karma. What if we were the ones born into this because we are the ones who have grown strong enough throughout our infinite reincarnations to be able to process an entire lineage of abuse without going on to abuse the ones we love?

Don’t let the family you were born into diminish your worth. Instead, let’s consider just how much the universe trusts us and hopefully we can see just how strong we really are. :)

Lastly, a butchered quote from a video game I finished recently, but it seems appropriate to end with: “I may not be able to forgive you for what you put me through, but I know now I can trust you.” (This is spoken by the main character to the creator of his world.) We don’t have to forgive the universe or our families for what we were born into, but maybe we can find the strength to trust ourselves and the universe again. Peace to you.Let’s talk about the 4 levels of consciousness. They are simply the different states where you grow into different relationships with life.

&#x200B;

**First, The Blamer.**

The Blamer says, ***“Life happens to me.”*** People in this state are self-victimized. They feel like life happens to them without their consent or control. They are the passive passengers on the drive of their own journey. They perceive that life is utterly unfair, and they are poor victims of a sadistic Creator. The Blamer often uses terms such as “I can’t,” “they made me,” “it’s no use,” “you will not understand,” where power belongs to forces outside the speaker.

This is the first state because as kids, we actually were there, where we could only passively eat the food our parents made and went to schools of our parents’ choices. It is absolutely normal for kids to have problems outside their control, but I bet you know at least one or two adults with this attitude. Some people just never grow out of this state. A long-term people pleaser. A woman who stays with her abuser for years and declines help. Any of us who hates our job to the core but keeps going every day. The Blamer can easily evolve into a state of learned helplessness, where they completely distrust their personal power and just let life happen to them.

&#x200B;

**Second, The Responsible.**

The Responsible says, ***“Life happens for me.”*** When the Blamer is done suffering and satisfying others, and their crying does not improve their life in any way, they develop the consciousness of responsibility. They decide to take back the wheel and become more bold, assertive, and willing to take action. The Responsible understands that they will not get the kind of help they want from the external world, and they are fully responsible for their thoughts, feelings, and actions.

This state is obviously better than the Blamer, but as the name may suggest, responsibility is no fun. Many people in this state develop existential crisis or the Sisyphus condition, where they feel numb, meaningless, and utterly disconnected from their life. Just like Sisyphus pushing the rock upon the top of the hill just to watch it roll right back down, we do the same work every day, expect the same outcome, and consider our life and ourselves boring. We feel trapped, pressured, easily replaceable, and deeply alienated. The only way to really feel the meaning of life is to know that we are, in fact, free, loved, irreplaceable, and wholly connected. That is when people move to the third state, the Contributor.

&#x200B;

**Third, The Contributor.**

The Contributor says, ***“Life happens through me.”*** This state often starts with a spiritual awakening, when we suddenly realize the interconnectedness. Perhaps the social condition we live in looks cold and distant, but above it is a higher order that actually cares about us, organizes lessons for us to grow, and depends on us as much as we depend on it.

When we realize that, we do not even have to actively contribute. We know that everything we do – our sole existence – is a contribution. The Responsible, even if he invented a whole new technology, feels empty because he doesn’t know who he’s serving, and he feels like tons of other people have done the exact thing but better than him. The Contributor, on the other hand, is delighted by the most simple act. By breathing, he is helping the trees to metabolize. By thanking the server, he is making her job a little easier. By taking care of himself, he is loving his loved ones and making them comfortable around him. He does not always keep in mind, “Who am I helping when I do this or that.” He simply views himself as a helper of the universe and appreciates every chance to spread the message.

&#x200B;

**Fourth, The Attractor.**

The Attractor says, ***“Life happens as me.”*** There is a huge step moving from the third to the fourth state – it probably takes the longest time. If the Contributor only considers himself a vessel, the Attractor has gathered profound wisdom and trust to make use of the universal forces in him. The Attractor believes in the universe, but no more than his belief in himself. All the great minds and spiritual gurus are Attractors. They could rewrite what had been thoughts to be the unalterable laws of nature. They act as the universe: enlighten people, bring them closer to their source, create a new belief system, and lift the collective consciousness to a higher level just by themselves. The Attractor ultimately blurs the line between the individual and the divine.

&#x200B;

There is no need to level up or label yourself with any of these states. If you are happy with your life, then keep doing you. This is only a possible map of consciousness that could guide us to more happiness. This is just a map guiding us back to ourselves.So fucking intolerant of anything that isn't materialistic or proven fact. Why are people so unnecessarily cruel. Why do people try to discredit life experience with their closed minded view that science is all that is.What would you want them to them see?

The past is a memory, and the future is an idea. The universe is ever expanding, ever creating, possibilities are endless.  But it can go either way.     
How can your actions *now* create the highest possible timeline?

    
Love, Damini
    
P.S: loving some of the funny smartass comments, thanks for the chuckle - upvotes for everyone ;}I’m having a lot of synchronicities. To the point that I feel as if the universe is bending itself to fit my needs. Everything feels as if it was perfectly designed to help me grow into the person I need to be. 

Every struggle helps me learn. Learning helps me grow. Growing unlocks potential. Maybe we are all gods of our own universe. We just need to open ourselves up to the infinite cosmos. 

I need to ground myself. Imma head out to the woods and rub dirt on meI’ve found out that I have stage 4 pancreatic cancer and I probably don’t have too long left. 

I feel ok about it, honestly. I’ve had a good life. I just feel really badly for the people who I love who will be sad. Also, this is really new information, so I could just be in shock. 

So I started a new account, and I’m going to the subs I like to talk about it. That way I can choose whether I want to think/talk about it, or be in my “before” account, and like, laugh at children falling down, or whatever. 

I don’t know what to do with this time I have left. I always thought I would travel the world or something, but I guess that’s out. Wondering what folks here would do. 

I have about a year’s salary saved, and another year’s salary on credit cards. Probably gonna divorce on paper so we can rack them up as she won’t have to pay them, haha. I live far from home, thinking about going to my hometown for when my body starts really failing. But between now and then...?

I’m not planning on fighting it, because all that’ll do is make me sicker and I’m not going to survive it anyway. Not  interested in medical advice. Just want to decide what to do with my time, and I figure you lovely smart feeling people might have some inspiring ideas.

I also haven’t told anybody yet. Literally nobody. That’s the part I dread as much as being in a lot of pain. I will, soon. I just need to get my grounding so I can be strong for them.

I guess I should say, I don’t really want to talk too much, but I’m not ghosting the conversation. If you have practical advice, I’ll take it; right now I just want to listen, take in info, consider other people’s perspectives, more than talk. I guess because I really don’t know anything yet. I’m not ready to make decisions, I just want to think about what’s still possible, and go from there.

Thanks in advance for your consideration.Sometimes we suffer more in our imagination than in reality. And of course sometimes really terrible things can happen, and then it makes sense that you suffer because of this. But often our pain comes from our imagination of what happened in the past or what will happen in the future. But you are not living in the past. And you are not living in the future. You are living in this present moment. So focus on your breathing and be aware of where you are right now. And ask yourself if there are any problems. There probably aren't any problems, your problems were just in your head. So get out of your head, and enjoy this moment.

[Source](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TKyJylz5lJM)I think most of our problems come from the fact we hold all these external things from this world so close to our hearts and we get attached to it (spiritual people are not immune to this) but sometimes we need to chill and take a break and chill. You don’t always need to mediate , or do yoga or do anything . Just chill & be. Sometimes time away is the best time . Do that thing that’s “bad for you” it’s okayQuick backstory:
A few months ago me and my gf of 8 years broke up. Even though we both felt it was for the best it still hurts. I began to smoke cigarettes and I've tried to quit smoking for a while but I've kept coming up with excuses for myself to buy "just one more pack".

Yesterday, I rolled a joint, took a hike to my special spot where I often sit and just relax, meditate, read, write poems and enjoy the view (it's up on a mountain top). Any way, i smoked the joint and started to think about life in general. I felt happy and thankful for being there, I felt right to be there at that moment. I took out a cigarette and started to smoke. On my 4-5 inhale, at the exact moment I was about to blow out the smoke a gust of wind hit me (it had been no wind at all before that) and all the smoke and ash from the cigarette blew up my nose and down my throat.
I was coughing my lungs out.
After that gust of wind the air stood completely still again.
I strongly believe that the universe speaks to all of us, but most of us ignore it or just don't understand that language. That gust of wind really felt like the universe slapping me for being so stupid to keep coming up with excuses to keep smoking. Something I don't even want to do.
After that I threw the cigarettes. Sure, it's only been a day, but I feel no need for a smoke at all. That gust of wind opened my eyes.
There's a silent language in this world, that's only spoken by the ones who's listens.You do not need anyone else to tell you what is wrong and what is right. Your internal moral compass knows already. Follow and trust your heart and soul. Only you knows what’s best for yourself. Only you are in your head🤟I've joined it a few months ago when I was feeling scared of death and depressed of life. Today, I said " F this, if I'm here Im going to at least find some joy in it." I've recently joined a gym, scheduled a therapist, began meditating, and started an actual morning schedule. Jumping in head first. 

Please keep me in your thoughts during this harsh next month. Thank you.Once there was a great teacher who had many
students.

Once one of the students came to him and

asked "I have read lots of books but forgotten
most of them. What's the purpose of reading?".

The teacher didn't give him an answer at that
time.

After few days teacher gave that student a sieve
which was in dirty and in very bad condition as
shown in the picture.

The teacher asked the student to fetch water

from a nearby river in this sieve.

The student didn't like the idea but he could not

refuse his teacher.

He went to the river, filled sieve at the river and
started his return journey.

Few feet as he walks, all water in the sieve was
drained through holes.

Then again he went to the river and filled sieve.

He did this all day but could not complete the
task assigned by his teacher.

He returned to the teacher with a sad face and

said "I am unable to fetch water with this sieve.

am failed"

His teacher smiled at him.

No! You didn't fail.

Look at the sieve.

It has become like new. It got clean when you
were trying to fetch water.

The teacher then explained the true motive
behind this task.

He said " Last time you asked me what is the
purpose of reading if you don't remember what
you read. Now take this example of the sieve.

Sieve = Mind

Water = Knowledge

River = Book

Even if you can't remember its ok!

But reading will definitely make your mind
sharp.

Reading has a profound impact on our mind,
brain.

It helps to be a better version of yourself.

This is a subconscious process.

The story ends here.

Credit- Chaitanya ShrishrimalExcept reddit btw, I only come here to read during my free time other than that I also watch the television. I've never felt so relieved in my life :DThe  human mind takes itself very seriously. There is a good reason for  that: in the mind’s world, mind is all there is. Mind is the center of  the universe, literally, since it is the mind that creates the  perception of the universe. Mind is in the center of it’s own  perceptions, therefore mind is always preoccupied with itself. In any  and every situation the very first thing the mind wants to establish is:  what does this mean about me, how does this affect me, what does this  make me.

The  mind is eternally preoccupied with what it is, what it isn’t, what’s  it’s status, what’s it’s progress, what’s its level, what it achieved,  what it lost and what does it mean about the mind, and on and on and on  and on…

All  the “am I there yet” questions are the mind trying to assess itself.  All the “how do I know when I’m there” questions are the mind trying to  assess itself. All the “what are the signs” questions are the mind  trying to assess itself. Your question is the mind trying to assess  itself.

In  awakening what you are, the awareness that you are, expands and becomes  you. You become it. Awareness becomes the center of experience, and the  mind gets pushed to the sidelines, and so do the mind’s concerns. As a  result, everything that was of the greatest importance no longer is  important.

Establishing  one’s own position is no longer important, monitoring one’s own  progress is no longer important, figuring out what one is or isn’t, what  one achieved or didn’t achieve, what level one hit or didn’t hit, no  longer matters. Not in the least.

You no longer see any need to know whether or not you are awakened spiritually.Something that's really helped me day to day is the realisation that my mind and body are a system that work together. 

When it comes to intense or unpleasant emotions, often it will start with an unwanted thought appearing in the mind. The thought will trigger a physical response in the body, known as a feeling. 

These two elements combined (the thought and the feeling) make the experience of emotion. Then a cycle will begin where the feeling will cause more negative thoughts, leading to more feelings in the body [ad infinitum].

Many people deal with negative emotions by passively watching their thoughts. This is legitimate  but this process was not super effective for me, because what I experienced more overwhelmingly was a sense of anxiety/dread/sadness in my body. 

That was where my suffering was primarily originating. Thoughts were the cause, the feeling the effect. So I figured, why not directly address this part of the system instead.

My practice for day to day living is simply not having my body  'grab hold' of the feeling. Letting it pass through, then out. 

I noticed that my body will literally tense up when these heavy emotions are felt. However, if during the day, I simply allow these feelings to pass through my body as and when they arise (no distracting from it in the moment, no pushing it away), they don't gain the necessary momentum to turn into a full blown emotional crisis, later on.

The feelings are used to latching onto you, and your body is used to grabbing hold of them. Perhaps we subconsciously believe that by becoming rigid, we're more protected somehow. The opposite is true. 

If you let the feelings pass through you without grabbing on, it will last a few seconds, then you simply get back to living your life.Last Saturday, my wife had what I can only describe as a psychotic break. At the time, I thought it was ego dissolution, but ever since she’s been refusing to eat or sleep unless she absolutely has to. She doesn’t identify as herself anymore, and nothing I’m saying to her helps. She’s been quoting the Bible a lot, but just in bits and pieces that don’t make sense (we’ve both been Christians our whole lives, so she should know better). I’m in the process of getting her professional help and hopefully medication, but this is the most terrifying thing that’s ever happened to me. 

I’m begging anyone reading this to please pray for us in whatever way you see fit. I just want my wife back. I’m sorry if this is weird or doesn’t make sense. It’s only been a few days, but I feel like it’s driving me to the ends of my sanity. 

I love and appreciate anyone and everyone who reads this and thinks I am worth praying for.  Sorry again, this is just a lot.I was scrolling through Twitter when I seen this tiktok of some girl saying “if you’re not ready for this, then you’re not ready for spirituality”. She then proceeded to flash a bunch of shadow people on screen and it ended. Racked up 100,000+ likes and many other people agreeing. Now don’t get me wrong, if you’re seeing shadow people CLEAR AS DAY and you’re genuinely spiritual please message me. But I see ZERO correlation between these 2. The fact that so many people typically my age liked this has actually hit somewhere deep in me. I don’t know why I feel so threatened or attacked by this but the amount of BS tied with spirituality is getting ridiculous.

Edit: will send link if askedThe mushroom spirit wants you(empathetic person) to know that if you are getting constantly drained you are doing a DISSERVICE to humanity.

 You are part of the problem!

In my trip off shrooms, I has an intense vision..I saw people walking with HUGE ( almost whole body size) backpacks looking down and tired of life.  They were all walking in a line and would go up this hill and then disappear into the distance. Then I saw people without backpacks smiling and skipping around, sitting under trees, and looked really happy. In particular I honed in to a person w/out backpack sitting under a tree. A person with a backpack approached him asking him if he could help him by taking some of the load off his back. The guy w/out the backpack, an empath, agreed to take some of the things and had to put on a backpack to put in some of the baggage. As soon as that happened the guy with a now less heavy backpack walked away and the guy with no backpack was now left carrying a backpack full of someone else's shit. Since he now had a huge backpack which was the size of his whole body he could no longer sit under the tree and he could no longer enjoy himself. He had no other choice but to join the others with backpacks walking in line and over the hill.

The message: You choose to wear this heavy backpack much of what is not even yours. You can listen to others but do not agree to taking their problems as yours because now you become useless to others because now your limited and weighed down by that heavy ass backpack. If your an empath learn to have compassion but with limits. If you're feeling drained its because you are becoming emotionally invested in "trying to help" By taking someone's problems away. No, you must just listen allow them to take shit off their chest. Just listening you have done your job, empath! Sometimes that's all that's needed for someone to take some weight off their backpack and be able to walk a little easier on their journey!If you are suicidal, you can talk to me. If I can't help you, then I will do my best to find people who can.

You're not alone friend. The world isn't against you. We are trying to help best we can.Regarding Buddhism, my this time around coming out of my weed addiction was actually the catalyst to my breakthrough in my understanding of the core teaching. 

For many years, I tried managing my use, all the bargaining, negotiating, attempting to moderate it down to once a month, once a week, once a day, and all this effort trying to strike the perfect balance, turns into this constant excessive thinking around this topic.

It’s either I’m thinking about smoking, or thinking about moderating, or I’m just smoking all the time, while thinking about quitting. 

It’s the excessive thinking that became unbearable suffering. 

Buddhist teaching talks about how “thinking” is the source of suffering. “Nothingness” is nirvana; ultimate liberation. 

“Thinking” comes from desire, attachment. (Or the other way around, some argue)

This pleasure, either it’s a thing in your life, or it’s nothing to you. As long as it’s a thing, regardless how infrequently you use it, it’s a thing that you think about. As long as there is “thinking”, you are suffering. You are a slave to this desire and attachment.  

Only when it becomes “nothing”, then you attain true liberation (at least in terms of this relationship with weed) You cannot suffer from something that doesn’t exist. 

And I thank weed for teaching me this valuable lesson of Buddhism, because it also applies to other desires (money, big house, to have things under control, to find out what happened, revenge, justice, reddit upvotes), other addictions (food addiction, sweet beverage, sex), other attachments (social status, parents, children, friendships, spouse, this physical body, the ego).

The answer is always to let go. When you truly let go everything, you get out of this exhausting endless excessive thinking, and endless cycles of reincarnations of life and death. The fact that we are still here is because our souls are still learning to let go. 

Family, romance and sex are three huge attachment, desire and addiction that keep us coming back for another round. So monks and nuns renounce them. They have nothing. They are the most free and liberated people on the planet. But they still need to let go of their ego and physical body when death arrives.I’ve noticed a trend going on lately, and I’ve seen a few posts getting sucked into it, as well. It’s the notion that there are ‘good’ and ‘bad’ emotions. That there must be ‘good vibes’ all the time otherwise you’ll draw negativity to you if you’re feeling the ‘wrong’, ‘bad’, ‘harmful’, ‘hateful’ emotions etc etc. 

Emotions are not good or bad. They just are. They are a state of being that not only can they change, but they absolutely refuse to be ignored. 

If you’re sad, feel sad! If you’re angry, feel angry! If you’re feeling anxious, feel anxious! Ignoring your emotions will lead you to becoming overwhelmed, then into a downward spiral. ‘Negative’ emotions are not the enemy. They are there to help you cope. They may not be pleasant to feel, but they can mean the difference between being mentally stable and breaking at the straw that broke the camel’s back. It’s healthy to feel negative at times. It’s the human condition. Life has its ups and downs. 

Emotions are not the enemy, and they never will be. Although it’s up to each individual to go about dealing with ‘negative’ emotions in a healthy, non self-destructive way.

Also note that I am not talking about mental illnesses or disorders. I’m talking about feeling positive because ‘sad is bad’ or ‘anger is bad’.

Edit: So I just want to clarify my stance on this. We are responsible for our actions, and emotional well-being as we interact with the world around us within the confines of our morality, ethics, and the law. I am not endorsing anyone hurting anybody in any way. And while it is important to embrace our emotions, we are *not* our emotions. They usually are fleeting, and they’re always seperate from our Selves. 

I’m not saying identify with our emotions, I’m saying be compassionate towards them. Don’t think you’re somehow a terrible person because you feel the way you do, but do be compassionate towards yourself, your emotions, and figure out why you feel that way. They’re there to help us cope, but you also need to think about your actions. It won’t help you if you end up hurting anyone, or doing anything you’re going to regret from either an emotional or legal standpoint.

Everyone’s path is different, and I’m not about to dictate anyone’s path so feel free to disagree with any sentiments based on whatever field of study.

Edit edit: O-O... Thank you kind stranger!- Alejandro Jodorowsky.For those of you on the spiritual path, I have a secret.

When you finally sit in all the ayahuasca ceremonies,

When you complete your 16th vision quest,

Have done countless rituals, and fasted for 10 days straight

The answer that is revealed; is to come back to earth and do the work. 

Right here. Where you’re at, and with what you have in front of you.

Be a good human.

Be a good friend.

Serve those who have less than you.

Protect the earth. 

Protect innocence and Start with what is innocent inside of you.

Be kind. Be honest.

Be humble. Forgive yourself.

Yes it is important to heal.

Yes it is important to gain bigger perspective.

But don’t get lost in the lust of always wanting something more.

Don’t yoke your ego to your spirituality.

Remember that every guru is just a person with their own folly.

Don’t be so quick to give over your power.

When any true teacher will lead you to your own power.

Any worthwhile medicine will heal you until you don’t need it anymore.

Don’t let your path to liberation become a trap.

Do the work. Be a good human.

You don’t have to try so hard to be perfect.

Your mistakes are the greatest teacher you will ever have.

Your love is the most valuable gift you will ever give.

You can relax, and just be a good human.

&#x200B;

[Be a good human](https://youtu.be/H6rEMX9C6NA)A single candle can light a thousand flames.Have you taken a breather today ? 

Have you listen to some of your favorite music ?

Have you stopped everything you’re doing and just sat down ?


Go ahead you can still do all those things , and afterwards appreciate yourself for just being.

Edit: Really really like the post says , no need to thank me just literally thank yourself for existing for just being , for the synchronicity of you finding  and  reading this postIt just felt like it was from her.. Or just something she would do. I also paid for the person behind me because I was so inspired.Just sharing my thoughts.We can all be hard on ourselves sometimes; we may think that we're not living up to our own or other people's expectations. But you don't need to be any more than you are - you have a good and compassionate nature. By getting comfortable with who we are, we need less validation from the people around us, reducing strain on relationships and making for a calmer, happier life. 

[Listen On Apple Podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/learning-to-love-yourself-part-2-accepting-who-you/id1493806566?i=1000477100793)

[Listen On Google Podcasts](https://www.google.com/podcasts?feed=aHR0cHM6Ly9hbmNob3IuZm0vcy8xMjNkZThlMC9wb2RjYXN0L3Jzcw==)

[Listen On Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/show/1ozwIEgzEtHQezPoi83nVV)

[Other ways to listen](https://anchor.fm/shaun-donaghy/episodes/Learning-to-love-yourself-part-2-Accepting-who-you-are---with-guided-meditation-ef46mm)Hi all.  I know that these sorts of posts always get a lot of attention, upvotes, and response, so I'm going to shamelessly use this life milestone in order to get out some things that I think are important.  I enjoy sharing, and believe I have some wisdom to offer.

30 is a big milestone, at least in my eyes, because I no longer feel like a kid anymore.  Early 20s I did.  Even late 20s I did.  And even now, I mean, I still feel that same youthful spirit I always had.  30 isn't *that* old, by any stretch of the imagination.  But at the same time, 30 is unequivocally adulthood. There is no longer denying that I am entering into what could be called maturity.  Youth is starting to escape me.

Of course, being a 30 year old isn't my only qualification.  I had a really rough time growing up, which led to me needing to get sober at age 22.  At the beginning of next month I'll have been sober for 8 years.  This really made all the difference for me.  Going so low, I had to really examine a lot of things I had been taught growing up.  It was either that, or face serious consequences, like jail or worse.  It didn't help that I was constantly miserable despite all the attempts to escape.  So there came a point where I really had to do a lot of earnest reflecting.  And not just reflecting, but also taking tangible action to make changes in my life.  I'm not better than anybody, but I do feel that my experience has given me a perspective that many people fail to grasp early on, if ever.

I had been thinking about doing this post for a couple of months now, and I was deciding what I would touch on.  I didn't really want to make it a list thing, although I could have certainly done that. Honesty and authenticity have been hugely important.   Courage has been important.  Perseverance and patience have been important.  Doing the right thing has been important.  Following your heart. All of these things.  Today, finally though, I came to a conclusion: I want this post to be about *savoring life*.

Savoring life.  What I mean by that is taking the raw ingredients of all of this mess and learning to make something beautiful with it.  And, as the dictionary defines it - "enjoying something \[life\] to the fullest".

Life is never going to be perfect.  If you're waiting for it to be perfect, you're going to miss it.  Relationships are going to come, and they're going to be messy.  So what are you going to do?  Avoid them?

There's never going to be a right time to lay bare your heart and get honest with those you love.  It's always risky.  It always means rocking the boat a little bit.  So what?  You're going to be dead one day.  There isn't any time to waste with this stuff.  Sometimes you've got to have the courage to shake things up a little bit, and follow your heart.

You have to be something of a poet.  If you wait for all the answers in a sort of mathematical way, you'll never find them.  Math can teach us wonderful things about the nature of the universe, but it could never answer the question of "why", or even how we ought to live our life.  Impossible.  That's a question for the heart.  And in order to live from the heart you've got to give up the idea that everything is going to be neat and clean.

Those of us who have experienced depression, or simply gone about it as a sort of intellectual exercise, have undoubtedly asked ourselves "what's the point?".  So much suffering, getting old, things not always going our way.  So what's the point?  It's a question that I haven't really found a good answer to.

But somehow, when I let go of the need to figure things out, and start living from the heart, the point becomes self-evident.  The point is love.  The point is companionship.  The point is adventure and celebration.  It is self-evident.  It just takes a little courage to be able to let yourself *feel.*

Things aren't always going to work out the way that we want, that's life.  But if we can learn to change our perspective a little bit, and make peace with uncertainty, then perhaps we can take the mystery and do something beautiful with it.  Perhaps we can become less demanding, and instead of lamenting that which we don't have, we can learn to savor that which we do.

I'm 30 today.  Happy birthday to me.  The same guy who used to be a little monkey.  Just another Bozo on the bus, growing old like everybody else (at least those of us who are fortunate)

I don't know where the journey will end, but at 30, knock on wood, I feel like I'm just getting started.  May the adventure continue!

Best wishes to all.In the past two months, I’ve let go of most of my family and a few close friends which basically leaves me lacking my entire support system. Has this happened to anyone else recently? I had to cut family off because of abuse and friends off because of taking too much energy.

One thing I’m noticing is: I need to set up stronger boundaries. And maybe these relationships would have been different or ended sooner if I did.About 8 days ago my 38 year old husband had a horrible stroke. He required emergency brain surgery. He was doing well for a day and a half after the surgery (could open his eyes, gave a thumbs up, and followed commands) , but on Tuesday night he stopped following commands and stopped reacting to pain, which was frightening.

They discovered that he was having silent seizures, 5,6,7 of them at a time. This is common for people who had blood on the brain, but still scary.

He started responding to pain again on Wednesday, but still wasn't following commands. Friday I started witnessing more movement, not only on his right side, but also his left. His mouth started moving a lot more as well, but he wasn't following commands, so the nurses didn't seem as excited as his family and I were.

When I called yesterday (I can't be there because of the Coronavirus) I was told that they were noticing more movement, that he seemed more relaxed and he was moving his left side.

Last night at 8pm I gathered with his siblings did a video call with him (I video call 2 or 3 times a day) . The nurse on duty said he thought Jonathan had followed a command but wasn't 100% sure it was deliberately. Then he lifted my husband's arm and asked him to hold it up, AND HE DID! He also started curling his toes and grabbing the nurses hand on command. This is so amazing.

His breathing is so great today they also took him off assistance and he's able to cough and swallow on his own. 

Please  send him positive energy. He needs to start following commands more consistently  and we really need him to open his eyes. Please also send energy that he stays seizure free, his infection goes away and that he keeps becoming more awake. 

Thank you

Update : He opened an eye a little bit for the first time! He's still moving a lot and started touching the shaved part of his head. He's not really following commands yet, but hopefully that will follow. Please continue to send positive energy!Everything that happens in life is perfectly aligned by a divine force , once you start believing in that higher power you realize that control is an illusion . 


This does not mean that you don't take any action and just sit on your couch all day long , it simply means you accept life as it is , you don't try to force things to happen .


You don't flow against the current of the river , you flow with the river . 
You start living life effortlessly with awareness of each moment because you realize everything is connected . 

There may be somethings that may feel really bad right now , but in the future you realize those bad times made you a strong person . 

So trust the divine timing of life , nothing is a coincidence in this Universe , everything is aligned and connected .

Once the storm is over, you won’t remember how you made it through, how you managed to survive. You won’t even be sure whether the storm is really over. But one thing is certain. When you come out of the storm, you won’t be the same person who walked in. That’s what this storm’s all about.Here in this suffering, all previous beliefs are called into question. They are consumed in the fire sparked and fueled by our own illusion. The pain becomes the ashes we are now entombed in. It is only when we find ourselves at this most imprisoned of junctures that we emerge again, the phoenix of our very life which is ever so much more beautiful than the last one
Life tried to crush her, but only succeeded in creating a diamond.Hope rises like a phoenix from the ashes of shattered dreams.Often it’s the deepest pain which empowers you to grow into your highest self

🔥Sometimes you have to burn yourself to the ground before you can rise like a phoenix from the ashes🔥Meditation is something that's always helped me in my life.

No matter what else has been going on, by meditating even every few days (ideally every day), I get much more clarity.

I think we're often overwhelmed by our senses, things going on around us, even just having constant music on in the background can overwhelm us and never gives us time to just 'be'.

But I also have seen that it's not always the time you spend meditating but the habit of doing it that makes the biggest difference.

Just KNOWING that you're going to do it every day actually has an effect, even if you're only meditating for a couple of minutes. But it is sometimes hard to stick to it and if you miss one day that can quickly turn into 2, 3 or 10 days...

But the benefits are pretty interesting. More clarity, less stress. And being able to reduce stress has a huge impact on almost everything else in your body/mind!

Just my thought of the day, if you don't already meditate I would highly encourage it! Even if you just see it as 'pointless' because you're just essentially sitting there doing 'nothing' for a period of time, but it really does have some benefits!

Hope this helps! I’ll try and reply to everyone here but if you have any questions or thoughts about this, I’m happy to chat! Just send me a message.I just wanted to share this message with anyone who reads this. At this very moment, I’m experiencing so much love for you all. My heart is full and I just need to share this positivity. Take it however you please. 

I love you.

❤️I see people taking it so seriously and therefore becoming so ridged in thought pattern & behaviors. Just relax guys. enjoy what you can.  this life is all we have so have fun

Edit : some words...IT’S MY LIFE!

There are no rules or guidelines we have to follow. 

Just be a good human being to everyone and good things will come to you. 

A Higher Power created YOU for a PURPOSE and there is NO reason why you have to keep toxic people in your life (ie: parents)

I came to the realization that I’m 32 and was living my life for my parents.

Disobedience is not a terrible word but one that I need to live by if i want to move forward.

I cried and smiled and watched people going by thinking about this AWAKENING!

Now its time to get shit DONE!Toxic positivity is the belief that people should keep a positive mindset despite how severe or complex a situation is. It’s really a “good vibes” lifestyle. Even though you will find advantages to be an optimist and taking part in positive thinking, toxic positivity rather rejects complex emotions to support a cheerful, usually falsely positive, facade.

Everybody knows that having a positive lifestyle will work for your mental well-being. The problem is life is not always positive. Most of us handle painful feelings and experiences.

Those emotions, while unpleasant and challenging to cope with, are very important and have to be thought and managed freely and honestly.

Toxic positivity takes positive reasoning to an overgeneralized extreme. This mindset does not simply stress the significance of optimism; it minimizes and denies any trace of people's feelings that are not strictly positive or good.

Forms of Toxic Positivity

Toxic positivity usually takes a multitude of kinds. Some situations you have experienced are likely to live:

Whenever one thing terrible occurs, such as losing your job, folks tell you firmly to “just stay positive” or “look on the bright part.” While such opinions, most times, are supposed to be sympathetic, they can additionally be an easy method of shutting straight down what you may want to state about what you are experiencing.

After experiencing some sort of loss, people inform you that “everything happens for a reason.” While people frequently make such statements simply because they think they are comforting, it’s also an easy method of avoiding somebody else’s discomfort.

Once you express frustration or sadness, somebody informs you that “happiness is just a choice.” This implies that if you’re experiencing negative feelings, then it is your choice, along with your own fault for maybe not “choosing” to be happy.

Such statements, most times, are well-intentioned — people simply do not know what else to say plus don’t know how exactly to be empathetic — but harmful. At their utmost, such statements come off as trite platitudes that allow you to form the hook which means you don’t deal with people’s feelings.

At their worst, these statements find yourself shaming and blaming folks who are frequently coping with challenging situations.

Toxic positivity denies people the authentic help that they must deal with what they’re facing.

Why It’s Harmful

Toxic positivity can really damage folks who are going right through hard times. To be able to share authentic people's feelings and gain unconditional help, individuals find their emotions dismissed, ignored, or outright invalidated.

It is shaming: When somebody is enduring; they realize their feelings are legitimate, but they can find relief and love inside their relatives and buddies. But toxic positivity informs individuals the thoughts they’re experiencing are wrong.

It causes guilt: It delivers a message that if you are not finding a method to feel positive, even in the face of tragedy, that you’re doing something amiss.

It prevents authentic individual feeling: Toxic positivity functions being an avoidance mechanism. Whenever other folks participate in this kind of behavior, it allows them to avoid emotional situations which may cause them to feel uncomfortable. But often, we turn these exact same ideas on ourselves, internalizing these toxic ideas. Whenever we think of complicated thoughts, we then discredit, dismiss, and reject them.

It stops development: It allows us to avoid experiencing things that could be painful, but also, it denies us the capacity to face challenging feelings that may eventually cause development and much more profound understanding.

Indications

Toxic positivity can frequently be discreet, but learning how to recognize the indications will help you better determine this sort of behavior. Some indications consist of:

Brushing off issues in the place of dealing with them.

Feeling wrong about being sad, mad, or disappointed.

Hiding your genuine emotions behind feel-good quotes that appear more socially appropriate.

Hiding or disguising how you experience.

Minimizing other people’s emotions simply because they prompt you to be uncomfortable.

Shaming other folks who do not have a positive mindset.

Trying to be stoic or “get over” painful feelings.

How to Avoid Toxic Positivity

If you’ve been afflicted with toxic positivity or recognize this type of behavior in yourself, you can find things that you can certainly do to build up a wholesome, more supportive approach. Ideas comprise:

Manage your negative feelings, but never reject them. Negative emotions cause anxiety whenever unchecked, however they may also offer information that may induce beneficial changes in yourself.

Be practical in what you need to feel. When you’re dealing with a stressful situation, it is normal to feel stressed, concerned, and even afraid. Don’t anticipate a lot from yourself. Focus on self-care and using actions that will help improve your situation.

It is ok to feel one or more thing. If you’re dealing with a challenge, it is workable to feel stressed concerning the future and hope you will be successful. Your feelings are as complex as the specific situation itself.

Focus on hearing other people and showing help. An individual expresses a problematic emotion, don’t shut them down with toxic platitudes. Alternatively, tell them that what they’re experiencing is normal and you are here to pay attention.

Notice how you feel. Following “positive” social media profiles, can occasionally act as a supply of motivation but look closely at how you feel when you see and connect to such content. If you are left with a feeling of pity or shame after seeing “uplifting” posts, it may be because of toxic positivity. In such situations, consider restricting your social networking usage.

Give yourself permission to feel your emotions. As opposed to attempting to avoid hard feelings, offer your self-authorization to handle them. These emotions are genuine and crucial. They can provide information and help you see reasons for having a situation you need to alter.

[Article](https://medium.com/curious/the-rise-of-toxic-positivity-677d998b3d3e)***17 Affirmations for Prosperity Consciousness to Start Your Day***

1. I Am Enough.

2. I Have a Beautiful Heart and Soul.

3. I Am in the Right Place, at the Right Time, Doing the Right Thing.

4. I Choose to Find the Positive in Difficult Situations.

5. Any Negatives in My Past is not a Reflection of My Future.

6. I Attract Money Easily into my Life.

7. I am In Charge of How I Feel.

8. I am Strong, Confident and Motivated.

9. Positivity is a Choice I Choose to Make.

10.  I am Worthy of All the Good Things That Happen in My Life.

11.  My Life is a Gift and I Appreciate Everything I Have.

12.  I Celebrate My Achievements, No Matter How Small.

13.  I am Lovable.

14.  I Deserve Good Things.

15.  I am Stronger than Any of My Problems.

16.  I Choose Peace.

17.  I Believe in Myself.Hello everyone! I love reedit, but I notice a lot of scammers trying to solicit services from people going through a spiritual awakening. It makes me so angry that they can’t offer their perspectives for free in a place for discussion and community. I recently shared a blog post on a sub forum specifically about chakra therapy. I shared a very detailed explanation of how one can heal their own chakras through meditation and shadow work. People were so triggered by my sharing that they got it removed. 

I decided to answer any and all questions about your chakras, chakra blockages, and chakra healing. 

This is the post I made, which might answer some initial questions, but please feel free to ask more:

Many people who cannot afford to book a session with me ask how they can heal their chakras on their own--and it's very easy! It requires a daily habit of meditation. That's it. Why doesn't everyone do it? I don't know! That's how I healed my own chakras, which subsequently healed my childhood post traumatic stress disorder, eating disorder, poor self-image, writer's block, scarcity mentality, internalized misogyny, codependency, and compulsive heterosexuality. I've been on quite a journey just by consistently meditating for three years. 



Meditation can take many forms. Some do it by being so still and relaxing so deeply they trick the conscious mind into thinking they're sleeping, which is what hypnosis is. Others meditate in motion, going on long walks in nature, performing daily chores, running, painting, gardening, or putting the body in yoga poses, which distracts the conscious mind since it rules the physical body. There's also automatic writing, meditating on the page in a stream of consciousness. Julia Cameron calls this doing "morning pages" in The Artist's Way. Some rely on hallucinogenic plants to surpass the conscious mind--things like ayahuasca, peyote, mushrooms, or the indica strain of cannabis. There's also lucid dreaming, and dream journaling. It'd be great to have a shaman or spiritual healer guide you through the entirety of such an intense process, but most don't have that option. Healing can take months, years, or even lifetimes. However, if you consent without fear, your spirit guides will guide you. No matter how you meditate, it's about detachment from the conscious mind and external world. 



To understand how meditation is necessary for shadow work and chakra healing, you need to understand the levels of consciousness possible for humans to explore.



The 1st dimension of consciousness rules the Earth Star chakra, which is black in color. This is what Carl Jung called the "collective unconscious", what ancients called "the underworld" and "the world soul" and the part of mankind Freud referred to as "the id." It contains all unconscious emotions of humanity, from ancestral and past life trauma to soul desires. This is passed through our DNA. Your soul desires will always be unmet needs of your ancestors and past versions of yourself, because we reincarnate into the same bloodline, or into one of the same vibration with the same traumas. The collective unconscious is currently experiencing a collective shift, which is why the world is so chaotic right now. Disembodied souls, or ghosts, are purely in this dimension, but those in a physical body are multidimensional. A great but horrifying portrayal of this dimension of consciousness and humanity's repressed shadow selves is in the movie "US." Because this chakra is ruled by Earth itself, the traumas of specific pieces of land are tied to the people born and raised there. The United States has to atone for the genocide of Native Americans and enslavement of African Americans for us to heal as a nation. 



The 2nd dimension of consciousness rules the Root chakra, which anchors us into the physical earth and our physical bodies. The Earth Star chakra is sometimes called the "super root" because it anchors us into the collective of humanity, but that 1st dimension is intangible. The 2nd dimension is all things Mother Nature--flora, fauna, crystals, dirt, human bodies, bodies of water. Most humans have a severely blocked Root chakra, which we'll talk about later, so they cannot communicate with plants and animals or feel a connection to the land like indigenous people once did, and they work hard to have physical needs met instead of receiving the abundance of Earth. Plant medicines and crystal healing often won't work for them, and more invasive procedures or complete reliance on pharmaceuticals with severe side effects are necessary for temporary relief of symptoms. There's also a great deal of body dysmorphia, bodily harm, and disassociation from the body in our society, with people more in their upper chakras and imbalanced. Even those able to enjoy nature do it from outside of themselves, and they don't realize they're ungrounded because it's all they've ever known.



The 3rd dimension of consciousness rules the Sacral, Solar Plexus, Heart, Throat, and Third Eye chakras. It rules our physical senses, and the manmade material world. Technological and industrial advances, the entertainment world, the rise of social media, consumerism, and 40-hour work weeks have created an overemphasis on the 3D, sensory overload, adrenaline fatigue, inability to meditate, and a debilitating imbalance to our chakra systems, which harms our emotional, physical, and mental health. Most people are so externally focused that they have no self-awareness or autonomy, and they are far too distracted to ever begin shadow work. They are primarily concerned with finances, relationships, and how others perceive them. When I started out as a traditional astrologer giving psychic readings, these are the only things clients asked me about. Money, love, family problems, reputation, and how they can belong here in this outer world. In actuality, the 3rd dimension is an illusion, a mirror image of what is going on within us. You will never, ever improve your outer world circumstances by focus or force. The attachment to and obsession with 3D problems is the perpetuation of them. 



The Third Eye is the portal to all dimensions of consciousness. While the Throat chakra rules both the conscious and subconscious mind, and it's how we process our physical senses, the Third Eye is reached through the subconscious mind, and it's how we process the clairs, the extrasensory perception. The conscious mind must be bypassed to get to the subconscious, and access the Third Eye. This is only done through meditation or sleep, and we often forget our dreams. The Third Eye is the most active in children under the age of 7, who are consistently in their imaginations, and the meditative state. The 40-hour school week is meant to be a free babysitter while parents work 40-hour work weeks, and also preparation for children to grow up and work 40-hour work weeks. This damages the Third Eye, forcing the young and impressionable to be in their conscious minds an unnatural amount of time while they are overwhelmed with information, made to pay attention to the teacher and interact with peers. Daydreaming and the pursuit of individual passions is discouraged. Inner child work is necessary to open the Third Eye. Many people tell me they cannot surrender to meditation consistently because it doesn't feel productive. We've all been programmed for productivity, and must reparent and nurture ourselves to not feel shame for a relaxed state of being. 



The 4th dimension of consciousness rules the Crown chakra, also known as the "collective consciousness" or the "superconscious" or the "super ego." This is the chakra of enlightenment, self-awareness, autonomy, and claircognizance, or "clear knowing." It can only be opened by illumination of the shadow self. Until you've explored the 1st and 2nd dimensions, integrated your soul desires, respected your body as a physical vessel for divinity, and fulfilled your physical and non-physical needs through radical self-care and devotion to your destiny, the 4th dimension of consciousness remains the astral realm you visit in forgotten dreams, and the parts of your brain you never use. The Crown chakra is violet in color when blocked. When cleared, it is white, the combination of all colors, and the integration of the full rainbow bridge of the 7 main chakras. Your predominate chakra gives you a predominate aura color, so spiritually advanced people have white auras surrounding and protecting them. 



The 5th dimension of consciousness rules the Soul Star chakra. THIS is the "5D" spiritual people are always talking about "ascending" to, although I'm not sure they're fully aware of what that entails. This chakra is the part of you that people refer to as your spirit, your Higher Self, your main spirit guide, or your guardian angel. It's the part of you that can perceive things you cannot from your very limited conscious mind. This chakra is never blocked, but it's only reached through the Crown, so a Crown blockage keeps people from merging with their higher self in holy union. The 1st dimension of consciousness I talked about is not only the shadow self, the dark you must integrate with your light, but also your soul. The soul is your divine femininity, the spirit is your divine masculinity. When they're united, you have inner balance, inner peace, which is reflected back to you in the 3D that you're still very much a part of. My spirit guides have told me the 5D can be temporarily experienced through near-death experiences, out-of-body experiences, and doing heroin. I've no experiences with any of that, so make of that what you will. What I can say is that the Soul Star chakra is magenta in color until the rainbow bridge is cleared in someone who has fully integrated their shadow self. It then turns gold, and this is why saints, enlightened beings, and angels were depicted with golden halos in ancient art. People used to have more open Third Eyes, and clairvoyance or "clear seeing" was the norm. They could see this golden chakra above the heads of ascended people. 



The 6th dimension of consciousness rules the High Heart chakra, and this one is a little harder to explain. Like the 1st and 4th dimensions, it's a shared realm. The 1st dimension is your connection to your ancestors and akashic records and world soul, or life force of the planet. The 4th dimension is your connection with the collective mentality, and you can either be influenced by it through groupthink if your Crown chakra is blocked, or you can be an influencer as a great thinker. You can also connect with anyone, living or non-living, through your dreams in that astral realm, which is what the 4th dimension is. The 6th dimension is unity consciousness, and it is where ascended kindred spirits come together. It is how they can feel deep connection and community, and telepathically communicate. It's how people can experience utopia alongside others on the planet experiencing dystopia, and I can tell you right now that this is what our collective shift in consciousness is leading up to. Those who've done the shadow work are living a completely different reality from those who haven't, even while in the same physical locations. It's not a location, it's a state of being, a dimension of consciousness. It's what the Bible refers to as "the kingdom of God within you." You don't have to physically die to ascend there, but you do have to experience ego death. Fortunately, ego death isn't death at all, it's just an energetic transformation. It's the giving up of your old identity to become your Higher Self, and to live as your Higher Self here on Earth. This chakra is blue-green, and between the green Heart and blue Throat. 



One last thing I want to make clear--you cannot "meditate on" your chakras. That's the craziest thing I've ever heard. To meditate is to surrender your thoughts, not control them or force them in any direction. You also cannot clear your chakras with reiki, candles, herbs, crystals, or rituals. Don't be scammed. A chakra cannot be overactive or underactive, it can only be blocked or clear. A blocked chakra will work in one direction only, receiving energy but never sending, being influenced by external factors but never influencing positive change. When ALL chakras are clear, they are balanced. There's no way to individually balance each chakra.



Chakras are blocked by repressed emotions and thoughts that you are not consciously aware you have. The most anyone can do for you is hold space for you to reclaim these emotions and thoughts, or gently guide you to explore them. It will be intense, much more intense than traditional therapy or journaling where you are focusing on 3D problems you're already well aware of and likely using to distract yourself from the deeper problems. It will require aftercare. If you can't find a trusted practician and don't have a support system of those who know exactly what you're going through, you will have to cultivate a relationship with your spirit guides, take it slow, and be willing to hold space for yourself and self-soothe. It can feel like you are having a nervous breakdown, and some people do find themselves institutionalized temporarily. You are not going crazy, you are going sane. You are breaking toxic patterns, many of them generational. Be kind to yourself, and don't have expectations for how fast or how well your recovery is going.The last year was the beginning of my spiritual awakening and so much has changed. I’ve accepted my true nature of thriving in solitude. I just feel like I can breathe and no more feel apologetic about who I am. 

thank you to everyone here for making me feel accepted and understood in one way or the other. praying for a more enlightening and prosperous year to come ✨In fact, I'd say it's just the opposite.  If we can appreciate the gifts of others, that actually allows us to appreciate our own gift more.  It reminds us that, ah, we're all unique, and there is nobody just like me.  It makes what we are doing all the more special.

Why do we get so insecure then?  I suppose it's because we're all taught from an early age to compete.  We're taught that we're not good enough.  So when we see somebody owning their gift, it triggers that wound in us.  Instead of facing that wound and nurturing it with love, we lash out and try to drag others down with us.

It takes courage to let people shine.  And it's the old saying: everybody is fighting a battle you know nothing about.   What we see on the surface is not always the full story.  So it's OK to extend compassion.

I am convinced that we all have a special gift to offer to this world.  Some people are organizers, some are writers, some are artists, some are great thinkers.  There is room for all of us; we all have beauty to offer to the world.

And if you don't know what your gift is, that's OK.  The world needs people who are uncertain, too.  It's the certain people (the religious, the greedy, the politicians, the ambitious...) who have plowed over others and caused so much destruction in the world.

In my experience, by extending love, by letting others shine, we, too, give ourselves permission to shine.  And that's when our own gift becomes apparent, no matter how subtle it may be.  Love doesn't always need to be loud.Don't quit....never...ever...Yeah being awake and all of that is important, but you can't be meditating 24/7, being anti-social and all of that, I feel like people take it way too seriously and they kinda start treating it like a religion, like bro we all know at this point that we're a soul inside a body, but the reason you came back here is to experience life and have FUN, that doesn't mean doing dumb shit but yeah, enjoy LIFEsomeone made a post yesterday about going in the sun and not wearing sunscreen. so many uneducated and misleading comments i couldn't respond to them all. 

a comment actually said "only white people need sunscreen because they don't have melatonin" MELATONIN????

okay guys, i fully understand the spiritual power and connection with our beautiful sun. but let's all please recognize the PHYSICAL power of the sun. it can 500% cause skin cancer. there is no debating that. not only white people need sunscreen either. every single person should be wearing sunscreen when going in the sun! 

and while it's true you need vitamin d which the sun provides. you can take a pill. a vitamin d pill is more effective than getting vitamin d from the sun.

please don't think sunscreen is in any way hindering your spiritual journey or your spiritual well being. it's not. it's protecting your life.separate from the emotion. take a step away. get that frame back. it’s so easy to believe so much is wrong when you’re looking at it through that limited, negative frame we can gain when we aren’t mindful.“Death is like taking off a tight shoe” 
-Ram Dass 

I just turned 36 but this quote has been on my mind for the last year.  It comforts me. It reminds me of how much bigger we are than our bodies. 

Anyway have a great dayWhen you encounter spirituality narcissism you will see yourself valuing your person spiritual experience over the next. We have nothing to gain by allowing ourselves to have a disconnect from everyone else and need to be able to see the importance of everyones own individual spiritual journey. Your journey may be more important than theirs or it may not, but you are not to be the judge of that. We must make connections with the other spirits around us and not invalidate their feelings or push them away from us.Said by Yuval Noah Harari.I haven’t planned this post out, so it might be a little long. This sub seems like the most fitting center for what is troubling me. 

I recently posted r/pagan but my subject still doesn’t seem fitting there. I’m having a lot of curiosity with my beliefs and what I think the truth is. 

For those who take time and read this, I truly appreciate it. 

I’ve been struggling with religion for 5+ years now. I grew up in a Christian household with kind hearted Christian family. They were good people and had their religion and the second hand. They weren’t owned nor engulfed in their religion. 

Over these last years, I started to question Jesus and the aspects of Christianity after I started to meditate a lot and experienced some psilocybin “soul resets” as I called it haha. A lot of what I thought was concrete, felt like stories to give to adults so they wouldn’t feel scared about what they don’t know. 

I feel as though every religion in our world today has the right path to being one with the universe. Treat others well, live proper and clean, do no harm, essentially it’s living in a higher vibration without calling it that. 

I do feel though that it’s like looking at the scariness of “what if it’s just an energy” and then “I don’t truly know what’s next” though rose colored glasses. You’ll always get to the end road, and that end road may be a heaven, or a reincarnation but that’s the beauty is I/we don’t know. 

What I do feel like I know is that when I close my eyes and shut off the noise, I...am connected. I know there’s something. It used to scare me thinking that it’s not Jesus. That it could be just an energy in the universe or what ever is out there. God to most humans is a tangible way to look at what we don’t know so we feel relaxed enough to function. 

I asked in r/pagan because i was throwing around the idea of maybe trying to look into a belief or a religion that sees more polytheistic views of the world. I have always thought religions that tie in the earth with everything are a little more insightful. But I don’t know either way. I don’t want to feel trapped having to do prayer and worship beings. 

Again, I feel like worshiping beings, food, people, phrases or songs and prayer is just a human thing we do. The person doing it may get the SAME high vibration I get out of meditation and thoughtfulness but it’s a different flavor. 

It feels constrictive to me to do things such as what Buddhism, Hinduism, Norse, Christianity and much more do. 

I hope this can strike some interesting conversation. I haven’t had many to talk to in my life who are willing to dig deep. Maybe it scares some people. Most Christians I known, unfortunately, don’t want to hear me out or get verbally aggressive. It’s depressing. 

TLDR; I am questioning ALL and EVERY religion and want to talk to people about believing nothing aside from the vibrational energy that I believe we all belong too. While worshiping nothing at all. We’re stardust, we’re nothing...and we’re everything.

Edit: Your guys reply’s and the conversations were having is blowing my mind. Thank you to everyone who’s commenting and sharing your thoughts. I feel like I’m on a high right now with how many of you guys I resonate with. This community is amazing!Im turning 25 in about a month, im still a childish guy but I can easily notice my brain has been fully developed this year. Anyone experienced the same, its like im feeling like an adult now and kind of regret my dramas with my parents and siblings. And I also cry because I know a chapter of my life is finished, the childish time is over now and inside my heart I know a new chapter of adulthood is startingSo I'm 21 years old and have no clue what I want to do with my life. All I am is a stupid cashier at a grocery store which treats it's employees like crap.

So I was in deep thought, and then all of a sudden, bam, it hit me. I just want to be in a place, where I can be myself, while having financial freedom, at a job I like, and at a spot where I can still enjoy life (play Videos games, art, etc), and while working on spirituality. I honestly couldn't care less what if I become rich.Forgive me if this is the wrong subreddit for something like this.

I haven’t had the easiest life, I’ve gone through a lot. I come from a broken home. I’ve been treated badly by the people who were suppose to care about me. I’ve been abused in many different ways. It’s been rough. 


I trust that the universe didn’t put me through all of that for nothing.  I’m not mad, in fact i am grateful for the bad things that have happened to me, because it’s made me who I am today, and it’s given me the ability empathize with people who have gone through similar things. 

Throughout the hardest parts of my life I began on my spiritual journey and had an awakening at a young age, I don’t know if I would’ve had that had I not been in such a bad place. 

If I had the ability to go back and change the way my life happened, I wouldn’t do it. I don’t know what type of person I would be if my life wouldn’t have been what it was. 

People think that I’m crazy for thinking this way, because most people who have had a hard life are angry, and they wish that their life would have been different.&#x200B;

**"*****The more I study science, the more I believe in God*****"**.... (*Albert Einstein*)

***"The first gulp from the glass of natural sciences will turn you into an atheist, but at the bottom of the glass God is waiting for you."***  (*Werner Heisenberg*, father of quantum mechanics)

&#x200B;

I found God through science.

I've always been highly skeptical of everything, very rational, and logical. I was a fierce atheist at one point. My main loves are physics and geology, earth sciences in general, and the study the sun as well. One day I was studying how the solar activity affects planet earth and I started looking to the ozone layer, which is what protects us against UV light. If it wasn't by the ozone layer, there wouldn't be any life on planet earth.

What is ozone? Ozone is composed of 3 molecules of oxygen. Oxygen is a chemical element. There are 118 chemical elements in the periodic table. For some very strange reason, our planet's atmosphere produces ozone, which is really the only thing which allows life in our world. Why a piece of rock floating in space needs an ozone layer? It doesn't. A rock don't need ozone, there is absolutely no reason for a planet to have an ozone layer. Miracle number 1.

Then, do you know what are the probabilities that our atmosphere is able to produce ozone out of luck? If instead of combining 3 molecules of oxygen, our atmosphere combined 2 molecules of oxygen and 1 of magnesium, or a molecule of zinc, or any other element... there wouldn't be an ozone layer. The chances that this happened only by chance are ridiculously low, almost impossible. Miracle number 2.

These are just two "miracles", but there are many others (like the perfect position and size of the moon). And if you apply your logic correctly, you can infer the conclusion that there was an intelligent design when the earth was formed. This, for me, scientifically proved that God exists. 

Plus, when you understand how much God worked to build our planet, to build us (we are literally made of stardust from an old supernova which exploded billions of years ago), when you really appreciate how special existence is and how thankful we should be to be alive, you feel God's love. God's love, plus acceptance, solves it all. If you are having a rough time, my advise is that you reconnect with God's love, understand how special and precious you are in this universe, and accept what you have around you, let people be, everyone has their own path, full of mistakes and wrong turns. Like you and me.

I always tell my self: you are just a temporary guest in this planet, not the host, not the landlord. Learn your place and to appreciate the fact that you were invited.

This is my story, now want to ask you how did you find God?

&#x200B;

**Additional "miracles":**

The moon is really incredible. I advice you all to look into it, as a tip: there are very good youtube videos explaining all the incredible features of the moon, easy to watch. Earth's moon is the 5th largest in the solar system, but it becomes the largest by far when you compare it to the size of its orbiting planet. It's just too big for our planet and our orbit. Our moon is larger than all the dwarf planets, almost as large as planet Mercury. Gravity can't explain how or why we have such a large moon, and also the fact that it's gravitationally locked in its position adds more complexity to its impossibility. Actually, science cannot recreate a proper theoretical model to explain how our moon was formed. It is currently impossible.

In perspective, the  moon is precisely the same size of the solar disk in our sky (that is why our solar eclipses are perfect). The chances of something like happening, together with everything else, is simple mathematically impossible in practice. Quite a sign from god eh?... In my view, a solar eclipse is like God telling us: "hey kids, look what I can do?"...

Thanks to the moon, its  perfect position and mass, we have stable life on earth, as it creates the tides (climatic stability) and it gives our planet its perfect tilt. Without this specific tilt, earth wouldn't have seasons, without  seasons, the planet would have only extremely cold and extremely hot  regions. Also, science believes that tides played a major role in the creation of life, for the "primordial soup".

Then, there are many other highly improbable things which help life on earth, including:

* We’re at the perfect distance from the Sun, earth temperatures plus tilt allow life.
* We have the perfect atmospheric pressure to have liquid water at our surface.
* We have the perfect ingredients  for life, no other planet seems to have them.
* Evolution seems to walk not only towards the strongest, but also the most sentient, self-aware creatures.

I could give many practical statistical impossibilities more, specially if I start talking about physics and microbiology, but that's far to technical and boring. But, already with what it has been presented, when you add all this practical statistical impossibilities together, it just becomes too impossible. It becomes, in my opinion, intelligent.

&#x200B;

**Additional reflections surged from the comments about God:**

*"I think that God purposely made itself a mystery. If we knew how God is or what God thinks, we would spend our days praising him like mindless robots or worst, fearing him. The fact that we cannot see or prove God, gives us the possibility of finding him with our free hearts and minds. We will "see" him only if we want to find him and the connection will always be personal, because every soul is unique and reaches God in different way. I think God was very smart at hiding himself, I  would have done the same if I was him. But well, that's just my perspective."*

*"I think the fact that god is speechless is his greatest gift. In my opinion, God seems to want us to discover life and love by ourselves, sets it as our responsibility. He just gives us life, freedom and this incredible planet. And I like to believe that he walks by our side, watching us all grow. We are his children, he is our parent. And I personally don't like narcissistic parents telling me what to do or how to be, I had one in real life and it was hell. I prefer a parent who gives me freedom of choice, free will."*

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

**PD: Dear reddit friends, for some reason this post is getting many downvotes and there are also many weird movements in the comments with the upvotes and downvotes. There is definitely people angry and I don't know why all this negativity. I'm just sharing my experience of how I found God and asked others how they found God, that's all.**

**All this is very strange, specially this being a subreddit about spirituality... I don't mind the downvotes, they are just "internet points", but it's really uncomfortable to have people brigading the post and the comments because others have different views. To all the goodhearted people, sorry in advance if your comments get downvoted due to your beliefs. Seem like some people can't accept different views and I guess we have to deal with that.**

**Wisdom & Love for everyone, even for the brigaders! ❤❤**In 15 years of school. Them matrix dudes really tryna distract us from everything to not connect with our higher self.A truth to rememberJust read this on Instagram & thought i might share. Be easy on yourself & let things flow, enjoy life too! & also be safe everyone, much love 💗!1. My daily thoughts are not me. They are habits formed over time that spontaneously spring up from time to time. I can choose which of them I pay attention to and which I don't. 
2. The self is an illusion. The character that I think I am is not real. I am anything and everything & can change at any time. In the moment I just am, and my past actions do not define me. 
3. Try to pay attention to the feeling of existing, for this is the now. Listen & feel what the now is like whenever you remember to. 
4. Age is a number as useless past the age of 18 as a chocolate teapot. Again, there is only the now. 
5. Eat well & remember to exercise. 
6. Don't live so much in your mind. Instead of escaping, go looking.Just wanted to share my experience, Im 20 y.o…worked 11am-8pm 5 days a week at walmart.  
Today it finally hit me while working, what am i doing here? throwing away 9 hours of my life to do this? I can barley fit anything i enjoy doing in life. I lost so many connections and friendships due to this. It made me unhappy and dread waking up. I feel i’m not progressing anywhere other than making $1100 every 2 weeks. Im still young i have so much i can learn and become as a person. I then walked out and didn’t look back. I lost myself in the matrix that i was once against. But now i’m hoping to get back on track and manifest better things in my life to make me happy. 
:)It is a paradigm of practiced and repetitive thoughts throughout one’s day that serves as a tool. Its purpose is for an individual to manifest or bring forth anything they desire. from the Universe/God. They do this by the use of consistent and particularly-worded affirmations that help their subconscious mind to believe that they already have what they desire.

Why the numbers 3–6–9, though? The synchronicity of these particular numbers are in direct correlation with the Universe. The number three is significant because is it the direct link to Source/Universe. Six represents the deepest strength we have within ourselves. Nine is in accordance with moving on from the past, and helps release any feelings of self-doubt or negativity.

➡️How to do it:

1. Get a pen and paper and start with this technique as soon as you wake up. An example statement similar to the one I am currently practicing: “I am so grateful for my job at ____. It exceeds my expectations and I am treated with respect and thoroughly enjoy my work. I am so excited to have the chance to embrace my passion of writing and content creation each day at a job with benefits. I feel that I am valued by my supervisor and team and I am so grateful.” Each morning, you will write the same statement down three times, and try your hardest to avoid any other distractions. It is paramount that you stay focused and enter a place where you are on the vibration of receiving.

It is very important that this message is seventeen seconds long. According to Abraham Hicks, law of attraction and manifestation expert, seventeen seconds of pure thought is what gets the ball rolling and ignites the start of manifestation. During these seventeen seconds, we should not negate our desires or allow any doubt to creep in. This will deflate the momentum and serve no purpose at all. Though challenging at first, practice makes perfect.

Avoid becoming frustrated if your mind strays during these seventeen seconds. Also, steer clear of promoting any feelings of obsessive intentions or underlying feelings of lack. For if you are unable to control doubtful feelings, you will create resistance and nothing will come of all your hard work. Take a step back, center yourself, and come back to reciting your affirmations when you are at least in a neutral mindset.

You will eventually, sometimes quickly reach a point where you truly, deeply feel that what you are asking the Universe/God/ Source/etc, for will come to you in reality. If you are new to intentional manifestation, in time you will come to know the wildly different feelings of lack vs. true knowing in your heart that your desires will come to fruition.

2. In the afternoon and amid the chaos of our day, it’s easy to forget about our manifestations. It may also be tough to enter a positive state of mind and become focused on the vibration we are looking to be in. One of the highlights of this method is to train our mind to enter and remain in this high-frequency vibration throughout the day. This will help us stay on track to manifest in general and more quickly. The more often we repeat these affirmations, the sooner our subconscious will adapt to believing it is true. At this point of day, you should write down the same statement from the morning a total of six times. Try not to rush-consider it apart of your daily self-care. After you write it down, you can repeat the statements six times out loud (with passion, not desperation!) Remind yourself that this is the reality you desire and will have it.

3. Before your head hits the pillow for the night, it’s time to get out your notebook, and write down this affirmation again nine times. This will be followed by you reciting it nine times out loud immediately before sleep. This is such a crucial step because during sleep, our brain does a lot of consolidating of what it has accumulated during the day. Without any external distractions that could potentially affect our vibration, we should take advantage of letting those thoughts sit in the mind undisturbed. It can be the fast-track way to reprogram your mind when utilized effectively.

👉We practice the 3–6–9 method in an effort to rewire our mind. When we first begin this new practice, it’s normal and natural to experience a mind that omits aggressively oppressive and doubtful thoughts. Though, when we continuously visualize, our brain cannot tell the difference among a memory, a dream, or if something is completely made up just because we feel like it. When we affirm and visualize without any type of resistance, we enable the thought to remain in our mind.

👉When you use the 3–6–9 method and consistently put forth energy to create the life you desire, you must try your best to stay within alignment. It is so essential to hold yourself at a vibration of receiving and knowing that you will receive all that you requested. At times this may be difficult — especially when you are trying to manifest something you desperately need or want like a job, car, money, or even a relationship. Nonetheless, it is suggested to repeat your practiced affirmation throughout the day to keep you feeling good. When you are on a positive vibration, or even neutral, you are on a vibration to accept and receive. Get excited! (But not too excited that you being to experience feelings of resistance.)

👉If you’re new to manifesting, it’s important that you don’t force a timeline on your manifestation regarding when you want something to happen. This will naturally incur resistance and force you into a vibration of desperation, no matter how sure of yourself you will manifest by that specific date. When I’m manifesting, I rarely put a timeline on it and simply verbalize that the Universe will grant my desire(s) in divine timing. That’s not to say that it is impossible to manifest something in as short as a few days. Personally, I leave that part up to the Universe! When utilizing this technique or others related to the law of attraction, don’t be afraid to ask for a sign that your manifestation is on its way to you.

👉While we manifest, time doesn’t exist. Time is simply a social construct because in reality, all that exists is the now. If you consider the timing of your manifestation and allow it to leak into your mind, you are telling the Universe that you will manifest this, that, or the other thing in the future and that you are currently waiting for this manifestation to come to you. When we eliminate any sense of time from the equation and experience the feelings of having it now, we are remaining aligned with our wants and telling our subconscious that we have it already. Don’t stare at the clock. Know that it is on its way to you. Your desires are in your vortex simply waiting for you to accept it with open arms.

👉 At times, feelings of self-doubt and negative emotions will re-surface. It is just our human nature. Not many people are elated for literally the whole entire day, every day. And those who are probably meditate a whole lot and are very invested in their personal and spiritual development. Regardless, those feelings will creep in out of seemingly nowhere. The best way to conquer these emotions and stay aligned on the vibration of receiving is to simply acknowledge how you are feeling and then release it/transmute the ick.

Hold yourself accountable and be consistent. Be sure to stay on top of your manifestations by repeating them three times in the morning, six times in the afternoon and nine times in the evening. It’s all about commitment to holding the energy and remaining in that vibration. Yes, I realize that I may sound like a broken record but this is SO important for you to get what you want.

Just remember to keep your vibrations high, your desires clear and meaningful, and your patterns consistent.

Wishing you a life filled with effortless manifestations.

Source >>> [Aticle](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley/comments/jbu1yu/manifest_anything_with_the_traditional_nikola/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source) From r/ManifestationValley (Join us here to  see more content like this)My uncle had a stroke this afternoon. He is unconscious and bleeding in his brain. No one else but my aunt has been allowed to see him. Please, send healing prays and light for him.

I am stuck at home with covid-19 so I can't even go drive to see my family even if I wanted to. If there are any prayers or rituals I can do as well, please teach me. I cant lose him..You gotta conquer yourself before you can conquer the world!

[https://infinitians.com/conquer-yourself/](https://infinitians.com/conquer-yourself/)I am so serious with this, I am reaching out to anyone who would believe in me. It’s almost 3am here in Sweden and I took a quick smoke before I was supposed to go to bed (2am ish) and I see this weird light in the sky. Trying to focus real hard to see if its a plane or a drone or whatever, then I see this human shaped body with lights, no face, no gender, not really wings but two shining lines coming from its shoulders as their wings. 

I freaked the f out. My mother is a medium though so I tried to keep calm and maybe just appreciate the moment. But that was so hard, it was like they tried to get my attention with dancing or just flying around. My curious self I waved them over just to see if my mind was playing tricks, since it was quite far away. 

This being flew so fast with “head” first. Its head was like a burning V ? I thought i was going to die, I panicked so hard. I shook my head “no dont come here” and they IMMEDIATELY stopped and stayed where they were. I waved bye and it waved back and i closed the door, my whole body shaking and goosebumps all over. 

WHAT THE FRICK DID I JUST WITNESS? I feel like I definitely should have not seen this. I didnt want to see this. My mind is... I dont know. This was so unreal but OH so real. 

Also hoping my neighbours didnt see me obviously communicating in some kind of way with the sky. 


Did you ever see what you thought was an angel? Please describe it to me. I am so scared and disturbed in a way. 

[[ I am not religious nor have I ever been, I believe fully in energies and spirits because of my medium to mother.]]Many thanks! https://decrimca.org/“Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will call it fate.”

― C.G. JungJust wanted to say merry Christmas to all you guys and I hope you guys enjoy this day with your families because other people have nobody to spend it with.

Merry Christmas to you beautiful souls🌟✨Your body and your mind are the soil for spirituality. In order to be able to grow anything healthy from it, you must first work your own soil. Take out the litter, the excess things you’ve picked up on the way. Give it good nutrition, which will also bring a better balance to the flora and fauna of your mind. Take a look under the surface, if you see that poisons have sapped into your soil you have to confront them. 

For most people, it may be best to even remove this goal of spiritual growth and just focus on your own soil. If you become so focused on tending, healing and loving yourself, the spiritual seeds will sprout without you having to do anything. 

This goes against a common misconception of spirituality being a “leaving behind” of yourself. No, we must start with ourselves. It is the only way towards the center of the soul where all the questions and answers meet at one point.Most of us don't live in this world, and I mean truly live. We hibernate and wait for ourselves to wake up. We're waiting to be saved by something that will never come.I've never been this free. I still am damaged but I handle it better. I have hope and love towards the Universe cause I know while bad things do happen, it does happen for a reason.

Before anyone says "well what about shitty things happening, that's toxic positivity etc." I just gotta say that I've been through 2 psychotic episodes, 1 brain infection which caused strong depression and PTSD cause it's very traumatizing to have your brain malfunction like that. I also have a big problem with dissociation, have been alone and betrayed by people alot, abused by my father, was angry at God for a long time...

BUT I started getting synchronicities like thinking something and someone else says it at the exact same time. Or like singing a song, turning on the TV and it goes to MTV and the exact same song starts playing. And other experiences.. I truly now believe everything is going to be alright.I've been going through my spiritual journey and I have become so self aware of everything. I look at the sky differently, the moon feels unreal, the sun feels scary almost (like hello, a giant fireball??), and just the concept of time is so overwhelming. My own existence has been freaking me out and it has made life much more interesting. I definitely believe that the government and church has tried to distract us from how spiritual we are. we have become so desensitized to the wonder of creation and the universe. Anyone else experiencing this?I help others by helping myself, and I help myself by helping others.

The others are not me, and I am not them,
nevertheless, whoever I help, the result is the same.

I am the others, and they too are me, 
hence helping each other, shall set us all free.A positive message for anyone going through depression or anxiety. First of all everything in this planet including relationships, money, people, jobs, etc is all an illusion. Everything is just atoms or energy bouncing and dancing around.

Whatever is stressing you out think about it like this: if I were to die in this moment would that thing that’s bothering me really matter?
We often forget about Death when one of the biggest realities of life is death. Keeping death in mind gives us a perspective on how much importance we should give to things. 

If you’re on the spiritual path remember everything is part of the Divine Play. What you are currently going through may not be something you want but it is definitely what your Soul needs to advance in this journey of life. Have faith in The Divine when things aren’t going your way! Surely life is a test and we’re going to get tested. Imagine life as an ocean with waves going up and down and yourself as a droplet.My spirit guides confirmed why I have the sexual feelings toward women that I’ve always run away from since childhood. It all makes sense now

EDIT: I’m surprised at how many people on this sub are asking me how to communicate with spirit guides. All I can really tell you is to start off by meditating to get into a headspace of receiving. Let the messages flow in. The more you do this the easier and more frequently the messages from your guides, loved ones, and higher self will flow in! Hope this helps :) SN: Personally i don’t hear voices when we communicate. Our guides are living in the astral plane where they cannot take on a human form therefore can only communicate in other ways such as vibrational frequencies, numbers and patterns, but everyone receives messages differently; however if you are hearing voices that make you feel uncomfortable or have a dark energy please be mindful as they may not be your guides.Children are the best at keeping their individuality alive. They do things for the love of it, the fun, the feeling. In their art, speech, and play, you see pure, unconscious creation.I feel like I am exactly where I should be, everything is in tune, coming together and I honestly couldn’t be happier. 

I love you and hope you are looking after yourself, I believe in you! 💗😌I am a Black, spiritual woman and i’ve come across many videos of young black men such as vontoocut saying that “only black people have souls” and a racist asian spiritualist (if that makes sense) saying “only POC have souls.” I don’t want to come off as “kissing white ass” to my community but that’s just false. It seems that POC probably have a very strong spiritual power but every race has souls. 

These people’s egos are talking when they say this. It seems like they’re very hurt about what happened and we completely have the right to be, but that doesn’t mean you have to blame the whole group because of it. 

vontoocut and spiritual so have been “beefing” or debating about “souls” and spiritual so is basically calling von out for saying those things.

What’s you guys opinion?What are your *primary dominant emotions* right now (ie: fear, joy, boredom, sadness, self pity, happiness, guilt, shame, anger, frustration, peace, etc)?

What sounds do you hear?

What physical sensations do you feel in your body?

What do you see (besides your screen)? What colors are around you?

Are your thoughts in the past, present, or future?

**This is an exercise in conscious mindfulness.** It is supposed to increase your self awareness. For example, if you are constantly in a state of sadness, you might not be aware of it since it has become unconscious and habitual. Mindfulness brings the unconscious to the conscious mind (which can help you grow as a person). 

*I really hope this post made you think outside the box for a few minutes* :)Even when you think you’re down and out, every day is a new day. Just keep tryingI always heard that you should be careful of the information you take in regularly...but now I see just how sensitive I am to a lot of things. I notice if I watch some videos on YouTube or read comments on reddit or if i....listen to the radio....I've picked up on how I feel after. If I watch something unproductive or non beneficial....I feel it later. Ill have a lower mood or feel bored or annoyed. And it's the opposite for beneficial and positive information. I feel it later. I'm just now really seeing how all this influences and affects me. That's it. Just wanted to share that.This is an incredibly exciting time for you. Massive change is on the horizon and beautiful opportunities are flowing your way. Keep doing what you're doing. Always Trust and believe in Yourself.

Source>>> r/ManifestationValley (join us here)Imagine the possibility of life if we all opened up and took off the mask. If we dropped the character and stopped the self-deception, we'd realize that we are just like each other: scared, alien, and dying for true laughter.A little backstory about me is that I grew up Christian, but without really a choice since I was forced to go to church each day as a kid. My faith wavered, as most do when growing up, yet I never stopped believing in "God" or a higher power just because the world and life is so beautiful. I remember secretly laughing at my church friends who told said they had a conversation with God, because I'm like "did he just come over for coffee or what???" 

Then when I was 19 in community college and really depressed. I would continually, ever since I was 15, ask outloud for God to send me signals that he exists. I was so hopeless and sad when I was 19 living through the motions, not having any friends and living at home. 

It was when I was 19 driving down a street near my house that I cried out in my car "please tell me what to do, where are you, if you even exist,". I don't remember exactly what I said but it was along those lines. Then I felt the weirdest most unexplainable feeling. It wasn't a voice. But I heard it in english words??? It said "I am all around you, you just have to look" 

I swear on my cat that I jumped in my skin. It was the WEIRDEST thing. I felt my body vibrate and like that voice came from my frickin body?? I was so lost for words. I wasn't even scared, which was weird because I actually used to be afraid of seeing God, like some white man in a robe coming in my room at night sounded terrifying, I don't care if he is here to help it's scary haha. But yeah for the first 20 minutes I tried to understand what happened. I wish I wrote down the exact words that I felt/heard/experienced but all i remember is the feeling.

However, I continued my everyday life still just randomly thinking about that experience. I didn't know what to make if it. I spent 18 years of my life believing god was a human white male with blue eyes. "how is he all around me?" "what is he chris from my English class, he's got blue eyes and he's white ?" 

then I got into spirituality during 2020 as a lot of people have. I have always been a curious person so once I even heard about spirituality and mindfulness I was so interested. I picked up the popular book "the power of now". Within the first 30 pages I started crying. Something in the book mentioned how God is all around us, in the forest, in the trees, in your friends family, in you. I finally understood what that experience meant 3 years ago. It all connected and I could not be happier. It makes so much sense to me. That voice felt like God speaking from inside my chest. All along I have been taught that God is to worship, what he looks like, and how we are not him. When really he is within all of us. Every organism. I feel so relieved to get out of my fear based religion and truly experience the love/higher power I knew existed but didn't understand. And will never understand, since I believe God/the universe is so complex and beautiful its impossible for us to understand all. that's the greatest aspect of life to me is forever learning. 

Anyway, thank you if you read my whole long story. I have never shared this with anyone as so far none of my friends are spiritual but they are agnostic or christian so they would think I'm crazy. Might I add I have never taken drugs or anything not even marijuana. But even if I say that I doubt anyone will understand my experience. 

 Yet, I am so excited to embark on my new journey into spirituality and love. :)I would greatly appreciate 💕I am leaving this subreddit because I have realized, the more I read, study, and try to make sense out of spirituality and meditation, the more I get tangled in it. I am leaving this subreddit so that I can find all the answers by myself, after all, I am the whole universe. It was a great time here and I learned a lot, but I guess it's time for me to unlearn everything and listen to the wisdom that is eternally present inside me. Just needed to let it all out. I say goodbye to this beautiful community <3A newborn is often described as a good child, if they don’t cry much.  


We mostly smile for photos irrespective of how we feel, taking another if someone isn't smiling.  


We sometimes distract children with shiny toys, something to watch, if they start crying.  


We distract adults with alcohol, food, shopping, something to play or watch, if they are upset.  


“How are you?”, “Yeah, I’m good thanks, how are you?”, “Good, thanks”.  


Good prompts no further investigation, sadness prompts an inquiry.  


Would you attempt to alter the behaviour of two friends laughing, trying to bring them back to a more neutral state?  


It's important to realise that despite what we may project, in-person or online, sometimes suffering and sadness is a fully normal part of life.  


Our repression of, or sprinting out of, sadness is creating a fake world which is robbing us of the lessons we could learn, and of genuine connections.  


We don't necessarily need to fix each other when feeling down - we may just need an empathic ear and time, not a busy mouth and an action plan.  


Until we understand that it is as natural to cry as it is to laugh, we’ll continue to suffer in our pursuit of a perpetual state of happiness.Not because I told you so, and "upvote this post if you agree!"  No. It's not that simple.  Life sucks sometimes.  It's hard.  It's sad.  It's scary.  It's frustrating.  That's all part of it.  No amount of well-wishing and positivity is ever going to change that.

Yet, at the same time, things *do* get better.  My life used to suck.  I hated myself.  I hated life.  I thought there was no way out.  But life works in mysterious ways.  It was at my absolute bottom when I was shown a different way.  I guess I needed to be totally broken before I became willing to take the chance to be vulnerable and try something new.  I'm glad it worked out that way.  I guess they call it grace.

That's the beauty of life: if something didn't go well today, tomorrow you get another shot at it.  Not everybody does, unfortunately.  But most of us do.  I consider myself very lucky to have been given a second chance, and though I forget sometimes, each new day is another opportunity to do something beautiful with this experience.

For me, it really was the cliché old advice: follow your heart.  That's all.  And the only thing getting in the way of it was my fear, and also caring what other people thought about me.  As soon as I was able to overcome that (it's a process), well, things really turned around.  There is no greater transformative force than love... in this case, self-love.  

Why shouldn't you live the way you want to live?  Why shouldn't you feel the way you want to feel?  Why shouldn't you love the people you want to love?  There are real restrictions in this world... we can't have everything we want all the time.  But I think that perhaps the biggest restriction is the one we place on ourselves.

It's about love, and it's about freedom.  The freedom to be the person you are, and to live the way you want to live.  It's not always easy, but I can assure you just the smallest of efforts can be rewarded a thousandfold.  I would never have believed it 10 years ago, but now I'm living proof of it.  It's such a gift to be able to experience it, and an even greater gift to be able to share it.

Best wishes to all.I don’t control my thoughts. I can’t stop myself from having thoughts. I don’t control my heart beat. I don’t control my immune system fighting off viruses. I can’t predict a thought before it happens. I can’t control my regulations. I can’t control my emotions. I’m simply conscious of this human experience. I can let go of (fear,anxiety,doubt,anger,suffering) and be at peace of mindI noticed this every night then started noticing people on twitter experiencing the same thing.... all my dreams are STRANGE! I very rarely remember dreams and now I can recall them vividly. It’s EVERY NIGHT. And involve people from my past. I don’t know what’s going on. Anybody else?**Explanation**: Do we judge others because of their negative behaviours, or do we judge because we simply do not understand? It is usually easy to see another’s physical ailments, but mental, emotional and spiritual scars are invisible to the eye, which can allow judgments to easily fill the void where compassion and understanding should reign. Bear this in mind the next time you are tempted to cast judgment on another, regardless of their behaviour.

For more inspirational and motivational quotes:

[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/mindovermatterscott/)

[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/pg/Mind-Over-Matter-Scott-Houghton-2129895330606529/photos/?tab=album&album_id=2138404346422294)Okay so I played this music of monks chanting and I closed my eyes with the intention of seeing myself dying and what would happen right after my death..

This is what I saw:

After I imagined I had died I instantly flew out of my body. I felt immense pain and sadness take over my soul that was transitioning, I cried knowing that me-the self that existed in the earthly plane-suffered so much heartache. From losing loved ones to seeing loved ones lose themselves in addictions to seeing others suffer from the experiences of life. There was just an overwhelming emotion of sadness. My soul was balling and then these arms reached out to me and hugged me. These arms where the arms of Mother she patted me on my back and nurtured me like if I was a 2 year old. She whispered in my ears saying its over now and its okay what I was feeling was the the pain of everyone and I needed to let it all out before transitioning over. I started to calm down and looked up to see alot of my loved ones who have passed waiting for me with a smile. The crazy part is that I saw my dad there and he looked like he had lived a few lifetimes more than the one he lived now. And he had finally got it right in one of them. By that I mean he had no addictions and was able to live a life with his heart where he was able transition to where he was now greeting me in what seemed a higher realm. So I was so happy to see him finally get it right. I also saw my children that I left behind and that's where I felt sad because I saw them crying over me no longer being alive as a human. 

This made me realize 2 things:

1. Suffering is undeniably a big part of the life experience, but one should aim to work hard on seeing all the good constantly in order to have a fun experience while alive as human.

2. Everyone should meditate on their death for it will make them see what can potentially await them and what they would like to change if they dont like what the see. For instance for me it was seeing my children suffer and Now I plan on teaching them more spiritual things regarding death and how this life is temporary and to teach them what they need to learn. They must remain warriors and seek ways to feel connected despite me not being physically alive.Repeat after me…
This year, I will not chase. What is meant for me, will be gifted to me. I will not worry for the future as it doesn’t exist yet. I will not worry about the past as it doesn’t exist anymore. I love. I am loved. I light every candle that comes into my life. I bless every room I walk into. I am protected by the divine. I give the universe my troubles as they do not belong to me. The universe and spirit will take care of everything. I welcome this year with open arms.I'm angsty as shit over the fact that I was born into a society that practically forces me to work in order to not either starve to death or die from the elements. It's still slavery, it's just disguised as "adulting, "normal," or "part of life." But why does it have to be? I know everyone feels this way...but if everyone feels this way, then why don't we all *do something* about it? 

I just find myself thinking there *has* to be another way to live...there has to be something I can do that is both satisfying to my soul and also provides me with the ability to have my basic survival needs met, without working for someone else or futilely pushing change on someone or a group of people who don't want it. 

The fact that I consistently want to sleep instead of do something that makes me feel truly alive terrifies me. The fact that I've wasted years of my life over this feeling  makes me feel so afraid because what if 60 years go by and I feel exactly the same way as I do now? Is that a waste? If I haven't ever truly been happy, what did I even live for?

I'm terrified of being one of those people who is so attached to their pain and to their piece of this giant, corrupt societal system that it makes them feel depressed, angry, helpless, hopeless, and virtually chronically dissatisfied. 

I'm viewed as naive by many, as I'm 25 and still have these idealistic wishes...but I don't understand why pushing for a freer world needs to be seen as such.

Society is so fucked up and the corruption is perpetuated on a small-scale, sociological level of social norms and the fear of being rejected. Why can't we just accept each other? You want to do what you want? Great, then let other people do what they want. 

Everyone wants to point fingers and blame others for the corruption, but no one wants to fix themselves. 

Show yourself genuine love and compassion, and watch how it affects the way you view and treat those around you. When your own perception changes, watch how the perception of those close to you changes. When you see how their perception changes, watch how the entire cultural environment around you changes. 

Nothing happens on a grand scale until it happens on a small scale. Similarly, no social or political changes will happen until they happen inside of *you*. 

Worry about yourself and don't hurt people. The rest will follow.Just believe, you don't have to choose. You are already doing the right thing, just by being you! Don't force control, trust the universe. It is coming and happening right now.You are NOT defined by your name

You are NOT defined by your "personality"

You are NOT defined by your age

You are NOT defined by your gender

You are NOT defined by your sex

You are NOT defined by your race

You are NOT defined by your religion

You are NOT defined by your cultural background 

You are NOT defined by the person you were raised to be 

You are NOT defined by the clothes you wear

You are NOT defined by the number in your bank account

You are NOT defined by your career or college major

You are NOT defined by the car you drive 

You are NOT defined by your popularity 

You are NOT defined by your mistakes

You are NOT defined by your failures

You are NOT defined by your body

You are NOT your appearance or looks

You are NOT defined by your thoughts OR what people think of you

You are NOT defined by your emotions/feelings OR how other people feel about you

You are NOT defined by your experiences

You are NOT defined by your trauma or your pain 

&#x200B;

Society brainwashed you to live in a state of lack, insecurity and self-doubt. By simply EXISTING you have intrinsic VALUE. Do not let others put you into a box or try to label you by trying to measure your worth by any of the things I listed above. You are NOT superior OR inferior to ANYONE. You deserve to be here just like everyone else. You deserve to be happy. You deserve to be content. And if anyone challenges that then they DON'T deserve to be in your life.

&#x200B;

To the beautiful person reading this....I believe in you. 🧠 You’ve been putting in so much work and you’re finally starting to see things a bit more clearly, aren’t you?

👁 I can see it in the way you’ve been thinking and writing.

🤲 It’s wonderful to realize how connected you are to the web of life on this earth and how it is constantly communicating with you. Nature - life itself has manifested in you to explore this wonderful creation...

👥 Be true to your ambitions and take great care of your vessel. Find forgiveness for your past self and do your best to release the past trauma that is holding you back.

😇 There is a cascade of ascension happening in *your* world. I believe in you. You will ascend. As you’re beginning to see yourself and the rest of us more clearly you may get a little nervous... That’s perfectly normal. We all have skeletons in our closet that are surfacing during this time.

🌓 *release them to the past*

☔️ Endure the storm, it’s here to help you grow.

🙏 Please forgive yourself.

👼Be gentle with yourself when things get rough and do not betray the child within. You are being reborn.

🐍 Don’t fall for spiritual ego traps and predatory gurus during this process. Stay grounded my friend. This is your birthright - ENJOY THIS DAY!

🌞 Be strong and wise you divine child of life.Your mind resembles an uncontrolled horse. You are continually on an excursion which is chosen by your your mind. Which bring you into the future and past that create a misguided feeling of self, you can also say it EGO. Be that as it may, continue reminding yourself you are the rider who must watch the excursion, as a quiet watcher. 

"You have it already. You just can't feel it because your mind is making too much noise, thinking has become a disease."

In any case, On the off chance that you could disassociate yourself from your mind. In the event that you could forget the projection of self and could go into quietness, in the event you may discover yourself.

Everything is here, there is no war between your self (rider) your psyche and the universe. You will liberate yourself from the oppression of your brain. The moment you begin watching as a thinker(rider), a more significant level awareness become Initiated. 

As long as your egoic mind is running your life, you will think you are- mind, false self, possessions, status, recognition, physical appearance, personal and family history, belief systems and also your political, nationalistic, racial, religious and other collective Identification. BUT NONE OF THESE IS YOU.

If you can understand how your mind playing with you , which is very difficult because the mind don't want you to realize you are more than your mind, because loosing mind implies loosing you, which is at some point inconceivable for some.

To getvfree you need to be free from everything, I am not saying by suppressing it but by getting libreation from it. I MEAN by discovering that mind isn't the only way to feel and experience everything.

Your mind can only experience what it knows. For example If someone never tasted sugar, at that point his psyche/mind can't create the sense of the flavor of sugar. Your psyche/mind can only make a simulation of what it knows.

You will locate the present moment holds the key of freedom. In any case, YOU can't find the present moment as long as you are your mind, you would think all the problem, craving and desiring of the mind is yours. But the moment you realize, the moment you get PRESENT. I assure you that it is an insubstantial phantom that cannot prevail against the power of your PRESENCE.

You will be above every misery. You will be over each hopelessness. You'll resemble a lovely bloom that are not on edge about tomorrow but rather live easily in the NOW. You'll be like a beautiful flower that are not anxious about tomorrow but live with ease in the timeless.

If you pass by a flower you may know the chemistry of its fragrance, that is one dimension of knowledge.
If you know the experience and ecstasy of that fragrance, that is another dimension of knowledge.
But, if you become the fragrance, that is knowing, that is aliveness. 
 
Be available as the watcher of your psyche your mind who is enamored. Do everything with love and adoration, move and grin. Love will help you with experiencing with universe. Mind will limit your experience to your sense of self. 

Welcome to the realm of mystic.
Jai shiva shambooI just have that feeling, everything in this world seems to be going downhill and nobody’s doing anything to stop it. I don’t want kids because the world really isn’t the same anymore, something is off.tittle.  
make an statement of who you prefer to be and simply stick to it. reality will rearrange according to your decision.   
act, feel and think the way you prefer. it will reflect outside, by law.  
Who am i? I am enlightened. A healer. A mystic. A Powerful and wise creator.  
Who are you?You guys ever feel the emotions of the world? Like an overwhelming wave of emotion that's foreign to you, like you can tell the emotions don't resonate from within.I mean it.

And my life was fucking terrible for a long amount of time.

I love everyone for everything they have ever done to me.

I wish everyone the best.

Edit: I love you all, thank you for bringing ur voices.

Edit 2: Thank you all so much seriously, I find it very hard to be expressive with my emotions even though I have understood them. Seeing I love you from everyone really makes my heart warm.

I would really like to trust my emotions especially in relationships, I’m young but I feel like I have so much heart to give. I don’t want to be lied to, I have seen my generation.

Edit 3: I am a male, some have me confused to be female. Nope haha!Many people and children are suffering of a depression. Or they are destructive towards themselves and sometimes even other people.

Many depressions or depressed feelings are caused by the fact that children start to feel like they are not good enough. This is one of the results of raising children in a system where there almost always is an illusionary goal that should be achieved. And only when they achieve the goal they feel like they did a great job. Like they're good enough.

But there is no ultimate goal. Everything is connected. Everything exists because of the surroundings so everything is one. Let's call this one big thing the universe. Are we as the universe going to somewhere? Do we need to achieve a goal? No we don't. So let's teach children this so they start to enjoy life at every moment.

Of course there are also illusionary goals outside of schools. That's why I think that it would be useful to teach children how to observe their thoughts. Because then they will learn to not get caught up by depressing thoughts. And when they will also learn to live in the present moment, they will really see the beautiful things of life because they are not living in their head.

So together with knowledge about life, observing thoughts, and living in the present moment. There will probably be less depressed children.

I recently created the An Awakened Earth platforms on YouTube, Ko-fi, and Soundcloud. An Awakened Earth supports the collective awakening which has to take place to live in unity and survive as a species. Do you have some content which can help people to awake? Send it to me via [quintenvanommen@gmail.com](mailto:quintenvanommen@gmail.com) and I will try to upload it on the platforms! For more information [https://ko-fi.com/anawakenedearth/posts](https://ko-fi.com/anawakenedearth/posts) I would like to thank you in advance for your supportI went back to download instagram in about 6 months or so of being absolutely off all social media and it’s absolutely surprising and depressing how a huge amount of people are still living in oblivion to the spiritual awakening going on in the real reality and how they are living in a literal matrix, and it even seems like the matrix is getting worse and worse by the day just for the few minutes of scrolling through i could just feel the draining energy come out of me it’s crazy and i can’t believe people actually LIVE in that reality. It’s depressing, lol really it kinda gives me a sense of appreciation for the opportunity i have to be awakened & saved from this façade.

Hey whoever reading this what ever you maybe going thru make sure u keep pushing and never give up and u never go back to that matrix because no matter how things may be here your at least certain you get to keep your soul and be whole, so keep pushing we’re all gonna go thru times of challenge even as the chosen ones but it’s all for the greater good of God and to make us stronger. So think positive, be positive, stay blessed and keep pushing! 💙Long mental health post ahead:

TLDR: You are a computer, not a cake. You can reprogram your reality. You are not stuck being who you currently are.

A common misconception today is that you are a recipe. The ingredients of your childhood mix together, bake in your teens and when you're an adult you're the finished product, a cake if you will. 

But the problem with this is once you're a cake then that's it. You can't change what kind of cake you are or whether you are perfectly formed or a pile of burned mush. 

The truth though is that our brains run by electrical circuits and neurotransmitters. Our brains constantly learn and constantly evolve. This makes us more like computers. The good news about this is you can reprogram the beliefs you've learned, the character traits you've developed, the way you perceive people and the world. 

Unlike a cake which can't be deconstructed to its basic ingredients and changed once baked; a computer's programming can be rewritten, updated, or restored. 

You also can be rewritten, updated and restored. Trauma in your past, your environment, your socialisation, everything that has contributed to the person you are today can be examined and changed. It's not a quick fix, just like a computer you need time to work through the old and write in the new. Along the way you might need to shut down and reboot a few times, and afterwards there will still be some bugs to work out.

But change is not impossible. You are not a cake. You can change what you've learned to become. You can be who you want to be. Be patient, be kind to yourself, allow your growth to take place, look into your pain from an outside perspective, identify your limiting and your helpful beliefs, start believing in your new updates and the feelings and actions will follow.

Change your Windows 98 to Windows 2020.I think the universe just said “she’s had enough shit...now let’s give her the good stuff”. 

I won a 2 years long legal battle and met a very nice man all within less than a week. 

Not sure if this is the right place to post but this is the message I’m getting.i always knew of this concept this but today I finally KNOWI was thinking about how I have gotten much quieter and gentler than before my “spiritual awakening” and how I am more ok and pleased with being alone than ever before. Sometimes that scares me and it feels strange to not need people as much, but I just realized, what if that had to do with my ego? When my ego was bigger, I needed more attention. Now that that shadow is seen- I don’t think it’s as scary, so maybe I’m more ok by myself.No matter how hard its been, take time to just breathe in that oxygen, excersise it, really take in that air and fill yourself up with life. Stay well. Much love and lightI opened my windows for the first time this morning, breathed in the fresh air and felt the soft breeze. It made me feel so alive and connected to nature. It makes me realize how fortunate I am to be alive in the present. Have a great day! 💛The emotions flowing through me is so overwhelming that the tears just flow with it. Has anyone else experienced this? 

I don't know if I'm doing this correctly or not, but I just kind of let go and do. There doesn't seem to be an instruction booklet to this and what to expect.

Anyone want to help?On my walk this morning, I noticed that nature is literally perfect when left alone.

Why do we feel the need to control everything? Why do we consider ourselves separate to this basic law?

Everything unfolds as it should when allowed to. Trust it!Could be worthless too, haha we all know how dreams can be. This one felt.. different. Especially bc of the things happening in my own life and on the macrocosmic level as well. 

Setting: me and my mother were in a house, not the one we currently live in, there was a crowd of people moving around outside. Like. They were going to/coming from a large event.  We could see them through the windows and they could see us, but we were unbothered by the lack of privacy. However, the house likely was just a symbol for our "boundaries" in these astral planes. 

I think I was discussing the nature of reality with my mother,  as I've been doing my hardest to truly get her to believe in the miraculous. When suddenly two humanoids "appeared" right in front of me. They had some wild energy about them. Through dream symbols they first expressed the energy of "homeless" and of "mental handicaps" but I pushed passed those symbols. I KNEW. They were harmless. But was very curious on WHY they were in our house 🤣 it felt like a gift. 

As I tried to interact with them, and begin resonating with them, 1, the house changed and two they did as well.  They were reptile humanoids. But with good souls.  They were really intrigued to be talking with a human. And were really impressed with me. 

Couldn't get alot of answers on "why" they were impressed. Something about how rare it is to get to "be" a human. And also, how great it is for them, when beings become human. We give them gifts somehow.  The magic really happens,  in the "afterlife" where being human has changed us to the point where we can really.. do something. But,  I think its bc an enlightened human being basically is limitless and merges with source and therefore. Can give without limit. But idk 🤷‍♂️ didn't feel nefarious, I really don't think they are "bad" which is the common label put on them. Are all humans "good"? 

Here's where it gets saucy. 

They started talking about world affairs. And they said "so many already know" and I said, well, we don't (people in the USA) and they said, by the end of October EVERYONE on the planet will know. 

I forget what we were talking about 😅 not aliens coming to earth. The knowledge is going to be more applicable than that. The light is going to illuminate the darkness, and so many hidden and secret things will be "known". Most likely about the goverment and what it's been doing in secret.

So, keep your eyes and mind open towards global events these next two weeks. 

Or it was just some adolescent Reptilians fucking with a dreaming human or it was "just a dream"

😁 cheersToday is my birthday and I realized that my life has changed a lot because of you!.  I am 47 years old today and I want to thank you all for all the knowledge you have poured into this forum, I have been reading it and practicing for a few months and I feel that my perspective on life and death has changed more in the last few months than the rest of my life, I just wanted to take the time to say thank you, thank you, thank you.I saw a twitter thread  today of spiritual people asking others to please meditate and visualize rain. The thread was so nice in all the different way they visualized rain falling. Talked about how they didn’t stop till they felt it. One even said “ I know it worked “ and you guys!!!!!! It rained!!!!!!!! today!!!! It had been 5 months!!!!! 



Keep sending your love.Stop projecting your past onto your future. Seriously. The people that surround you now are not the same as before. It’s unfair to them to cast this judgement. It’s unfair to yourself. Move forward. Look up. Live in the Present, because that’s all there ever is.

Be Still, my friend ☀️Life is full of contrast. Without the dark, we wouldn't be able to appreciate the light. My perspective of the world changed a lot after going through the Dark Night of the Soul. It went from being meaningless to meaningful when I encountered my soul tribe and the love of my life.I’m 18M. I will get the vaccine, some say it’s safe others say it will eliminate the god gene, others say it will make me not feel empathy, some say it’s the mark of the beast, others say it contains baby blood. Imma get it. I will do it and keep everyone curious updated. After I get it I will try meditating, getting sun, watch a video of something and see if I feel bad. I was scared but now I no longer live in fear. I have faith that the universe will make sure I complete my purpose before I die. I am no longer scared of this shit. Peace, I love all of you1.Gratitude

Being grateful for what you already have surfaces positive feelings that Increase your vibration and opens you to receive more

2. Meditate

Meditating is a great way to connect with your higher self Meditation also eliminates worries, anxieties, and other negative filing

3. Connect With Nature

Go outside and connect with nature is a great way to ground yourself and feel connected to the universe

4. Self-care

Taking care of yourself an essential way to rais your vibration. Put On a face mask get burials do not, or read a book Do what feels good and makes you happy

5. Visualize

Close your eyes and see what you want to manifest Visualize dream life or goal (Imagine every aspect of your desire and se yourself with it)

6. Drink Water

Water Helps cleanse you of toxins and Impurities that could be weighing down your vibration. Waterfall your vibration from the Inside out

7. Journal

Journaling a great way to clean and organize the mind. Journaling and raise your vibration releasing worries onto the paper freeing them from your mind.

[Here are the 7 signs that shows your vibrations are increasing/Rising](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley/comments/jdejei/here_are_the_7_signs_that_shows_your_vibrations/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source)If you’re not moving as quickly along your spiritual path as you were in the beginning or if things seemed to have slowed down a bit for you that is OKAY. Trust that everything is working out for your highest good and it will. Balance is an important part of life and sometimes you just have to pump the brakes a little and take a deep breath. Remember how far you’ve come and that you are doing amazing! Focus on all the things in your life that you are grateful for and they will multiply💛🙏🏽 you got this!So today was a weird day at work in general. I'm a server so I deal with a lot of people. Today a homeless couple came in and I saw they had a gift card out. They made it a point to tell me their "neighbors" gave them card and to not go over budget because they didnt know how much money was on the card. I ran the card to see for myself and the system said invalid gift card. I couldn't go back to them and tell them they had no money on the card after I saw how excited they were to be there. I just kept the card and didnt say anything to them about how much was on it. The excitement on their faces when I brought them a big salad two cokes and some breadsticks. They couldn't even get out the words of what they wanted to order because they seemed so overwhelmed. They kept wanting to order more things and I was in such a predicament because I knew I was going to end up buying their meal and working for free, but I didnt want to tell them that the card had no money. So after the check got to 30 bucks I just told them that they were at the limit. The table next to me noticed as they were talking very loud. The lady at the table called me over and asked if they had any money. I told them no and that I planned on paying for it tho. She then told me she wanted to pay and that she used to work with special needs people. Hats fucking off to her and im assuming she noticed how well I was handling the situation which is why she offered to pay. It was interesting that she assumed they had no money as did I when I saw them. Just wanted to share a positive story with yall because the whole situation had a big impact on me. It was crazy to actually see how much a lot of us take for granted when this was probably the best day these people have had in maybe years and all they did was go out to eat with whatever money they thought they had found on a gift card.We are Energy
By Nikola Tesla

“Death does not exist, and with that very knowledge, the fear of it disappears. And remember: no man who existed died. They turned into light and as such still exist. The secret is that these light particles return to original state.Return to one of the previous energies.Christ and some others knew this secret.I was searching for how to preserve human energy.It is one of the forms of light.In the Soul sometimes equal to the supreme celestial light.I did not search for it for myself, but for the good of all. I believe that my discovery will make people’s lives easier and more bearable and direct them to spirituality and morality.”
— Nikola Tesla.Today I took a hike and felt high off life. I felt like I was on shrooms (lol). Take a hike if you can and take a few minutes to just stand there and take it all in. Life seems fast but it doesn’t have to be. The present is an absolute blessing, to be fully immersed in your surroundings and “be here now” will grant you so much peace and happiness. I could not get over how beautiful the flowers were... the mountains...

How lucky are we to be alive and live this life?! I’m grateful quarantine gave me time to be with myself. I now know I am the only person I need. I am whole on my own and I’m very happy to come to this realization. I hope during this time others can, too. 

Anyways just wanted to share with y’all and wanted to hear from some other people who are also high off life. Hope you guys all have the most amazing day/night! Do something good for yourself and remember to slow down sometimes and enjoy the small things.These emotions if they become to extreme can cause wars, outbreaks and greed. All of which could lead to other extremely negative consequences. However the opposite is true also. Anytime we show kindness we help raise the vibration of the collective consciousness. Let us help the universe out on it's job to guide us  towards ascension and just be nice to eachother.I dont mean to say this in a bad way. But it seems everyone is posting about how awakened they are...

I propose that Awakening isn't really special. Everyone can wake up and will.

 To brag about how awakened you are is just another ego trip to get lost in. 

What is special is how you put your experience to work in practical life. Because in the end before enlightenment you "chop wood and carry water" and after enlightenment or awakening you must still "chop wood and carry water." 

Will you use your experience to serve others or your ego?Much love and peace to all&#x200B;

You need to think like you already have it. So for example if you want to be rich don't say “can i be rich”. Say “I am Rich” 

**Step 1:** Write down the ‘Thing’ you want 3 Times 

**Step 2:** Say this ‘Thing’ in your mind 6 Times 

**Step 3:** Say it out loud 9 Times

**Step 4:** Thank the universe / God - it's really up to you 

**Extra Step:** Make sure you visualise a couple times a week your life with the ‘Thing’ you want. And just keep believing you will get it, Because trust me you will (:Crazy story time for anyone out there who isn't 100% sold on the whole "soul" concept.

Yesterday at work I was talking to this girl whose kid is seriously special.

She was explaining to me how he talks about remembering his past life. He says he got stabbed in the back of the neck when he died, but get this, he has a birthmark on the back of his neck.

He told her "I chose you to be my mom when I was in the bubble because you were sad."

Anyways their cat died a couple days ago and when she brought the bubble up to him yesterday he told her that the cat's bubble visits him still.

All I'm saying is if you have doubts that any of this is real or somebody tries to tell you differently just know they're the crazy one.

Love you guys 🙏💙It's funny how many people out there think this but continue to live like everyone else. It was actually a shock for me when I realised how many claim to astral project like it's a thing. They casually talk about it like how I talk about going to fetch groceries. The number of people who entertain themselves with discussion of how their heart chakra is open, how all of their chakras are activated and they are now feeling peaceful in life and all that, I can't help but wonder if they are lying outright or if they have been really brainwashed into believing it. It is ridiculous really. 

Whatever it is, one thing is clear. People taking like this have no idea whatsoever about what they are talking. I think for some people when they give up their seat for an old lady on the public transport, they think they are awakened? It's kindness. And that is good. But that's about it. 

The other day I saw a post that asked how people with all their chakras activated find their life to be. There was a long list of answers. I mean... Wow! You have all your chakras activated and that means you are a realised being like Buddha or Christ. And yet you spend your time scrolling on reddit? Seriously? The sheer audacity to even think about something like this!

I read something about how a person who thinks they are a realised being should spend some good time with their family to see how much of a "realisation" they have experienced. I agree. I spent a greater part of my 2 years travelling in the Himalayan mountains and meditating. I had some great mystical experiences. But when I came back home to my family, they kicked the Buddha right out of me in less than a month. The point is even after all that experience, I wasnt "There" yet. 

For most of the people out there, Id say being awakened should actually be about shattering the beliefs they have about their false awakening and face reality. That way they will atleast have a chance to experience the real stuff may be.

000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000

Edit: A lot of people are offended. But I have no justification to what I have said and I stand by it. However I do feel the need to clarify something. I am not saying the above mentioned phenomena aren't real or that no one has experienced them here. I am only saying that while there are those who experience these stuff for real, there are some others in the midst who talk about these stuff like it's their experience. 

I have seen posts where people claim to have just come across the concepts and that very night they gave it a try and it worked for them. They astral projected and saw the other side of the moon or something like that. And then there are those who unleashed the energy from all their chakras in less than a week. Naruto??? Avatar? Hmm may be. 

Also I have not directed this post to anyone who experiences things under the influence of psychedelics. Drugs are potent enough to alter the perception of the mind and we all know that. That's a different thing altogether and that's not a part of this post.Why? Because I feel like it would make more sense to not read about spirituality and focus more on my own journey. I'll be back ♥️If you want to have a loving, fulfilling life, just remember to tick these boxes every day:

* Make sure to get a good night's sleep and wake up promptly.
* Make your bed.
* Do morning meditation and/or some form of yoga/walking/light exercise.
* Hit work with a positive attitude.
* Do not engage in negative behaviors throughout the day: gossip, junk food, porn, smoking, etc.
* Catch yourself when you feel anger or other negative emotions arise.  Take breaths and calm yourself.
* At home dedicate at least 30/60 minutes to a new hobby or skill.
* Healthy meals.
* Invest time in relationships: if you have a partner, invest in him/her.  If you don't, and you desire one, invest time in pursuing one or doing things that will help you find one... ie new activities, hitting the gym, or even Tinder if you want to go that route.  Alternatively, invest time in friends/family.
* Limit social media use.
* Night time reflection: make an inventory of what you did well today, and what you didn't do so well.  Meditate on it before bed.
* No screen time 30-60 minutes before bed.
* Early bed time for a good night's sleep.

I'm posting this totally ironically, let's see if anyone catches it or if this gets a lot of upvotes/feedback of people who actually think this is a good list.

Life is not a series of boxes that you tick off.  Life is life... it's alive, scary, fragile, vulnerable, an adventure.  Even if you manage to tick off all the boxes you will not find love and fulfillment.  You may find something we could call well-being, but you won't find love, joy, and fulfillment.  That can only be found by being authentic to your true desires.  Which may of course include the desire to be healthy and do positive things for yourself.

But you will never know love by waging war on yourself.

Remember, life is not a business affair.  There is no reward at the finish line.  In fact, when you reach the finish line, it's over.  So enjoy the ride.

It's ok to be a human.If you're even as much as reading this message, it is because you have been deemed as capable of handling and executing the instructions contained therein. Therefore, without further ado, is this urgent call for providing assistance to all of humanity. An assistance, that absolutely ***ANYONE AND EVERYONE*** can *real easily* respond to and provide -- *that too* -- from within the very confines and comforts of their own homes no less! So, here goes nothing:  

There are those upon your world who are currently looking to ignite wars, fan tensions and flame agitations amongst the masses **THE WHOLE WORLD OVER.** Do not be fooled for even as much as a *single second* that these people have kind or just intentions at their heart for you, for they indeed do NOT. Still skeptical? Just look into your history and you'll find ample evidences of these (divisive) *"games"* being played here ENDLESSLY by all of these psychopathic individuals who benefit TREMENDOUSLY from war, slaughter, destruction, chaos, and the damaging of human property, human spirits, human psyche, and human flesh no less. So prevalent have these *"games"* of theirs been that even the *mainstream outlet* ***Wikipedia*** has an entire page dedicated to this particular cause, and no, I'm [***so not kidding here:***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide_and_rule).  

That being said, these dark-minded and near-sighted individuals are absolutely CLUELESS regarding the true power of **LOVE.** OR the *sheer power* of prayer, blessing and meditation, *to name a few.* A power, that is seamlessly capable of moving *entire universes,* let alone having to stop a bunch of power-tripping warmongers from wreaking needless havoc all over the place. But this power simply **does not** (and *would not)* *interfere* in our lives unless you **VERY EXPLICITLY PERMIT IT** to do so, so it is about time that you *GAVE IT* all of the necessary *permissions* to help us all out in here. Because even as you read this, there are some (rather desperate) attempts being made out there to start a WAR at the India-China border, flare up TENSIONS within the USA, and do a bunch of other warmongery stuff in many more places other than just that. Needless to say here, that YOU (yes, **YOU,** the one reading this message) can easily, ***VERY, VERY EASILY*** put an end to these nefarious plans of theirs, and that too *singlehandedly* at that. **How?** Here's *how.*  

**Simply visualize or imagine** a brilliant light filled with the energies and INTENTIONS of *pure love and peace* enveloping the *entire Earth at large.* Can't visualize or imagine stuff? No problem! Just set a very strong mental **INTENTION** that energies of love, peace, wisdom, healing and protection engulf and secure the entire planet at large.  

And then, whether you are visualizing / imagining or intending stuff, just go **FEEL** as if all of this was *ALREADY HAPPENING* ***RIGHT NOW.*** Then **FEEL** the whole world dropping weapons and taking the *'higher route'* to resolving issues. **FEEL** the whole world coming together and **FINDING SOLUTIONS** as opposed to doing absolutely *anything else.* Above all, **FEEL the whole world CHOOSING LOVE, PEACE,** HARMONY, HEALING, ABUNDANCE / PROSPERITY and **UNITY** over anything and everything else there is. FEEL IT. FEEL IT. **FEEL IT ALL OUT.**  

Then, let go of that visualization / imagination or intention and relax. **For your job here is now DONE.** You'll see the **RESULTS** of what you just did for yourself pretty shortly; I FUCKING **GUARANTEE YOU** ***THAT.***  

Last, but by no means the least, if you can, send out a prayer / blessing (or more) that **EVERYONE ON EARTH** find PEACE, LOVE, BALANCE, WISDOM, ABUNDANCE / PROSPERITY, HEALING, UNITY and *TRUE HARMONY.* **And that ALL ASSISTANCE from within ALL PARTS AND ASPECTS OF CREATION be provided to planet Earth for magnifying the above positive intentions; AND for bringing endless Love, Peace, Harmony, Wisdom, Healing, Clarity and Abundance / Prosperity to the ENTIRE PLANET, ONCE AND FOR ALL.** This will make things *even better* for the entire world at large, and you can take *my word for that* if you'd so like. ***DO*** gauge these words of mine through your *intuition / gut feeling* for yourselves in any case, and you will **IMMEDIATELY AND INSTANTANEOUSLY realize and** ***KNOW*** as to whether I'm telling you the **TRUTH** here or not.  

**Even JUST ONE LONE PERSON DOING THIS** will begin to screw up the dark ones' dark and dirty plans in unimaginable ways here -- though **THE MORE NUMBERS of people that do this, the FASTER and BETTER will you witness and experience the EFFECTS** of what all you just intended to see occurring in here. The phrase *"the more the merrier"* exists for a reason you know.  

**DO SHARE** this message with ***AS MANY PEOPLE AS YOU POSSIBLY CAN,*** through **AS MANY SOCIAL MEDIA CHANNELS** that you possibly have access to. The **greater** the numbers of people reading this and doing this, the **faster and better** will be the victory of Love, Light, Peace, Wisdom, Harmony, Unity, Abundance / Prosperity and TRUTH. And so it is. And so it is.

I thank all of you SO MUCH for assisting humanity in here today. The sheer numbers of *blessings* that you will receive out of these efforts of yours will be beyond what you can even as much as *hope to count* during you entire lifetime. So thank you. Thank you. And thank YOU. **OVER and OVER AGAIN.**That's just it, I'm practically making my dreams come true, now and i already got an interview, so let's see how it goes!Dont forget to stretch and drink water, and remember to be grateful for the little things.  We will make the world a better place and im not gonna stop!If you're like me, you never let anyone love you before.  You never loved yourself.  You were never able to successfully love anyone else.  Sure, you felt it on some level, but there was always so much interference and funk that things would go awry without fail.  And sometimes in a very ugly way.

If you're like me you used to be down and out.  Life used to be a great burden.  Nobody knew the real you.  And if you're like me, you've made a lot of very big mistakes.  You've hurt people.

You may not relate to everything I just shared, but I think that without fail most of us grew up lacking true love in our lives.  We were never taught to accept ourselves.  We were taught to put up a front.  We were taught to fight hard to "be better".   But not to love.

If you're like me, then nowadays, things have changed.  You accept yourself.  You let people in.  You feel love, and you share it, and you let people love you back.

If you're like me, and you're coming from a very dark place... the fact that such great love could arise in your life is nothing short of a miracle.  It's grace.

That's something worth celebrating on this Christmas day.  It's a big deal.  But come to think of it, it's also the most natural state of things.  It is really quite simple... it's just that we had to work through our jungle gym of conditioning and dysfunction first.  So let's celebrate it today.  And when we're done, we can get on to living life like it was meant to be lived: with love.

Happy Christmas!I've developed a game about the individuation process and active imagination - a process many of you are interested in. Here is the official trailer for my game. I incorporated some of my dreams into the game and some of my psychedelic experiences too. I rely heavily on Jungian psychology and teachings of Marie-Louise Von Franz and JP.

Here is the TRAILER: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GjX9cSc2BLw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GjX9cSc2BLw)I feel like whenever I’m a little high, I’m closer to the spiritual world. I feel like I’ve had a lot of messages from the universe come to me after I smoke weed. Does this happen to anyone else or am I just getting really high?Don’t let others block that beautiful light you have , outshine them. 

Don’t see it as “loosing” people you love see it as outgrowing them. 

Do trust in the universe 

Be grateful for what you already have 

And most importantly thank yourself for being you. Be appreciative of yourself for even existing in this beautiful planet we call earth.How in the fuck do you work a 9-5 after having a spiritual awakening???  I’ve been trying to work a normal job and I am so repulsed by it, I’ve tried school and I’m even more repulsed.  Idk what to do.  I know I love investing into stocks etc.  but that hasn’t been able to pay itself off yet.  I’m having an extremely difficult time finding my “passion” and I’m having a hard time working without burning out and quitting.  If anybody has any advice on what they did/do please let me know for this has been a reoccurring theme for more than a year.Find yourself feeling pain, seemingly about nothing external, as you progress on your spiritual journey? Well, congratulations! 

While it can be uncomfortable, even seemingly unbearable at times, it is a fantastic opportunity to clear negative energy patterns. Some of these energy patterns can also be generational, meaning that you’ve unconsciously inherited them through family. 

It can seem, to the ego, that you must be doing something wrong if you find yourself feeling these uncomfortable emotions when you are meant to be “high vibe”. Actually, the opposite can be true. 

As you raise your vibration, these lower vibrational energies can no longer survive in your energy field! This means that they come up to the surface, ready for you to “feel them to heal them”. 
Also, as you increase your conscious awareness of your body and your energy field, you may become aware of subtle uncomfortable energies that were always there, but now that you’ve increased your awareness, you notice what you once couldn’t. 

So don’t be discouraged if you are feeling pain. Continue to practice great habits and wire in a positive reality, but even if you are doing these things and you find yourself feeling down, know that your spirit has deemed you ready to heal generational energies. That is something to be proud of.Maybe I’m not posting this in the right place, but I wanna see if anyone else has a situation like this. 

I’m not a religious person, but I think I’m very fine tuned into my intuition and I feel as though I have some kind of connection with....something? The universe maybe? I’m not sure. 

Long story short, I’m in a bad place mentally and I feel like I’m in the wrong spot/on the wrong track. So last night I was mid panic attack and was begging anyone/anything out there for a sign that I’m not where I’m supposed to be and basically just asking for any small hint that I need to make some changes that may hurt now but will be good changes in the long run. Not even 5 minutes later, I received the exact sign I was asking for. I dunno if I’m just overthinking this whole thing, maybe it was just a coincidence, or maybe it was my sign that I need to make some changes. Little things like this happen to me often, so I’m not sure if I’m just running into coincidences or if I’m actually tuned in to the universe this well. Any advice is welcome. TYIA.\-Iyanla VanzantWhy is it these types of people who always have the good things happen to them? Why do they always get the jobs they want, make new friends, make the most money? I have witnessed this in my life with the horrible people. The people who have caused me depression, anxiety, low self esteem are the ones who get praised and looked at like they are amazing. Whilst I'm here suffering with the trauma they've given me. Why is the universe like this?

Sorry to be so negative it's just frustrating to think about.I’m not suicidalLife feels harder and easier at the same time. I find it hard to keep playing a role in this mundane, weird system. And what I find most difficult is to have connections with other people. Especially those in my usual environment. I don’t want to talk to them anymore, I can’t do this. It freaks me out. I have a decent following on socials and stopped posting, I can’t even be bothered to open those apps anymore. I stopped replying to messages from anyone. and everything just feels like a burden IdkTension is who you think you should be, relaxation is who you are.

&#x200B;Something beautiful is coming your way. You can expect bigger and better things. You will be celebrating miracles in your health, love life, and finances. Everything is aligning in your favor.
Do you agree?

Source >>> [image post](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley/comments/j8482t/daily_affirmation/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share) from r/ManifestationValleyI was listening to a “Decoding the Power of Now” seminar on YT by Eckhart himself. 

Funny enough I was only half paying attention as I put it on in the background as I was tinkering with my longboard. Suddenly I had a feeling I needed to pay attention to the video and as I tuned in I heard Eckhart  say (paraphrasing a bit):

Neither the past nor future exist. They’re not real. The past is an illusion created by your thoughts and the future is also constructed by your thoughts but they do not exist. The only thing to truly exist is now, and you can understand this by practicing the power of presence. 

Man that hit me like a brick and it finally clicked in my head. It allowed me to let go of decision making processes based on inhibitions created from a constructed past. It allowed me to let go of any turmoil, anxiety, and regret caused by my past simply by understanding the past does not exist and it’s created within your mind. And surpassing your mind and viewing it from consciousness is how you obtain true understanding. I’m beyond grateful for this enlightening experience and I feel as though I’ve reached a large milestone in my spiritual journey. 

Love & Peace,
BJust like in the title, about a week or so since my little brother(15m) has passed away, my mom and I were going to the store and as we are walking towards the car we seen a tiny bird that appeared to be sleeping on our driveway. It was pretty unusual because usually when you walk past a bird it always flies away but this bird didn’t fly away. I went ahead and gently picked up the bird to see if it was okay, it didn’t seem hurt or anything. The bird let me pick it up, it didn’t try to attack me or try to escape, the bird actually woke up and started to fall back asleep. Could it be a sign of my little brother? What’s the meaning behind something like that? Or am I just overthinking it?You heard the call and you answered, you agreed to play this game. You were aware that you were going to forget in order to make the game more rich in experience. You agreed because you knew you were an immortal being and that the reward was to grow into another vibration after the test was finished. Once your lessons are done you start remembering and becoming more self-conscious. Hold on tight, after this one we go home.Someone asked me to write a post on this, as I wrote some thoughts in a comment earlier this week.

For most my adult life, I identified as 'straight', with a 'bi curious' streak. Over time, we have been taught to be more accepting of homosexuality, and this has escalated in intensity lately. The LGBT and the rainbow movement are, of course, founded on this notion - that we need to be more accepting of differences in sexuality and of diverse preferences. That these orientations are mainstream, and deserve the same level of respect as heterosexuality. I wholeheartedly agree with this notion.

But views around sexuality, whether strictly conservative or heavily liberal in nature, take the view that sexuality is something that needs to be defined and matters. I would argue that it doesn't.

It's none of my business who someone chooses to engage in sexual relations with. It makes no difference to me whether someone prefers the same sex or the opposite sex. Why do I need to know which 'team' you are on?

Society likes to define people by their sexuality. But if we look at the universe from an angle of oneness, why does the act of having sexual relations with another person even need a label? What is and isn't sex anyway? There are many 'acts' that people can do together that some people consider to be 'sex' and others don't. This shows how blurred the line can get.

One definition that springs to mind is 'sex is any interaction with another person involving the genitals for the purpose of pleasure'. Ok, let's run with that.

Well, what are the genitals? Why do they need a label? Aren't they just a part of us? Society likes to label absolutely everything - illnesses, syndromes, diseases, sexual acts. Some cultures don't have words for things while others do. Labels are not necessary. Yet we label the genitals, and label the act us using those labelled body parts in a labelled way as 'having sex'.

In my opinion, society's unspoken view toward sex is something like this:

"It's ACTUALLY only for making babies. However... because it feels so nice and has other benefits for us, we break that rule. Because we're all collectively breaking that rule, it should become a taboo"

So we end up with conflicting views on the subject - some groups who think sex is everything (because of the liberating aspect of breaking the rule of the taboo) and some who think sex is shameful and sinful (because of the taboo).

In the sense of oneness, sex just is. The body brings us pleasure. That's why we have incarnated in a human lifeform. One of the many ways the body brings us pleasure is through our external organs, including the genitalia. This pleasure can be enjoyed on our own or with another person. That person might be the same sex as us or the opposite sex. That's really all there is to it.

But whether we engage in such activity with people who have the same or different genitals to us has no bearing on our or their identity. The acts we enjoy do not group us into a particular category. We all enjoy what we enjoy, and that's really all there is to it. Nobody's framework can define how we enjoy life with the body we inhabit.

I no longer identify as having any sexual orientation. I've engaged in and enjoy sexual activity with men and women, but that doesn't define me.Hello, whoever see’s this I just wanna say whatever your stressed over will be over with. You are in the right place. You have the strength and courage to do what you need to do. One Love💛Doing something that isnt normal. especially here in Holland u have to act "normal"

This always pissed me of and i could give grumpy looks to people. The hate was almost mandatory. The other day i saw a man doing some sort of yoga outdoors by himself. I looked at him and he saw me looking. And in my intent i always try to not give an awkward stare but an interesting and not too long to not try to make someone uncomfortable in the hope i encourage them. 

And then it dawned upon me. I thought what if this man i saw started looking grumpy at me? 

*i would probably start either laughin a bit or at least inwardly* 

Ive been doin it wrong the whole time i figured. Instead of trying to control people to not laugh or anything (yes i know its stupid, but i have a strong will actually) what i need to to do is be 

*more inviting*  


Ofcourse people are going to look. U cant stop that. So let them look and show them ur passion or whatever it is and thus inspire them. Well just thought sharing this, mayb someone can benefit. Thats all.I’ve maintained a consistent morning routine for almost two months now (meditation, cleansing, tarot, journaling, that jazz) and I’ve found that either my sweet cat is much more affectionate, or I’m simply noticing it more. Sometimes it feels like a little note from the universe reminding me of the small gifts in life, like true affection from an animal.

She sits with me during my morning meditation and yoga sessions and tries to stay close beside me throughout the day just to hang out. It’s been a very sweet little reminder of progress each day, and how valuable life is. And that I’ve got someone in my corner rooting for me :)Has someone ever told you “you’ve changed” as if it was a negative thing? Did they attach to you the heavy expectation of stagnation, for their sake of comfort?

Listen, I know you’ve changed. It’s okay. 
That’s what we do as humans. We live, we grow, we change. There is nothing wrong with having different interests, practicing a better life, wanting more for yourself & others than you did before. 

If they say to you, “you’ve changed” & turn up their nose when you start looking after yourself, shifting your perspective in life, taking on new, exciting  interests... perhaps, they were not ready for your growth. 

Consider this. Do you owe them your stagnation? Are you suppose to halt your journey for the comfort of the insecure? 

I don’t believe so. You owe them nothing. You owe it to yourself, however to be the best & most authentic you, that you could possibly be. Release the expectation of stagnation, and watch yourself blossom, as you grow & sway with the trees, shift with the currents, flow with the tides. 

You owe your absolute authenticity to yourself & yourself only. This is where you will find a deep seated sense of unshakable peace. No matter what your life circumstances are. 

Now take a deep breath, and please remember. Life is always working in your favor.

I love you ☀️YOU are God experiencing an HUMAN experience.

Anything less than that is limiting yourself.

YOU are source of energy

YOU are source of LIFE

YOU are one of the infinite life manifestations

YOU are LIMITLESS on your MIND

YOU create your own limitations by assimilating "TRUTHS"

YOUR TRUTH is what LIMITS your MIND

Your physical body is a TOOL for MANIFESTATING your MIND into PHYSICAL REALITY

Your physical body is LIMITED by the matter on this planet, BUT THIS IS NOT EQUAL TO YOUR MIND.

MIND is atemporal, MIND is LIMITLESS, MIND is the connection between the source of the universal energy and YOUR OWN REALITY

EVERYTHING is energy, your physical body is energy vibrating in a pattern limited only to the extend of this physical plane.

BE what you BELIEVE in your MIND, HAVE NO LIMITATION in YOUR MIND, and your REALITY will CORRESPOND to it

DONT STRUGGLE.

Emotions are feedback systems of the physical body that can be exploited to "show you" the right direction of your WILL.

When your WILL is misaligned with your TRUE SELF (what makes you sad, stress, resistance, hate, envy, suffering), this is a SIGNAL to CHANGE BEHAVIOUR, CHANGE PATTERNS of behaviour, CHANGE LOWER VIBRATIONAL TOUGHTS PATTERNS.

When your WILL is Aligned with your OWN TRUE SELF, your OWN WAY of Expression of WILLINGNESS (what makes you thrill, love, what starts feelings of passion, happiness, fullfillment) THIS MEANS that your are in RESONANCE with your OWN TRUE LOVE vibration, your HEART is the COMPASS of your happiness.

So CHANGE your MIND BEHAVIOUR, CHOOSE to be HAPPY, CHOOSE NOT to ACCEPT ANY interference from EXTERNAL SOURCES that can CONFLICT with your OWN NATURE.

CHOOSE NOT to be deflected of your passions by forces that are NOT IN ALIGNMENT with your true source of happiness.

Dont let EMOTIONS OVERWHELM your PEACE OF MIND

Dont let Waves of EMOTIONAL PATTERNS DISTURB your Mind equilibrium.


Thats ALL meditation is about.

Thats ALL what HIGHER MIND is about.

THATS ALL LIFE IS ABOUT.

Your so called "higher self" is YOU, in a point of space-time in YOUR HISTORY that UNDERSTOOD the power of your MIND, and created ANOTHER POSSIBILITY, another "TIMEFRAME" on your TIMELINE of LIFE that is LIVING ITS TRUE HAPPINESS.


ITS NOT about money

ITS NOT about getting a degree in ANYTHING

ITS NOT about trying to be someone else based on EXPECTATIONS

ITS FOLLOWING YOUR WAY of BE, OF LIVE, YOUR HEART, WHATEVER MAY IT BE.

YOUR LIFE is dependent ONLY ON YOUR MIND, HOW YOU SEE, HOW YOU PERCEIVE IT, how you RESPOND to physical reality

EVERYTHING is "half truth", EVERYTHING IN HISTORY are diverging POINTS OF VIEW, EXPERIENCES of the SAME THING = LIFE = ENERGY = Responding to EMOTIONS.

Thats why MUSIC makes you happy, or Sad, or melancholic, its because SOUND VIBRATIONS in PATTERNS are ABSORBED by everyone else the SAME WAY, and YOUR MIND translates it in your OWN UNIQUE WAY in thoughts, feelings

So YOUR point of view of LIFE is YOUR OWN, UNIQUE, POINT OF VIEW of THIS UNIQUE MANIFESTATION in space-time.

You have the FREE-WILL to CHOOSE between FEED WELL BEING or BAD BEHAVIOR.

The reason people are suffering and CAUSING suffering is because they DONT KNOW, because the are TRAPPED INSIDE their heads, believing in LIES, ILLUSIONS, hunting SHADOWS. Causing pain to thenselves and each other, crushing everyone around then with their egos, SELFISHNESS, LACK OF LOVE, LACK OF COMPASSION, LACK OF COMPREHENSION, Because they DONT KNOW, or DONT WANT TO KNOW, how their mind/ body works. They are ignorant, not by their faults, but by the fault of the collective unconscious, that TRANSMITS all the LIES througout the ages, misleading people, creating PSYCHOTIC BEHAVIOUR, a BIG WAVE of FEAR of death, echoing through all Earth, reflecting in BEING. FEAR creates FEAR, ANGER creates ANGER, RAGE creates RAGE, because we are MIRRORS of each other, MIRRORS of how we DEAL with OTHERS. What you Get is what you Give, AND THIS FOREVER WILL BE.

YOU are in the COMPLETE CONTROL of ANYTHING that comes towards you, and your RESPONSE DEPENDS on your STATE OF MIND, and that changes how your BODY will correspond with EMOTIONS.

EMOTIONS are vibrational patterns of Heart, Gut, Glands, BRAIN.

The controller of EVERYTHING IN YOU is your MIND.

KNOW yourself, and you'll have the KEY to the universe.

KNOW your mind, and you'll gain CONTROL OVER EMOTIONS, AFTER THAT you will gain complete control over YOURSELF and experience life as IT IS and not by EXTERNAL TRUTHS, NOT BY "GIVEN FACTS".

Its not a "switch" you can flip and everything will come into place, you need to FOCUS, you need to have FAITH IN YOURSELF, you need to LEARN to LISTEN to your body, you need to KNOW WHAT are YOUR TRUTHS, YOUR BELIEFS, what WORKS FOR YOU and what is another POINT OF VIEW, diverging FROM YOU.

YOU HAVE A CHOICE, ALWAYS HAD and ALWAYS will, you will ALWAYS have the last word about ANYTHING that comes to you, because thats how reality works and its ALL in YOUR MIND, and its YOU and ONLY YOU that can change that, whatever way suits you best based on your HEART, your LOVE, your PASSION.

Follow your HEART

Peace!There is so much more than this. 

Imagine a world with no money, no country or religion. 

The true history of the world is known. The triumphs, the past and the atrocities. 

The calendar and construct of time is gone. 

Money is gone so is classification of race.

Vehicles move though 4 dimensional light grid at any speed they choose, making the concept of distance irrelevant. 

We can communicate without speaking to whomever we choose and have the ability to feel what another feels as if they are you.

We don’t eat animals anymore or their products because we will feel their dying or tortured presence when we eat.

Aliens come and go and serve as teachers and some as students. 

You may choose to stay on this planet or live on another. 

Education is free and you may learn whatever you wish with no expectation of finding a career. 

There is nobody above you or below you and no separation of class. 

Military is not needed and neither is senseless death.

Crime is not needed as you have everything you wish. 

We do not get sick as often as we normally do because we use the vibrational frequency of any medication to heal ourselves.

There is no accidental pregnancy as it will require intent to do so. 

Every human, animal, insect, plant and being will be respected, understood, loved and cherished.

There will be no mental illness caused by trauma because trauma will not be caused. 

Escapism will not be needed as the present will be filled with so much love, joy and excitement that you will want to be present in every moment. 

You will not need weapons to protect yourself from people because we will not have violence. 

There are no slaves and we all take care of each other. 

There will be no underhanded activity of any kind because everyone everywhere will know and there will be no hiding it. In fact, everyone will be so taken care of and supported that it won’t be needed.

Time travel will also be possible and you will be able to go anywhere you want to any time period without any fear of the butterfly effect. If your Grandmother passes away, you can go back and have tea with her in her 30s whenever you wish.

Everyone will be ok with bieng alone but you will never be alone unless you want to be. 

The planet heals and extinct species come back to life. We no longer cage our animals for our amusement and we may only have pets if they choose to be with you. 

The unloved are loved. 

And nobody will ever feel like they don’t belong...ever again.

❤️Do you ever see pics or home videos of yourself as a baby/toddler/child and just wanna hug and squeeze yourself? 

I have this overwhelming love for little me that seems so pure and unconditional. It’s sad that we lose that as we get older. I try to think of baby me on my hard days and think about how I would talk to her if she were having a bad day. 

Inner child work is so important!Thats it, that's the post. 


Thank you universe, thank you great creator 


And thank you to this community, I love all of youAttract your soul tribe!!! You give love and receive the same kind of love!!!I wasn’t feeling very good today and I even cried. I realized a simple solution to the problem and now I feel super charged. I was spending most of my time in the house always looking at my phone, spent a lot of time online on other things like a ps4 and my computer. Phone, then another device, then back to phone before I slept. I was feeling awful. 

Solution was simple. I went outside, grabbed my chair, and meditated in nature. For the first time in awhile I actually enjoyed meditation. Maybe the signs that caused me to go out to meditate was the universe trying to get me to go out there and get healed for real. Not talking just a jog, but I meditated for about 20
Minutes, then I just accepted the universe, god, Gaia, love, everything. I realized everything is a lesson. I’m not done learning lessons. So I’m ready for it. Lessons, lessons, lessons. It’s what it all is. I have them, you have them, we all have them. 

Don’t regret anything, just learn, and love everythingTo defeat it, accept it and then move on - it will lose all power.

There is nothing mystical about reality. It's all much more simple than that.
🙏Connecting with your spiritual guide and finding your higher self isn't anything that school could possibly prepare one for. It's an everyday journey that takes time, patience and perseverance. Breaking down walls of consciousness in attempt to get to the subconscious has proven, for me at least, to be more challenging than the videos out there make it seem. One day I will fully immerse myself in living life on a spiritual level and leave the natural behind.Whatever you want to call the thing we call God, we are the expression of it. We are all part of the one consciousness, the human consciousness, evolved over thousands of years. We are a part of the process of time: something much greater than we can explain or understand.Everyone has an ego. 

It’s separate yet intertwined with your spirit. 

It’s that bit of spark that makes you unique. 

Yes it can get a big head and yes sometimes you need to sit it in a corner otherwise it’ll attempt to take over. 

BUT THAT DOESN’T MEAN YOU KILL IT. 

It’s a part of you for a reason. 

It’s what gives you passion and purpose. 

Learn to wield your ego like a tool to maximize your potential. 

You’ll never be able to destroy a part of yourself without hurting yourself so stop acting like you can.It's not just about toxic positivity, although that's an important part of it, too.  But it's deeper than that.  The world, in many ways, is a very ugly place.  Life, in many ways, is a very ugly thing. We are born into a world where we have to find ways to survive, we are susceptible to disease and injury, we get old, and eventually we die.  That's it. It can be very ugly.

You can say things like "we were meant to be here" or whatever, but who says?  Nobody said that.  You might as well say that Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary.  Because it's not written anywhere in the fabric of the Universe, and if it was written somewhere it was written by man.  Nobody has the answers.  There are none.

Life is just life, and it just is the way it is.  It has beautiful elements, and it has ugly aspects.  But it's neither totally beautiful nor totally ugly, IMO.  It all depends on how you look at it.

In our search for something positive we've forgot to look for something *real.*

True beauty is accepting life the way it is but finding a reason to sing anyway.  Not faking like everything is always hunky dory and some sort of adventure game.  Sometimes it is, but oftentimes it isn't.

Humility.  It's why a World War 2 veteran who saw his friends get blown up but lived to tell about it appreciates the small things in life: he knows that every day is a gift.  Or why a 70 year old cancer patient stops fretting about all the stupid things that everyone else does, like Instagram or getting famous or something: he knows that every moment is precious.

It's hard to stare ugliness in the face.  It's really, really hard.  So most people don't.  And that's understandable; that's human.  But I think for a lot of people, and definitely for me, there came a point where my armor became so heavy that I had no choice but to throw it off.  Yeah it was scary, and yeah it sucks sometimes, but hey... I've got a real reason to live now.  Life means something, because I know just how fragile and precious it is.

It's not about singing and dancing all the time.  It's about getting beat around a little bit but still finding a reason to sign and dance anyway.  It's closer to the truth that way, and for that reason, infinitely more meaningful.

Best to all.
By Alessandro Carosi

Someone told me today “life isn’t meant to be easy”
I dont believe it, life is meant to be easy, life is meant to be wonderful, life is meant to be enjoyed in any possible way.
I tell you this, we don’t come to Planet Earth to spend at work 40-50-60 hours a week to buy usless stuff we don’t really need, doing a job we dont really like.
There is a sentence I Love from the movie Fight club
“We buy things we don’t need with money we don’t have to impress people we don’t like”
What we really need it’s already there and it’s all free.Well and Truly, and to whoever needs it no matter what you’re going through you will be alright , just choose love over fear, turn to the source, source loves you, I love you 💜💫, and always remember god helps those who help themselvesI’m a mailman at 22 and I hate it. Today I had to deliver Amazon packages on a Sunday because I’m new still. I’ve been feeling stuck, but today I was running through an apartment complex and was laughing and smiling for no reason, I couldn’t help but do it. 

That is allHi everyone, I have been looking "lurking" through this sub for months and I absolutely like the vibe and energy around here, I just want to pour my heart just for the sake of it even if none read or give me solutions I guess its only good to get somethings of my chest.

I have been living in a huge turmoil in the last couple of years, I have been in accidents, near death situations which absolutely changed my perspective on life. 
long story short (and I hope some people understand what I'm about to say) Basically because I have lived through pain and suffering for a long time I took it upon myself not to cause pain on anyone or anything at all. 

After a short period of my unfortunate life situations I wont say I had an awakening cause I dont like labeling experiences but I had a revelation of sort I was absolutely living in peace everything was going smooth and ironically thats not how life always works.

People I knew from my past started surfacing in my life, people who absolutely screwed me over really bad in the past they wanted to reconnect and be part of life again. "naively" me I prematurely accepted their peace offering and made them part of my life again. 

Idk what to say cause this is the hardest part  I got screwed over 100x more this time the problem is I totally take the full responsibility and blame myself for everything that happened to me I willingly gave up my own power to these people not deliberately but because of this revelation/awakening that I had that some may even call it ego deathI was living through.

I tried to be more patient and more open and accepting I am an extremely empathetic person I totally get where people are coming from even their short comings. 
I just dont know how to say this but in the past couple of months it felt like something or a thing took my ability to react I felt like a sponge I just kept absorbing and absorbing all the shit coming from anyone and I couldn't react at all, I kept giving people benefit of the doubt give them excuses take the high road and didn’t even know that what I was doing was slowly screwing with my head and overall health.

Until one day something huge happened from someone I never thought would happen from and it was my breaking point I didn't do anything to them I just left and that was my downfall. I went into a depressive episode that lasted for a year or so I was absolutely living like a numb person and everything thing that happened to me in the past came to haunt me back all the negativity I have been absorbing all my short comings and weakness screwed me real hard.
I was living with panic attacks and anxiety I was basically paranoid and the hardest part was the people who took my kindness for weakness. 
I just dont want to write much about this "dark time" cause I guess most of us went through this dark night of the soul. 

I started reading about shadow work and that I have been suppressing my shadow and it was the hardest thing I could ever do with facing my demons and weaknesses and admitting it to myself damn that was absolutely hard!  Now after all I went through I started rebuilding my esteem bit by bit again I cut all the negative people from my life and I guess life is starting to get more kinder to me now.

Now the absolute dilemma Im living with right now is Im starting to stand up to myself again Im becoming more assertive and I draw lines again I stood up to a lot of people who screwed me before and they didn't like it so I cut them off without even blinking. The shadow work I did made me notice a vast endless power that I never knew I had in me before.

The problem is Im still afraid to "Act" when I find myself in conflicts or situations when any problems arise I get paralyzed its like part of my older self still wants to seek peace above anything, and other part of me want to act and do and to make me stand my own ground affirmatively, basically I am damned if I do and I am damned if I dont. If I dont react my old wounded self keep reminding me again and again of all the times I didn't act and got screwed over and if I act I keep blaming myself that I could be hurting someone even if they are the one initiating the problem cause I rarely initiate a conflict and like this quote "If you avoid conflict to keep the peace, you start a war inside yourself" and that is the turmoil Im living with how can I continue the path of enlightenment and spirituality while being brave and affirmative?

Any possible solutions to what I stated above will be absolutely welcomed if you want share same experience as I had above Im more willing to listen.

*Edit: Spelling mistakesToday while I was doing my daily meditation, about ten minutes in, I felt my spirit guide come to me. I felt an urge to go to my bookshelf. I closed my eyes and felt all of the books until I got to one that felt right. I kept my eyes closed as I opened it up and began flipping through the pages. This took me four or five minutes, but I wanted to hear what she had to tell me. Once I found the page, I began running my finger all over the page until I got to the right spot. This is page 53 of children's book named "When the Tripods Came" [photo](https://imgur.com/a/2LXvJep). I have only ever read it once and it has no significance. This message feels so real and I hope we really do start to see a shift in humanity.I have had an amazing realisation from my meditation today, I’ve realised that the love from everyone in my life will live on until the day I die, even when people that you love aren’t around anymore the love they gave you and which helped you will never die. This love can be given to others who need it and it will live on for them as well. Always be grateful for everything, life is a blessing never forget ☯️This world is for our play; we are meant to experience and enjoy it. But we have succumbed to work, and everything we do is a serious matter. We rarely play for the fun of it. Children know this secret; children know creativity.I see this message a lot: change your habits, lift yourself up by your bootstraps, do better, etc.  Only then will you be happy.

If you are miserable, it is your fault.  You are not trying hard enough.  Work harder.

It's true, in a way, that if you are miserable, it is your fault.  But the question is not one of "doing better".  The question is not one of changing habits. The question, rather, is one of **changing your perspective.**  Life, no matter how awesome we arrange it, is always going to have its shortcomings.  We're only human.  Sadness, frustration, and loss are a part of the game no matter what.

Can we work to limit these things?  Yes.  We can, and we should.

But even if we achieve our dreams, what then?  Will that make us happy?  Perhaps in the short-term.  But then what?  Then we'll be coming up with some new dreams, some new goals.  And meanwhile life keeps escaping us.

So all I am saying is that you can make your life a blessing NOW.  Accept your humanity, accept your weakness, accept your lack of control.  Accept and love yourself deeply.  Don't try to improve upon life... it is already in such harmony!  Accept these things, and suddenly, even coal becomes a diamond.

There is beauty in sadness, hardship, and in fragility.  If everything were sunshine and roses, it would all be very empty.  

Enjoy the little things.  Some of us have been hit hard by the quarantine... and that is an issue, yes, but I like to think that most of us here are not in danger of losing everything.  For many of us, the biggest problem we have right now is a sudden surge in free time.  So enjoy it!  Enjoy sleeping in.  Enjoy wasting time on Netflix.  Enjoy video games.  Enjoy getting in touch with old friends.  Now is your chance!

And in general, way beyond this situation.  Enjoy love, enjoy sex, enjoy rest, enjoy good food.  Who told you these things were wrong?  If you cannot enjoy the simple pleasures of life, what *can* you enjoy?  If you cannot fall in love, how can you love yourself?

And don't get me wrong, because the old conditioning will come in.  So I'm not saying to do more.  I'm saying to **do less**.  On whatever level you are able to.

Just trust, be patient.. relax.  The miracle of life is all around us.  Sometimes we just have to open up our perspective a bit.I think people have misconstrued the idea of having a "high vibration" and that you have to stay on a higher vibration all the time to evade feeling bad or to grow spiritually... 
Drinking a glass of wine is lowering your vibration, there's a reason people do it after ritual, it's a grounding technique. 
Your "vibration" will fluctuate, it's okay to be grounded, it's okay to experience the full range of human emotion. 

A lot of the spirituality I see these days has nothing to do with being spiritual, it's just to to with feeling good and living further in the ego by rejecting parts of self that are misaligned with who you think you're supposed to be.This path we are on of self actualization and learning yourself is hard and not easy, so relax. No one has done this and it’s unique to you so it’s gonna be hard and you will struggle. but you’ll be fine eventually. This is the process this is the waySome of this may seem wild, some of it might seem obvious but I just wanted to share what i came to believe after having a profound experience. The meaning of life for me is to give love, love the earth, love humanity, give compassion and show empathy to all living things, even unconscious things. When i die my karma will be weighed and my soul will either move into a higher existence or I will return to the earth and start again.. I've been completely filled with love and appreciation for all things. I love the air in my lungs and the fibers in my blanket. I love humanity and I love animals. I love water and dirt, mud and rain. Im really in love with existence and I just had to share it 😍❣️Stretch and drink water, Love and forgive.  You've got this.I’m a 19M and as the title says, I’m becoming happier being playful and carefree but everyone keeps knocking me down to “act my age” and stuff, but it’s not like I’m acting like a 12y/o, I’m just being more playful and laughing more. If anything I feel like I am more mentally mature than everyone around me with all I’ve learned(not tryna brag)

So it’s just a weird thing of me acting like a child but having this mental maturity. But no one can see my mental maturity so they judge me and throw me as “being careless” but if you sit and talk to me, you’ll see that I’m not “childish” I just feel like now atleast, there’s no reason to take life so seriously to the point it negatively affects you. Especially after being “serious” I feel like being in this child like, fluid state is more freeing & I feel like I can really live like this. 

I’m not saying it’s perfect to be child like but it’s crazy that ppl want me to broke them and they’re all miserable asf, but who am I to judge. It’s all tiring and annoying , esp when people think they know me and I show them they don’t and then they’re all surprised. 

Idk this is just a rant, I’m annoyed but what can I do. 

Now it begs the question , how can I be myself and please others. But the answer is I can’t.

So it’s just annoyingYou’re just projecting how you feel inside towards others , things or objects.A blue moon (when there is two full moons in month)& Halloween..a good night for fun & intuition.. meditation tonight will be enhanced. Enjoy with my blessings & heartfelt love. GGStretch, drink water, love, forgive.I don't know how relevant this is to spirituality but I feel some of you can resonate. I'm so fascinated by people from every single corner of the globe and I wish I could spend my life travelling and meeting others.

I don't know why people make snide comments about other countries. Every place has it's own problems but this tribalistic "oh wow what a shithole we're a better country" or whatever I find really gross. 

It doesn't matter if you are from Brazil, Nigeria, India, Romania, USA or wherever you are in the world. I'm a strong believer that there are good, loving people in every corner of the world. These people are often overpowered by people with more selfish goals in mind.

I find myself sometimes fantasizing about exploring my own country or taking a plane to Brazil (or any other country) and living there for a long time. I can't achieve this because I'm pretty broke right now but I hope someday I can! Other cultures are just too bloody fantastic.

I feel like there are some activities such as music which unite people under one global umbrella quite easily. I don't know, I personally feel so happy and connected when I see other people from different parts of the world showing solidarity and love. 

Can anyone relate?&#x200B;

Love and honor yourself wherever you are in your journey 🤗 

🌈 In La'keshJust curious bc all week I’ve been feeling SO TIRED and DRAINED for literally no reason. It isn’t like my normal tiredness either, it’s an overwhelming exhaustion and have been feeling just very low energy mentally too. Is there something possibly going on energetically/spiritually?You’re growing in ways you don’t realize yet.

Don't let worry, fear, and anxiety make you dig up what you've planted just to see if it’s growing.

You’re being pushed out of your comfort zone to step into your truth. It’s all about evolving right now. It’s all about letting go and allowing change to take place. Keep breathing through it all. 😉Most of us believe that enlightenment is something to attain. We have a concept of what it is in our minds. But the mere act of *thinking* about enlightenment is what confuses us so deeply.

Enlightenment is not *thinking* you are one with the universe. It’s not trusting that the universe will keep you and your friends alive, or get you the things you want in life. This is a very Western (and selfish) view of Eastern philosophy.

Enlightenment (or Nirvana) is simply letting go of this human body. It’s letting the universe do what it does. It’s knowing that if this body dies, the universe goes on. Everything continues. Everything is eternal. In the end—the *true* end—everything will be okay. Because there *is* no end. It has always been okay. It *is* okay. The simple fact that you exist is enough to be at peace.

Anyone who says, “I am enlightened,” does not know what it is to be *truly* watching. Anyone who preaches the “truth,” does not really *know* the truth. Anyone who spreads the “Lord’s word,” does not know that the Lord’s word is not word at all! It’s silent. It’s breathing. It’s moving. It’s still. It’s the entire universe working together in harmony. To think that we are apart from this one, vast organism is primitive thinking. To believe that the human brain—a speck of dust within this world—can discover the universe’s secrets is a fool’s belief. These secrets are right before us! There is no need to dig around through the concepts of our mind. The mind is *only a mind,* don’t you see?No matter who you are or what you’ve done, know that you are worthy. There is no need to sabotage your success, health and happiness because you don’t “deserve it.” I have found that this is one of the most common obstacles to life that humans face. If we don’t feel we’re worthy, we subconciously push away what is good for us. Allow yourself to WIN. Allow yourself to FEEL GOOD and BE HAPPY and follow your dreams and love yourself. You deserve it. <3

One love.Worrying is optional.

Just thought you should know.Its exhausting when you're life is a battling of living in your head and also fighting to not live in your head.

Edit: 🙏no words required ❤️👊🏼It means accepting every little bit of you, even the thoughts rooted in anxiety, self deprecation, and depression. Self love does not mean eliminating thoughts you don’t want; it starts with loving every single thought you have and every demon inside your brain.

Took me a while to realize this, but it’s so freeing realizing I don’t have to fight anything. No more beating myself up for beating myself up. That’s the endless cycle that pulls you under. You have to stop it at some point.your deepest and darkest secrets. The shame and guilt that you carry. The stupid and wrongful things you did years ago. Your selfish thoughts, your greed and any other ugly trait that you may have. But your higher self *still* loves you unconditionally. Why? Because if we were doomed for our errors then all of us would be doomed. So we can be open with our higher self, no matter what. We can share and talk about anything with our higher self. We are free.Good morning! Yesterday I was feeling down and lost. There’s been big changes in my life in the past year and I still feel like I don’t have a direction as far as where my life is going. Then the universe sent me a messenger. Be patient and trust the higher intelligence. I’m not sure where I’m heading but I know there’s a plan for my life. I’m grateful for each one of you. Have a beautiful day!The only reason why a bad day can happen is because you carry that negative vibe from these 10-30 minutes where you let your thoughts run undisciplined. (Of course your vibe can be killed if something actually really bad happened).

When you think you have a bad day. Stop, and take a breath. Be aware of your in and out breath so that you will be conscious of the present moment. In which you will probably have no problems at all. And if you start to think or speak about some things. Think and speak about the positive things that happened.

I also started creating and sharing art to add some extra love and positivity to the environment. [Here you can catch these positive vibes](https://ko-fi.com/quintenvanommen/gallery) 

Have a nice day ;)Although I’ve been on this journey for quite some time, it took me the first two years to find the reason to make meditation a daily habit, so, I would like to share with you what it was that gave me that final push. I would also like to share the changes I have found within myself since I started daily meditation in the past six months to help motivate you further.

&#x200B;

Meditation was completely against my grain. I spent the first two years devouring book after book because as I understand the main goal of meditation is to see reality as it truly is, I thought I might be able to achieve this through the intellect. 

&#x200B;

I did come across some mind-altering books in this time, that did indeed change the way I viewed myself and the world from duality to non- duality, yet this did only reach the intellect and was not deep enough. Did I think I was one with everything? Yes! Did that change how I interacted with the world? Unfortunately not. I'd have to experience the truth to see it, not just read about it.

&#x200B;

So finally, I admitted I will have to meditate to understand. I would sit and oh, the frustration! Only a couple of breaths and my mind would be off in hell somewhere. So, I’d bring it back, again and again, and again. I thought this was supposed to be relaxing?! I would have to use such will power to keep hold of my breath I was more stressed than when I started!

&#x200B;

This called for further research as I was sure I couldn’t have been doing it right. I found it wasn’t exactly what I was doing was wrong, it was my understanding that was wrong. I thought I was in charge but I wasn’t. There is no I to be in charge. Once I understood that this identity we have is just like a river made from the reflections of our experience, there was no I to hold on to and I learned meditation was the art of letting it all go.

&#x200B;

I learned in order to get passed the initial struggle, it did not call for will power at all but wisdom power. The wisdom to know, ‘this too, shall pass’. Once I let my thoughts flow like a river, I would no longer try to catch thoughts and tell myself, no! I would just let them pass and return to the breath. I would no longer set a timer and I would not expect anything so there was no pressure. I used techniques to anchor myself and I found the wonderful breath and oh, yes it is wonderful. If you can get yourself here, the peace you can find will be enough to keep practising.

&#x200B;

All my life, since I can remember, up to the last few months I was anxiety-ridden and deeply depressed from unresolved trauma. Getting out of bed every day would be a struggle. Most days I would cry, even in public, I couldn’t control it. I would avoid people and I would dread each and every social interaction. I couldn’t trust anyone to accept me because I for sure didn’t! 

&#x200B;

Now, I wake up most days with a smile. Life has turned into HD. I accept myself. When I see people, they no longer scare me and instead I do my best to make them smile. My ability to stay present is increasing all the time. I’m no longer trying to fill my days to serve the future but to serve others.

&#x200B;

I just wish I started sooner!  

&#x200B;

Compassion, peace and freedom to allHi all,

My Dad passed on the fifth of this month and the Gita was his favourite book. In his memory I'm writing concise summaries of each Chapter of the Gita - no jargon, straightforward and no prior knowledge of Hinduism is necessary. But I've tried really hard to make sure the essence is captured and not lost. If anyone is interested they are at:

[https://resonate.substack.com/p/the-bhagavad-gita](https://resonate.substack.com/p/the-bhagavad-gita?r=1gtnq&utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web&utm_source=copy)

[https://resonate.substack.com/p/the-bhagavad-gita-chapter-2](https://resonate.substack.com/p/the-bhagavad-gita-chapter-2?r=1gtnq&utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web&utm_source=copy)

Two are done and the rest will follow, all feedback appreciated.

Edit - Chapter 3 added - [https://resonate.substack.com/p/the-bhagavad-gita-chapter-3](https://resonate.substack.com/p/the-bhagavad-gita-chapter-3?r=1gtnq&utm_campaign=post&utm_medium=web&utm_source=copy)

BestEspecially if they aren't religious. Especially if it just bores them and they have social anxiety or trauma that is already existing. It angers me how widely accepted and advocated it is to force kids to go to church. And how these people deny is is abuse. You are stripping away your child's consent and sovereignty, by forcing them to go. Let your child make their own choices and develope on their own when it comes to religion or the activities they partake in. My mom forced me to go. And she showed a lot of signs of being narcissistic, controlling, self righteous and prideful. 

So many parents are narcissistic, controlling, overbearing and prideful. And they refuse to listen, even remotely consider a different perspective, or consider the anguish they are inflicting on their kid. Am I the only one who feels this way?“Admit it. You aren’t like them. You’re not even close. You may occasionally dress yourself up as one of them, watch the same mindless television shows as they do, maybe even eat the same fast food sometimes. But it seems that the more you try to fit in, the more you feel like an outsider, watching the “normal people” as they go about their automatic existences. For every time you say club passwords like “Have a nice day” and “Weather’s awful today, eh?”, you yearn inside to say forbidden things like “Tell me something that makes you cry” or “What do you think deja vu is for?”. Face it, you even want to talk to that girl in the elevator. But what if that girl in the elevator (and the balding man who walks past your cubicle at work) are thinking the same thing? Who knows what you might learn from taking a chance on conversation with a stranger? Everyone carries a piece of the puzzle. Nobody comes into your life by mere coincidence. Trust your instincts. Do the unexpected. Find the others…”  
\- Timothy LearyPeople talk about opening the third eye, also known as the pineal gland, and they talk about its effects. Sunlight activates the pineal gland and releases serotonin (feel good hormone and mood regulator) in our brains when sunlight hits our eyes. I can’t even describe the mental clarity and the freeness of my thoughts when sitting in the Sun. So maybe opening your third eye is related to Sun gazing?

After sitting in the Sun for around 30 minutes I felt happier and less worried. Lately I’ve been having a bad time which I assume is because I don’t go outside much. Anyways, I just wanted to praise the Sun, no wonder ancient civilizations had Sun Gods, the Sun is significant to everything. And if you’re not getting at least 15 minutes of Sun, then do it!like even the idea of reincarnation would’ve reincarnated by now lol I think we never die. Someone who dies before your eyes still lives on in his own universe with an alternate dimension version of everyone. This theory would string together the multiverse and how we can be visited by spirits in dreams. Also, how people change so rapidly in near death experiences, I’m suggesting they did die in one dimension and there conscious lives on through the 100000000 versions of ourselves living within our DNA.Type yes if you agree !Don’t think about it, just do it. Be patient, be positive, and spread love and kindness everywhere you go. Then watch your life change before your eyes into the life you’ve always wanted. You already have it. But you won’t see it until you open your eyesThat's it! I decided to put it on this community because I think it is where the most  positive people is# Link to presentation: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cjqiye1TYx0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cjqiye1TYx0)

Based on 'Supernatural: Meetings With The Ancient Teachers of Mankind'. Written by Graham Hancock.

[https://www.amazon.com/Supernatural-Meetings-Ancient-Teachers-Mankind/dp/1932857842](https://www.amazon.com/Supernatural-Meetings-Ancient-Teachers-Mankind/dp/1932857842)

The final instalment of the Awakening Documentaries. Evidence has been surmounting to support the theory that Psychedelic plants played a key role in the psychological evolution of Human beings. The use of psychedelics not only coincides with the rise of art and culture, but they are also directly associated with the genesis of all religious based and spiritual traditions. These key agents for our evolution have been demonized by our society, due to the cultural stigma created by the war on drugs. Stunting our evolution as a species. And during this time, where humanity threatens to destroy itself & the planet, Ayahuasca -- the most powerful psychedelic in the world -- emerges from the Amazon jungle with a message for the human race…

Rebirth is a documentary that dissolves the artificial boundaries we’ve created. It shows how all religions are a valid path to gnosis, especially when decoding their underlying view of reality. It is a documentary that explores the deepest mysteries of the universe, while attempting to bridge the gap between science and spirituality. I hope you watch it in-full, as a book can only be truly understood if read in-full.

Awakening Documentaries [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mrR2rHPg1Zg&list=PL4UvieJ7i8d6T1XrGjp0VBsUyWAV0vooQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mrR2rHPg1Zg&list=PL4UvieJ7i8d6T1XrGjp0VBsUyWAV0vooQ).

\------------------------

Psychedelics:

Ayahuasca as a Medicine

[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6343205/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6343205/)

[https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2045125316638008](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2045125316638008)

Stepping into the Fire (Documentary)

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P0ommNRJeMQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P0ommNRJeMQ)

Religions stem from Psychedelics

[https://maps.org/news-letters/v12n1/12117stu.html](https://maps.org/news-letters/v12n1/12117stu.html)

[https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2829&context=californialawreview](https://scholarship.law.berkeley.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2829&context=californialawreview)

Graham Hancock: Elves, Aliens, Angels & Ayahuasca FULL LECTURE:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMVb3mtdUdI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMVb3mtdUdI)

Graham Hancock: SUPERNATURAL

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-fVuvvoy-vc&t=284s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-fVuvvoy-vc&t=284s)

Graham Hancock and the Sacred Vine | London Real

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6Hqm01QzNY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G6Hqm01QzNY)

The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross AUDIO BOOK

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dC8XgHUY1gQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dC8XgHUY1gQ)

The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross PDF:

[https://cochabambahotel.noblogs.org/files/2017/09/John-Marco-Allegro-The-Sacred-Mushroom-and-the-Cross.pdf](https://cochabambahotel.noblogs.org/files/2017/09/John-Marco-Allegro-The-Sacred-Mushroom-and-the-Cross.pdf)

New Graham Hancock Why Ancient Civilizations Used Psychedelics \[FULL VIDEO\]

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8HpdIV68zk&t=422s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8HpdIV68zk&t=422s)

Stoned Ape & Fungal Intelligence - Paul Stamens

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nxn2LlBJDl0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nxn2LlBJDl0)

Terrance Mckenna's The Stoned Ape Theory:

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hOtLJwK7kdk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hOtLJwK7kdk)

Paul Stamens on Joe Rogan Experience

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mPqWstVnRjQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mPqWstVnRjQ)

Paul Stamens 6 ways Mushrooms can Save the World

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XI5frPV58tY&t](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XI5frPV58tY&t)

Mushrooms as Medicine

[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5772431/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5772431/)

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7agK0nkiZpA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7agK0nkiZpA)

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ODaWxBJNPk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ODaWxBJNPk)

Everything you need to know about Mushrooms

[https://thethirdwave.co/psychedelics/shrooms/](https://thethirdwave.co/psychedelics/shrooms/)

Graham Hancock - Gaining insight to another level of reality through ayahuasca and DMT [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5lnLcRR35bY&t=302s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5lnLcRR35bY&t=302s)

Rupert Sheldrake - Morphic Fields and Cosmic Consciousness [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AFSsJHI5Zds&t=25s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AFSsJHI5Zds&t=25s)

Zoom Into Millenium Simulation of Universe \[720p\] [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mxVAsnb9CE4&t=25s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mxVAsnb9CE4&t=25s)

The Dark Matter Fractal Field [https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/the-great-cosmic-sea-of-reality-the-dark-matter-fractal-field--a-conceptual-premise-of-the-structure-and-functional-dynamics-of-ou-2329-6542-1000142.pdf](https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/the-great-cosmic-sea-of-reality-the-dark-matter-fractal-field--a-conceptual-premise-of-the-structure-and-functional-dynamics-of-ou-2329-6542-1000142.pdf)

The Fractal Geometry of Nature [https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a165185.pdf](https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a165185.pdf)

The VIRGO Consortium [https://wwwmpa.mpa-garching.mpg.de/galform/virgo/](https://wwwmpa.mpa-garching.mpg.de/galform/virgo/)

Is The Universe Itself Alive? [https://www.forbes.com/sites/startswithabang/2016/01/23/ask-ethan-is-the-universe-itself-alive/#7c2c711231bb](https://www.forbes.com/sites/startswithabang/2016/01/23/ask-ethan-is-the-universe-itself-alive/#7c2c711231bb)

Filaments of the Universe [https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16058](https://www.nature.com/articles/nature16058)

What Is Reality? \[Official Film\] [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w0ztlIAYTCU](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w0ztlIAYTCU)

Fractal Geometry [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HvXbQb57lsE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HvXbQb57lsE)

Morphic Resonance [https://www.sheldrake.org/research/morphic-resonance](https://www.sheldrake.org/research/morphic-resonance)

Ralph Abraham [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rokvlb512FY](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rokvlb512FY)

Ralph Abraham - The Cognitive Factor [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=shbpkxoZ4Ps](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=shbpkxoZ4Ps)

Quantum Entanglement [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum\_entanglement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_entanglement)

Eamonn Healy Neohumanism [http://www.telescopicevolution.com/tag/eamonn-healy/](http://www.telescopicevolution.com/tag/eamonn-healy/)I've been seeing people posting about how their instagram has "only good vibes" but the people I see posting it are the ones who have hurt me so much in the past and expects me to just move on. This is such a toxic mindset. If you have hurt someone, apologize. I've also noticed a trend of a particular group of people have been posting about spiritualism but are honestly such terrible people (I'm in high school so the whole spiritualism trend is huge along my peers). I'm probably just being grumpy but there are just so many hypocrites. There is a difference between growing and keeping a fake smile/friendship around those you don't like. I'm aware that no one is perfect but spiritualism feels so forced and aestheticize now.  
edit: I'm a spiritual individual myself, I just don't like the community in my town because it is very forced.So I'll give you a minute to unpretzel your brain and maybe read that again 

Wanting positive experience is a negative experience ; accepting negative experience is a positive experience . 

It's what the philosopher Alan Watts used to refer to as " the backwards law ". 

The idea that the more you pursue feeling better all the time , the less satisfied you become , as pursuing something only reinforces the fact that you lack it in the first place . 

The more you desperately want to be rich , the more poor and unworthy you feel , regardless of how much money you actually make . 

The more you desperately want to be sexy and desired , the uglier you come to see yourself , regardless of your actual physical appearance .

The more you desperately want to be happy and loved , the lonelier and more afraid you become , regardless of those who surround you . 

The more you want to be spiritually enlightened , the more self - centered and shallow you become in trying to get there

Thank You  and have a amazing spiritual day. 🌞Over the past few weeks I’ve been reading and watching so much stuff about spirituality, the universe and dimensions and vibrations and all that stuff. And it’s made me go crazy. I’ve realised how much the society that we live in tries to lower our vibration and I’m so angry that the ‘higher up’ people have this much control over me. 
Also, I’ve been having realisations every day. I discover something new about myself or come to new realisations about how the world actually is and how time isn’t real and we’re all just one collective consciousness and it’s freaking me out a bit. Everyone seems to think I’m crazy when I talk about it and I feel so alone. I feel so anxious and depressed while also feeling like I’m being freed from all the lies I’ve been fed. 
Is this what an awakening feels like, or am I just driving myself mad?*You* need to understand them. Try to delve deeper into its meaning (if there even is one). You cannot ask others to interpret its meaning because the universe has *customized it for you*,  so only you can understand it. It's context may be relative to your life experiences, so others will receive the message *out of context*.

You may argue: but I *don't* understand what the message is.

OK at that moment perhaps you don't. But you were meant to understand it, otherwise the universe (or God) would not have given you the message. Your ego and fear is generally blocking the message. Spirit can set you free. I was having a really good night the other night. A friend messaged me and wants to come visit and I'm just in a positive place.

I went outside to smoke and I saw a shooting star. My mind starting thinking of what I want to wish for and I stopped myself and just said, "I wish for what I already have."

This was freeing, because instead of being overcome with greed and ruining the moment, I was able to just replay the shooting star in my mind and enjoy the moment.

Disney programmed us to wish upon a star. That's consumer culture. You always yearn for something you don't have and therefore can never be happy, so you'll keep buying stuff. When you stop this, and just thank the universe for what it shows you, there is a deep sense on contentment.

I'm not trying to sell you something, so I can tell you things unbiased truth. Everything is within you. You don't need to want for anything. When you see a shooting star or any sign, don't feel the need to ask for something. Just be thankful for what you have and watch how the world starts to just unfold in front of you.

People sell you the Law of Attraction which makes you think you have to ask the universe for stuff. I didn't ask for that meteor to crash through our atmosphere, but the universe gave it to me anyway and it was a special experience. 

I hope this helps others struggling to find their way. The universe has a plan and you're just one piece of it. Just be present and watch what happens.Drop your shoulders, relax your face and jaw, melt.  

Drink water, stretch, Love, forgive, patience.Since this year has started I’ve noticed many people become aware of things that they wouldn’t normally. I’m from a very urban neighborhood and many people are beginning to feel this “change” in their life. The things that matter to them are changing. On top of that all of the things that are going on in the world are forcing people to critically think and show who they truly are. Many people seem to be aware.YOU ARE ENOUGH. Don’t let any circumstance or situation brainwash you that you’re not, if anyone does it is a reflection of their insecurities, their lack of understanding, their circumstances. 

Don’t blame them though, we are all brought up without this even being taught, most of us have parents who mean well but do things that damage us, just focus on being you and enjoying your life, that’s all you need!

SamEach word in the English language, just like each person, each place, and each event, carries a certain frequency. But because words are used so often collectively, they carry a much heavier energetic weight than we realize. 

Moving into the 21st century, humanity is beginning to awaken. Our biggest responsibility is to raise the frequencies of ourselves and those around us. This will help dissolve the old paradigms and make way for newer, more beautiful ways of life. 

And since our biggest responsibility is to raise the vibration of the planet, we must stop using low vibration words. Even words like “bad, negative, lame, unfortunate, fight,” and so on carry lower frequencies. These frequencies manifest around us.

They say mother Theresa would never join an anti war protest. Rather she would only join pro peace protests. Why? Because when we pursue anti-war, we are really resonating on the same frequency as war. We are fighting war’s battle, and therefore perpetuating war. But joining a pro peace protest holds a completely different frequency.

Language is one of THE MOST powerful tools we have. Use it wisely. We must spread love, beauty and positivity with our words, not the alternate. I believe this will create a change more profound than we realize.

NamasteI once heard Jim Carrey recontextualize his periods of depression as periods of growth, renewal, and inner exploration in an interview.  While this wording made me throw up in my mouth a little, I knew it was true.  I used to think there was something wrong with me when I felt inexplicably depressed, and when I would tell others, they would either try to snap me out of it, or act concerned.  

There were indeed times in my life where depression was a pathological state that required counseling and pharmaceuticals.  My hunch is that such measures may not have been necessary if I hadn’t pathologized it to begin with, and let it run its course, but sometimes you are too far gone.  You can’t always do a spiritual bypass around these things.  You need to look after your humanity.

I still experience lulls in vitality, where my energy is at a minimum; only enough to hold the essential structures of my life together.  I retreat into myself, and it becomes an experience of deepening, of visiting the void, and of returning to the godhead.  In these periods of withdrawal, my mind doesn’t seem to work at the same capacity during mundane activities, but seems intensely directed and energized toward the eternal: something that is entirely private and hidden from the world.

I often see individuals who struggle with these lulls, trying to look for an explanation:  Am I not sleeping enough?  Am I gluten intolerant?  Is Mercury in retrograde?  I don’t analyze it.  I use it, and that’s often the fastest way out of it — when you don’t mind it anymore.Hi all, I just wanted to share something that I have struggled with but recently found a way to reduce my suffering over. I see a lot of people have a hard time w this in these sort of subreddits so I hope my experience can help. 

I had a spiritual awakening initially through psychedelics, meditation, and therapy a few years back. Looking back (through a biased lens I’m sure) I felt a sense of awakening, fascination, motivation, bliss, cultivation of faith, and dramatic healing. People around me noticed and came to me for advice and company. It felt good. I felt like I was truly experiencing stages of enlightenment and continued to cultivate these feelings for years. I still had hard moments - my parents divorce, abusive bosses, a dramatic moving out, and all the other general hard life stuff of your early 20s. But I still felt this net positive. 

Recently these sort of feelings have faded. I found myself rolling my eyes at spiritual teachings that once made me cry tears of happiness. I completely lost faith in meditation as something I should do, I fell back into deeply addictive patterns, and all that good stuff. It *mostly* felt like I had just reverted to a pre-awakening state. However, there was the memory of this previous period that gave me faith that it would be ok. Once I recognized this, I just let the suffering and world take me. I let go of any feeling of “I ought to meditate” “I shouldn’t be struggling with x or y” etc. I just let myself be the way I was. And I’m okay. I didn’t “fall off the track” or lose my way. I realized that this period is just as spiritually significant as the one before it. Less flashy and blissful and exciting, but just as important if not more. It gave me a lot of perspective on other people suffering too. During my initial awakening period, I definitely had the view of “wow my friend sure is depressed, why doesn’t he just meditate or listen to this lecture?” Now I lived in a world where I had done all of that - I had all my memories and experiences with deep spirituality and I was still struggling. I saw myself in all of my friends I had previously had a judgmental confusion about. I had the epiphany that it’s not only about what you choose to listen, study, or do - it’s also about your own personal life path (or karma if you believe that) and what sort of suffering you need to go through. I realized I had to go through these darker sides of my soul with all my renewed perspective so I could look at them more compassionately. 

Let yourself go through these dark periods. Don’t fight them if they feel inevitable. You will survive. You will reinforce your faith or belief. You will come out stronger and more well rounded. Let yourself live in your neuroses and bad habits. Just keep awareness. You can’t ever forget where you’ve been. These hard experiences are just as spiritual and will have a huge impact on your life. Through this you will realize you are always free no matter the contents of your mind. 

And of course, continue doing your best to heal. During this period I continued therapy and used CBD, but I didn’t latch onto the idea that I should be super happy and not have any problems. 

Hope some of you at least found this interesting if not relatable!

Edit: just to add on, this period made me realize the importance of exercise and eating enough consistently as well. These dark periods are showing us something and it’s good to find new methods of awakening. For me it’s been cardio exercise this time!Note to self.I’m finding it very difficult to see myself with someone that is caught up in their ego, preferences and distractions... and that seems like everyone. Perhaps it’s my age group (twenties), but it’s feeling less and less likely that I’ll find a partner anytime soon that is able to step outside of themselves and just experience life with me. It seems like such a simple thing, but I’m finding it very hard to find.

Edit: thank you so much for all of the helpful responses! Much to think about, and much love for taking the time to comment. 

For future comments - I do want to stress that I am not saying at all that I’m a perfect spiritual being. I just started my spiritual journey under a year ago, and I am aware that there are spiritual ‘flaws’ in me feeling this way. But I wanted to share anyway, to get conversation going about it and get some advice. Cheers guys!Love, light, eternal.So i recently had a call with my mom and she explained how she finds it annoying how I take life as something so simple because I dont let things bother me. And it was honestly a compliment to me.If you find yourself avoiding doing things bc they are boring (meditation , tasks) it might be because they dont absorb your full attention , which means some of your mind will be left idle and might then bring to surface past pain and inner conflict. What are you trying not to think about? Welcome boredom, feel your pain fully, you'll find that you are so much more focused and more tranquil. I hope this makes senseThe issue of mental health has assumed alarming proportions. That WHO has declared 10th October as Mental Health day.

It is not because of more stress, more discomfort, more tenseness but because we feel so much relieved, satisfied, assured or want to feel secured, satisfied, assured by addition to possessions, relations, ideas that we do not recognize the fact that brain operates though contrasts only.

We have been cultured to believe that we can remain pleased, relieved, satisfied, if not now then in future when we get a good degree, good job, promotion, more money, possessions or by religious-spiritual ideas, activities.

This thinking keeps us in- 

Waiting mode, we live superficially.

Frustration sets in as nothing can give you stable relief.

Every time contrast is being created between ‘what you want’ and ‘what happens or what you think should happen’. You have to be comfortable with this contrast, this gap, this discomfort, if you call it so. This contrasting process is life, it never stops. 

The comfortableness with contrast puts you on the fluid ground, the ground of all possibilities.

Brain can not see, visualize, think, experience anything, which is not a contrast including any feeling. Brain can not work without contrast. Desire, uncertainty, any problem, any disliked situation provide contrast to manifestation, to what you want. This is the endless process.

Just notice your pattern:

1. You are working as compulsion and seek relief by entertainments, holidays, intoxications, religious-spiritual ideas, activities.

2. You want to feel relieved, satisfied about result, about tomorrow now.

3. You resort to solacing ideas when you face irritating, discomforting situations.

4. When any difficult problem is solved or you acquire something – you think as if relief, pleasure you experience will be stabilised.

5. You think as if some one else (guru and so on) has solved the enigma of life as a comfortable end or is living as psychologically comforted.

6. You think as if you can find flawless choices and be relieved.

Just being aware of the pattern causes a short-circuit in the pattern. You are face to face with the fundamental resistance of being human. 

You are on the Original ground.Meditation definitely played a significant role in my life and how I've changed from being an accountant hating my job into a school teacher/ yoga instructor who also runs a learning school for kids in Thailand.

&#x200B;

However, I must emphasize the importance the other four points played in complementing my practice. It allowed me to have a healthy, strong and energetic body to utilize and clear goals and objectives to focus on.

&#x200B;

Its changed my life so much I made a short video about it to share as I feel it's easier to communicate good ideas through videos sometimes.

&#x200B;

Please take a look and let me know what you think!

&#x200B;

[https://youtu.be/kTt91zDMx58](https://youtu.be/kTt91zDMx58)

&#x200B;

Much love and best wishes to all of you 🙂❤🙏
When you say "Fuck it", you are no longer anxiety-driven, and you gain a new life vigor.

"Fuck it" is probably the closest translation we westeners have, for the phrase "Be like water" or "Go with the flow".

Adding "Fuck" in front of a yes or no, removes all self-doubt and fills you with determination and intention.

Say "Fuck" more often :)👍Don't you think so...

for 💫 Daily Inspiring, Uplifting, Positive GOOD VIBES  related to Law Of Attraction & Manifestion.
r/ManifestationValley join us hereI got into spirituality after I tripped on mushrooms a year ago, ever since iv been meditating and questioning reality more and more. With my love for psychedelics, it's almost as tho everything is opening up fast. But I don't have an interest in getting a career anymore, don't have an interest in ”being successful.” I feel as tho humans make living way too complicated. I just don't have any interest in being human and participating in society. I just can't care and motivate myself a self man. All I want to do is enjoy life until I'm dead. Not doing anything just existing. It makes me scared that I might end up having a life full of hardship because of this. Like being homeless. Am I alone?I've been reading random psychology textbook PDFs I find on google during quarantine and it's incredible learning why people behave the way they do. Suddenly everything starts to make sense and forgiving feels easier. 

As an empath this really helped me stop trying to "fix" people that don't want to change, and that the healthier thing to do would be to stop giving in to feeling bad about it. Psychology is on another level of enlightenment hahahaSo, I'm trying to word this in a way that makes the most sense to the most people, but if it doesn't make sense, I'm sorry.  

If things have begun or start coming up for you during these times, like weird thoughts, intense emotions, past wounds that resurface and won't go away, please know that it's happening to a lot of people.

Try to not blame Covid 19, the government, or any outside force for your fears and anger. Instead, look within yourself, do what you feel compelled to do to heal those emotions, and let them go.

Trust yourself. There's people sending you so much love while you do this. You're supported, whether you physically have the support of someone else right now or not.

This time of "holding" is precious, and is the perfect time to practice taking off the masks we're all so used to wearing.

Happy Easter to all. I love you, friends!If it’s time for you to grow and let go of bad habits, and the wait is long overdue, the universe will finally send you a hard-hitting sign. The change is necessary, don’t ignore it or block it out by, indulging in self-deprecating bad habits. This is a lesson I just had to learn.Revofev!I find it amazing how people separate science and spirituality in the main stream world, but everything he says in this 10min video is amazingly spiritual.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N0WjV6MmCyM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N0WjV6MmCyM)Here's a little exercise that I've been practicing whenever I catch myself acting or feeling from the ego.  An example would make it clearer:

**Useless** **Negative Thought:** "Ugh, this commenter on reddit doesn't agree with me... their tone was so annoying, they must be a know-it-all, I don't want to read what they have to say."

**Feelings behind thought:** Defensive, Inadequate

**Roots of those feelings:** Insecurity

**The voice of the ego (arms crossed, pouting, kicking and screaming):** "They're trying to make me look stupid! I'm not stupid! They're stupid!"

**Rational Conclusion:** (Huh, why am I listening to this little kid?) "Okay, ego, I hear you. No, we're not stupid. I know, I know. Just be quiet now and I'll do the talking. They might have some useful perspective."Feel the peace ☮️ love you allOne of our biggest problems in life is we don’t forgive and we don’t forget. We nurse, we curse, we rehearse our past hurts. The past is over but we don’t know how to reverse it. That’s why we suffer. If we want to overcome suffering, we must move on. We must not only forgive, but also forget. We should wipe out the hurt. We should accept, surrender, laugh, live in bliss, peace and joy - that’s the way to happiness!

***You will suffer if you Choose to Live in the past.***   
***Those who look back, their Joy never lasts.***   
***If you want to do away with misery and regret,***   
***Then live with Acceptance, Forgive and Forget.***It literally explains everything. And it puts everything under perspective.Hold your head up, be proud, you are worthy. Hope everyone has a great day and can find one thing today that feels truthful and makes your heart sing, if even for a moment.I woke up this morning realizing I’ve been a serious young man for most of my life. Not authentically serious but serious in public relations. On the inside I’m a real goof just at some point I forgot that I had performing this serious role and took it seriously ( go figure).

The inside, unconscious, divine, whatever you like to call it, is rich with content. Endless content. The roles I wanted to play was someone that they could look to keep things together and succeed in life. Somehow I looked at my anime heroes and made a persona in which people admired. The admirable qualities then became apart of my personality which made them “real” with the weight of learning and history behind them. Wild stuff eh? 

Is it me, not me. Who knows. My soul wanted to learn something and I crafted out a scenario for it to learn though that. My mistake was that I didn’t include more fun into my scenario which is totally apart of the dealEarlier this week there was a day I woke up and early in the morning I noticed a pattern of negative thoughts during my morning routine. Mostly silly things but negative in nature, and then it came to me. Whenever I had a negative thought I would stop and think to myself. 
- I’m grateful to be aware of this negative thought 
And I would try to emit an inner feeling of gratitude towards this awareness. Within moments the pattern reversed and I had a more positive thought pattern going on. 
If it’s all vibration and we live on a constant flow of energy then the only solution is to counteract an energy with another :)
Just thought I’d share! Enjoy your weekend !!Seriously, it will work. If you don't have time for that, run your wrists under cold water and over your face for a few minutes. If you do this enough, eventually your mind will give up trying to force you into thinking about the past or future. It will cave to your will and persistence.

EDIT: THIS IS WHAT WORKS FOR ME. THIS WORKS FOR SOME PEOPLE AND NOT FOR OTHERS, AS YOU CAN SEE FROM THE COMMENTS BELOW. IF IT DOESN'T WORK FOR YOU, THERE IS NOTHING WRONG WITH YOU, DIFFERENT METHODS WORK FOR DIFFERENT PEOPLE. THIS ISN'T A REPLACEMENT FOR A MINDFUL LIFESTYLE/MEDITATION. IT'S A SIMPLE TRICK I USE WHEN *REALLY* STRUGGLING TO GET OUT OF A NEGATIVE/FEARFUL MINDSET. I DO NOT MEAN THAT THE MIND HAS TO BE DISSOLVED/DEFEATED - RATHER PUT BACK INTO IT'S PLACE - THE MIND IS A USEFUL TOOL TO HELP US TO THINK THINGS THROUGH LOGICALLY AND CLEARLY. IT IS DESTRUCTIVE WHEN REPEATEDLY 'LIVING' IN THE PAST OR FUTURE, CAUSING ANXIETY.I've been feeling very alone today... it's been a tough few weeks. I could not shake my wounded inner child feelings. I've spent the last 6 years unraveling the trauma I went through as an adolescent from verbal abuse, parentification, and collateral damage from my mother's mental illness. While I know I have come so far and been able to largely unlearn the thought processes of intense self-criticism and deprecation, I still fall back into it sometimes.

So like I said... today I've been feeling very alone. Stuck in the negative thought circles, telling myself I'm a failure, feeling like a disappointment to those in my life and to myself. When I receive validation from my loved ones I feel like they're lying, or no matter how much I want to believe them, I just can't.

So I ruminated on that loneliness... that feeling that cuts so deep and makes me feel inadequate and unloved even though I have a loving family, partner, and circle of friends. And I realized that I need to embrace it.

Nobody can pull me out except me. Nobody can heal my wounds and nurture my inner child except me. My partner, as loving and comforting as they are, is no substitute for the safety I have to learn to give myself. My therapist can only guide me through the process, not give me the answers. The current relationship with my mother that I've worked so hard to make healthy again will never make up for the scars from when I was younger.

So I'm gonna try to be kind to myself. I'm gonna clean up my space, light some incense, do a face mask, open up a coloring book, and work on showing myself the kindness that I know I deserve despite the voices in my head trying to bully me into a dark place.

I have to learn to find the support from myself before I look elsewhere. I have to remind myself that I have come so far, that I've achieved all the things I dreamed of as a kid, that my younger self would be completely awestruck and so proud of the person I've become.

If you made it this far, thanks for reading. I hope you can also show yourself some kindness today.

edit: thank you kind strangers for the awards and the nice words. love to you allI think the main reason I don't trust them is because the bible teaches them that if you ask for forgiveness then all of your sins are forgiven and you go to heaven.

A lot of christians use this as a excuse to be the absolute shittiest people possible for their entire lives  because they believe if they pray every time they murder innocents or sodomize young boys then their sinns will be forgiven. Like how could I trust you if I know you could slit my throat, then pray for forgivness and feel no remorse for your actions (because you prayed).

I consider my morals MUCH higher than a christians. I believe that when I die the screen goes black and I cease to exist so I feel like I need to make good while I'm here on earth. I believe this is my final destination and thus I need to treat everyone with dignity because I can't just ask some Santa Claus in the sky to make me feel better for being a shitty person. I have to actually do real things like apologizing to people, or not fucking them over to begin with.

I guess i'm just different... but trust me I'm not athiest. I fully believe in god but I wouldn't be caught dead claiming to be a Christian or any other established religion. I don't believe in the afterlife- because clearly I wasn't in heaven before I was concieved, meaning I was nonexistant for googleplex years before being born and after dying I will return to that state of being nonexistant for the rest of time. Like how can you not fucking know that is what happens? (like I'm 100% there is no afterlife from this one pretty straitforward idea.) Like how and why would an afterlife be created for you just because you tasted life on earth for a couple of decades, it's fucking stupid to believe that and it's even more fucking stupid to believe that people who haven't worshiped Jesus will go to hell. Like I actually help old ladies across the street but according to them I'm going to hell too--- fuck off christians and go to hell yourself.

&#x200B;

EDIT: This post is targeted towards religious folks that are so ignorant they are dangerous. I live in a small southern town (United States) and it seems 7/10 people I meet are like this.

It kills me because I know other towns aren't like this (I moved here from a bigger city). I needed a place to rant because If I say anything I'm scared the town will publicly stone me.

My little sister is super religious, wears a cross, goes to Bible study- but she isn't weird at all and non judgemental so trust me I know they DO exist lol, just in my neck of the woods they are rare.One of my less mindful habits is that I’m sometimes a bit of a news junkie - I’d happily sit in front of the news channel or scrolling through twitter when a big story is happening. This can be bad for our wellbeing though, particularly as the algorithm that controls our news feed is designed to provoke a reaction from us. Emotions like fear and anger are a lot more likely to grab people’s attention than happiness, so the content that we get fed through tends to water the seeds of anxiety and resentment.   

We can notice how much time we’re depending on the news and social media and limit ourselves, setting a regular alarm on our phone (the Plum Village app is good for this). When it goes off, if you’re watching the news or on social media, just stop, breath, notice your thoughts, notice what you’re feeling. With more awareness, you can make informed decisions about the media you consume and decide for yourself when to stop. 

But the evidence shows that with the news and social media, less is more. You can get a summary of whats going on once or twice a day - with the time you save you can call up a friend, go for a walk, enjoy nature. Its critical to be aware of what you consume, not just through your mouth but through your eyes and ears as well. The seeds we water create the garden we live in.

[Listen On Apple Podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/finding-peace-in-a-turbulent-world/id1493806566?i=1000505525436)

[Listen On Google Podcasts](https://www.google.com/podcasts?feed=aHR0cHM6Ly9hbmNob3IuZm0vcy8xMjNkZThlMC9wb2RjYXN0L3Jzcw==)

[Listen On Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/show/1ozwIEgzEtHQezPoi83nVV)

[Other ways to listen](https://anchor.fm/shaun-donaghy/episodes/Finding-peace-in-a-turbulent-world-eovodp)i just finished up my evening meditation and i felt so warm and comfy heheheh it was like a big hug, and now i’m sharing my warm, comfy energy with you 🥰

okay that’s all!! hugs!!!!!The title says more than enough.

&#x200B;

Just noticed this sentence on youtube, posted by 'Eckhart Tolle'.Hi.. this is weird for me to do this because I never imagine I would but I am in love with this community and the positivity it has to give. My boyfriend broke up with me last night because he wants to “work on himself”. I’m not sure it was random... & i just need some love & some wisdom if that’s okay. 😞 I’ve never been through a heart break and i feel feelings I’ve never felt before.Had a bad eating disorder for five years, destroyed my self image and ruined my perception of life entirely.
I started getting back into healthy living and I feel as though I’m finally a whole person.I  was in the mental hospital once.  It sucked.  Of course it did.   HOWEVER.  I had an experience in the hospital that was but an inkling of  what was to come, as I went back into the world, and particularly for  me, went back to AA.  I got a chance to meet the chaplain, while I was  in there.  He was cool shit.  He knew how to speak to people.  He had  this care, a comfort, and a confidence in him that was profoundly true,    and I noticed that his movements, unlike mine which were rigid and  shitty, had a rhythm and a flow.  He spoke with a soothing rhythm, he  moved with a soothing rhythm.  This dude was rocking in the rhythm of  the moment.  Apparently you can see experts of dialectical behavioral  therapy rock in the rhythm also.  Come to think of it there was someone  else in the hospital who rocked in the rhythm. I cant remember what she  did but she was very kind.  Very aware.  At some point, likely after I  told her during my psychosis I believed the 12 steps were inside of me,  she informed me that she had done the steps herself, and she assured me  of their power.  She didn’t do them for alcohol, but she didn’t disclose  what her catalyst was.  Even better.  Just letting me know the power of  the steps when I doubted the most.  That’s why she was there, what a  gift.

As I went back to AA, I  started to notice the different ways that people carried themselves, and  the ways they spoke.  Some were hunched and mumbled, some proud and  egoic, but some of them...some of these people were mutants.  I could  see it in them, and hear the truth for the first time.  You haven’t  heard the truth until you’ve heard it uttered by an old hillbilly with  no teeth who hasn’t showered in a month.  That’s some unadulterated  truth right there.

Its like once I  saw the rhythm in these people I couldn’t unsee it, and suddenly they  were like roided up cartoon characters as far as I was concerned,  heaving with spirit muscle.  But they just weren’t moving.  When a  spiritual person moves, its like poetry.  But the real power is watching  them rock in the rhythm without moving.  I watched this guy chair a  meeting, that’s the person who shares their story first.  This guy told  this crazy story about drugs, and money, and jail time, and arson.  He  told it with calm and authority.  He leaned back in his chair, its like  he was at attention and at rest at the same time.  He was nothing like  me.  But his story was so powerful I found him at his car after the  meeting and asked him if he had a moment.  He turned, said my name, and  asked “what can I do for you?”

I  was surprised to say the least.  In a room full of 40 people, he  remembered my name from going around the room at the beginning.  Just  the one time.  He was rocking in the rhythm so hard, he was paying such  close attention, that that reaction came to him as effortlessly as me  yelling “hey.”  Maybe more effortlessly because I didn’t want to bother  him.  The more someone is rocking in the rhythm of the beat of the  moment, the more the moment is accessible to them.  They experience more  and process faster.  They know what to do, they know what to say.  They  don’t move much.  They don’t speak much.  Pay attention to how people  move, and I guarantee if they have true cadence and flow, they’re down  with the rhythm.  I also guarantee they see hear, taste, smell, and feel  more than the rest of us do.  Because they are more inherently and  solidly grounded to the rhythm of the beat.

It  doesn’t even matter what they practice, that’s the point.  They all  rock the same way.  The twelve steps for instance act as a universal  translator, like in star trek.  You work steps, you’re getting in the  rhythm.  There’s obviously plenty of ways to get in the rhythm, this is  just the one I see around me personally.  You work steps, you find a  higher power, you’re essentially training your brain to understand that  it is without a doubt not even remotely alone.  It’s inside of  everything else.  And you rock in that rhythm instead of your own.  Cuz  your own rhythm sucked.  Check it out if you ever get the chance.  Watch  how they move.  I don’t know about you but I want to rock in the rhythm  so hard it kicks me back all the way to the cosmic moment, where it all  begins, the big bang beat.  I don’t dance much but I’ll rock to that  tune.i don’t know if this is the right sub for this, but i am freaking out and need to tell someone about this. as the title says, my 67 year old grandpa died yesterday in the nursing home he has been in for two or so months. it was very unexpected, as he wasn’t suffering from any severe health problems or anything. he just died in his sleep. 

anyways, since he has been in the nursing home, one of his friends has been going over to his house to feed all of the animals. he has two dogs and a cat. this friend is very trustworthy. 

yesterday, about an hour after we got the news about my grandpa, the friend reported to us that the cat had died. he found the dead cat under my grandpa’s bed. 
the cat was perfectly healthy and was just fine the day before.

i do not think this is a coincidence. 
i am wondering if there is some sort of spiritual explanation for this.Life is beautiful :)Let life flow it’s natural course 

You don’t need to control anything. 

Not your life, not other people, not the world. 

Trust.

Trust that the universe knows exactly what it is doing. It’s done it’s things for millions of years before you were here and it will continue to do its thing for millions of years after.

Let go of the need to control. 

Do what inspires you, but do not worry. 

Life goes on. 

And this too shall pass.My own space. Food, water, plenty of medicine. A dog who loves me and whom I love very much. My independence. Fulfilling relationships with genuine friends. A way to make a living doing what I love. I never thought I'd be able to get this on my own. And what's ironic is how it happened. Even in the midst of an extremely toxic, traumatic relationship I was in for seven years, the universe still aligned for me. I eventually left the relationship. That's when things started to align even more. I never thought I'd be able to be independent from my mom when I first started college years ago. Never thought I'd be okay living alone. That I would be able to afford my own place. That I would stop being emotionally and mentally co-dependent. And yet here I am. Thank you universe for everything you've given me. Thank you to everyone who's helped me along the way. Thank you to the universe and the people who have crossed my paths who gave me love. I love you all. So much. <3

Manifestation is possible if you believe no matter what's going on. Just live with love. Give love and compassion to everyone you cross paths with. As much as you can.Your number 1 tool is the vibe you carry. Carry a high vibe of love everywhere you go and hold it until you get used to it. Then raise the bar and hold a higher vibe. Get used to it and keep going. 

This will alter the world’s vibe frequency to higher levels until the spiritual war is won. Each person who does this moves the entire planet. You are stronger than you know.I've been carrying around so much generational trauma that my parents never meant to pass on to me! Imagine being raised by a WW2 or Vietnam Vet with PTSD plus all the programming that happened from the 50s to the 80s?? Does this apply to your dad or grandad? Maybe your mom or grandma? Can you imagine being raised in those times? 

This all occurred to me because some old lady neighbor was complaining about dog poop in her yard and I thought "what a trivial thing to complain about"

But that's not her fault! And who decides trivial?

Edit: not everyone is in a place to do this right now. That's ok. Don't feel like this is blanket advice that applies to all situations! Some of you still have a need to compartmentalize and protect yourself from that trauma. Take your time.Stop trying to figure everything out and being hard on yourself. Drop the rush about knowing what's next, nothing good ever comes out of obsessive thinking. You have to understand that once you give too much energy to figuring things out, sooner or later the ego will take you to the worst case scenario.

Instead of thinking too much learn to just be, you don't have to train your mind to just be because the mind knows doing, not being. Being comes from your soul, it's simply a trust in the divine timing of the Universe that you naturally drop the mind. 

Obsessive thinking means trying to obsessively control everything in life, just accept things as they are and enjoy the experience of life. Realize that no matter how much you stay in your head you will always find yourself living life in the now, just be present once in a while so that you can start using thinking when you really need it. Just be aware and present.

Spiritual awakening overthinking causes you to lose your thoughts. When lost your thought, you miss your present moment.So, observing self is important to become more aware. It is not a thought. It’s a feeling and perspective in which you observe your mind.

It helps to overcome your issues. So, give your brain a break and practice observe your thoughts, rather than continue thinking. It helps to overcome your spiritual awakening overthinking.

When you focus your attention on incoming sensory data, it reduces the activation of the non-essential thoughts. Therefore, whenever you intentionally activate think about the present moment, it helps to increase the awareness of the present moment and reduce overthinking.

*A person who thinks all the time has nothing to think about except thoughts. So, he loses touch with reality and lives in a world of illusions*

   ~ Alan Watts


Manifesting should be easy. But we create resistance. I love how Abraham Hicks breaks down basic Law of Attraction principles with humor and class in their popular workshops. And in February, I had the good fortune of attending the San Francisco workshop in person. I laughed, got calibrated, and had a blast! AND I took LOTS of notes to share what I learned with YOU! In this post, I’m sharing 8 Law of Attraction Tips from Abraham Hicks to Manifest with Ease.

8 Abraham Hicks Law of Attraction Tips
Learn how to manifest with ease with these 8 Law of Attraction tips from Abraham Hicks - one of the BEST teachers of the Law of Attraction 

#1 Negative Thoughts Are Good
Whaaaaaaat?! I know! Shocking!

But one thing Abraham teaches about a lot is the idea of “contrast.” That when you see something you don’t want, you also know what you DO want! Sometimes contrast is good and even needed to help us understand what we do want and what to focus our manifestations towards.

In this workshop, Abraham explained that when you encounter something you don’t want, you launch “rockets of desire” the other way towards what you do want and place what you do want into your “Vortex.” Note: The Vortex is a big Abraham concept, so hopefully you’re familiar, but drop a comment if you’d like an post for it.

My Takeaway: when you encounter a negative thought, focus on the opposite – what you DO want. Keep your thoughts on the positive “end of the stick.”

#2 Don’t Assert. Attract.

When we manifest, sometimes we try to *make* the manifestation happen. We put so much effort into it. We try to assert it. As a Type-A personality, I totally get this. Because I’ve tried it.

Abraham explained in the workshop that when you’re asserting, you’re manipulating.

But you can’t assert or manipulate a manifestation into happening.

Instead, you have to sit back and attract it. You don’t have to script everyday to make a manifestation work. What you want is already in the Vortex, your job now is to allow it. To do things that make you feel good so you can get into the right frequency to attract it.

My Takeaway: Remember to not manipulate manifestations and get into energetic alignment with what you want instead.

#3 Memories and Past Are Foes of Where You’re Going

The topic of therapy came up, and Abraham said that they don’t really like therapy. This was interesting for me because one thing I’ve been exploring is how past emotional trauma can impact us in the now. And how releasing emotional trauma can help you with health, happiness, clarity of thought, and MUCH more.

Abraham explained this one with an example: If you were sitting on a train and on one side was a junkyard and on the other was an ocean view, would you have to clean up the junkyard to look at the ocean? No! You just choose to look that way.

According to Abraham, the same can be said of memories and the past. When we think about those things, we can sometimes calibrate to lower vibrational experiences and get back into that lower energy. So instead of thinking about memories and the past, the idea is to choose to look at the “ocean view”.

My Takeaway: Whilst I’m still balancing this with what I’ve been learning about emotional trauma, I do think it’s important to not wallow in the past and calibrate to it. I intend to focus towards the future and calibrate to the good.

Speaking of calibration…

#4 Don’t Calibrate to Unstable Things

Abraham noted that we humans often calibrate to unstable things. The main thing we talked about here is calibrating to other people instead of calibrating to our Inner Being.

We allow someone with a lower vibe to take us to lower vibration too.

For example, you’re feeling good and you’re aligned and then you run into someone who’s having a bad day. Next thing you know, you’ve lowered your frequency to match theirs and not be too happy in the face of their bad day.

My Takeaway: Remember to calibrate to your Inner Being and keep your vibration strong around others.

#5 You Can’t Change the Way Someone Feels About You, But You Can Change the Way YOU Feel About Someone Else

A woman got in the hot seat, and she was really upset that she could be in a high vibe when she was on her own, but she’d get low vibe around her mom. She felt like her mom was disappointed in her, and this caused the woman a lot of low vibe feelings.

Abraham explained that the woman couldn’t change the way her mom looked at her life choices and whether she was disappointed or not. But the woman COULD look at her mom differently. She could see that her mom was acting out of love because she wanted success for her daughter but had a different definition of what that was.

My Takeaway: When you’re feeling upset by how someone feels about you, remember that you can’t control them and trying to do so will only upset you. Instead, choose to see that person differently. See how they can ultimately be acting out of love.

#6 Be Thrilled About the Process of Your Manifestation Coming Together, Not Just It Arriving

When you are only excited at your manifestation having arrived, you miss out on the fun of life. Abraham wants us to be thrilled as the manifestation is coming together. Eagerly observing how the various “cooperative components” are coming together. And enjoying the full process.

Not enjoying the process is like buying a new house and being miserable from the house hunting to the decorating because you’re just so frustrated the house isn’t fully set up yet and WHY is it taking so long!

It’s much more enjoyable to have fun with the end-to-end experience.

My Takeaway: Find ways to enjoy the process of your manifestation coming together. Get excited when you notice little pieces coming together.

#7 How to Understand Your Vibration

Curious about your vibration. Here are 2 ways to find out how - so easy! 
This one is simple.

Abraham said there are two ways to understand your vibration:

   1. How you feel
   2. How things are turning out for you

How You Feel

When you are aligned with your inner being, you feel great and “frisky”. Your vibe is high. Your Inner Being is pure, positive energy, so if you feel anything else, that means you’re out of alignment and/or low vibe.

How Things Are Turning Out for You
If things seem to be going wrong left and right, you’re probably not aligned to your Inner Being. Your Inner Being wants the best for you! It wants everything to work out in your favor.

#8 How to Calibrate

At the workshop, Abraham taught us a method for calibrating that I haven’t heard them teach before. So maybe it’s a newer method? Here’s how you do it.

You’ll want to use this if something is throwing your vibe off or making you feel bad.

Grab a notebook
On the left side – write down what’s bothering you and how it’s making you feel
On the right side – write down things that help you calibrate back to your Inner Being
For example:

Your friend was upset by something you said, and now you feel like a bad person
On the left side – write down: “My friend is upset by something I said”
Add: “I feel like a bad friend”, “I feel small”, “I feel like I’m a bad person”, etc.
On the right side – write down how you REALLY feel about yourself and use “or” questions if it helps (this is what Abraham did): Am I a bad friend or a good friend? Good friend! Write “I’m a good friend.” Am I a bad person or a good person?” Good person! (and keep going – calibrating back to your Inner Being who is pure, positive energy)
Note: This one is easier to explain via video, so def watch the video for a better example.

My Takeaway: Use this calibration method to re-calibrate anytime you’re feeling off about something.


BONUS: 3 Actions to Help Your Manifestation Success

Bonus #1 Meditation
Meditation is a great way to connect to Source energy and your Inner Being. Abraham recommended this many times during the workshop!

If you’re reading this, you probably already know this. So consider this your gentle reminder to get your meditation practice going / keep up the awesome work!

Bonus #2 Follow Your Bliss
Abraham stressed the importance of following your bliss and doing things that make you feel good many times during the workshop.

Bonus #3 My Recommendation 

[Get your complimentary personalized FREE Soul Reading here >>>](https://sites.google.com/view/manifestationmindhacks/soul-manifestion)
Your Soul Reading Reveals The Path That Your Soul Is On At This Point In Your Life.
It Reveals The Challenges That May Be Blocking You On Your Soul’s Journey
And The Opportunities Available To Help You At This Time in Your Life...


This is a big component of attracting because when we feel good, we attract good things!

Thank you for reading ! Hope you enjoyed learning these Law of Attraction tips for manifesting with ease that I collected at the SF workshop.

Source >>>  r/ManifestationValley ( Join Us Here )When I look deep within myself, I find myself feeling like a tribal or a hunter-gatherer inside. My deepest desires include finding a social connection and community with people I value the most, playing songs and dancing and drawing art with them, hunting and foraging for food together and calling it a day by a bonfire. 

Even in an evolutionary context, we have not moved on from the hunter-gatherer/nomadic lifestyle yet. We lived that for hundreds of thousands of years and everything about modern society is just so new. I attribute some of my feelings to that but it also feels like I was a hunter-gatherer in a previous life and I've suddenly been thrown into this world of insane technological marvel and magic.

I'm more than grateful to be born in this time to a good family with good friends and the opportunity to be who I want. I can get food delivered, a taxi or just about anything that I need/want with just a few clicks of a button on my magic brick. It is actually magic and something we take for granted.

Yet, I feel like I just kind of adapted to all this and I'm living with it because our era demands it. I value my experiences with other people more than anything in the world. Connection with people and with nature means more to me than any riches, fame or material wealth. When I look inside, I see the tribal spirit in me who longs for a very specific kind of lifestyle. 

Can anyone relate?I AM EVERYONE.

I LOVE MYSELF.

THE ONE in Everyone is The One I AM.

There is One Heart

The One Heart beats in every Being.

We are a Shared Being.

When I bring pain to your Heart, I am bringing it to my own Heart.

When I bring Joy to your Heart, I am bringing it to my own Heart.

You are Myself.

Everyone is Myself.

I literally AM EVERYONE.

As I love my Heart, I am also loving Your Heart.

As I feed my mind positive messages, it affects my Heart positively, because I am soothing it into Full Expression with my thoughts.

The Heart is beautiful.

The Heart is loved.

Remember that.**We all lose sight of how powerful we are sometimes.**

We forget that WE ARE THE CREATORS of our own reality and that we always have a choice available to us – no matter how unfair our circumstances may seem.

#### We may not be responsible for what has happened to us, but WE ARE RESPONSIBLE for what we do about it.

**WE GET TO DECIDE** if we accept the role of the victim, or if we chose to step into our power DESPITE whatever unfortunate situation we have faced.

**This is an invitation for you to step back into your power.**

​  
​Repeat after me:​  
​

**I GET TO CHOSE** what I want to experience in my life.  
​

**I AM SOLELY RESPONSIBLE** for making it happen. No one owes me anything. No one is coming to save me. I'm not going to wait around for coincidence to bring me what I want.  
​

**NOTHING IN MY PAST CAN STOP ME** from having the future I decide to have.  
​

**I CAN DO ANYTHING I SET MY MIND TO** as long as I believe in myself & take consistent aligned action towards my goal.

That's better, isn't it?

**Alright, now go smash your day!**

**Lona xo**

[Read more here.](https://artof-manifestation.com/manifestation-blog/a-reminder-to-step-into-your-power-amp-manifest-the-life-youve-always-dreamed-of) 

To understand addiction, we have to understand the root cause.

**Addiction** is so widely misunderstood because there’s a stigma — even in the mental health field. We have a society that criminalizes addiction. We have a society that doesn’t understand when core needs are not met — we have adults who cannot cope.

When a person cannot cope, they find whatever way they can to relieve themselves from a mind and body that keeps them in panic + pain cycles.

Some **addictions** are more stigmatized than others — heroin, meth, alcoholism. I ran groups for years in a state-run addiction recovery unit. Many of these people had been in prison. All of them had trauma. Trauma that was never addressed in treatment.

Many **addictions** are rewarded (or accepted) by society — workaholism, busyness, shopping addiction. Lots of people I treated in private practice silently struggled. They wore a public mask (just as they were modeled in childhood.) Few of them were aware of the emotional trauma + loss of connection they’d endured as children.

>**Addiction** is the seeking of relief and the seeking of a false connection.

To heal **addiction**, we must heal the trauma body. Actually — return to the body we left many years ago. We have to allow people to feel their pain, learn new ways to cope and regulate their nervous system.

To heal **addiction**, we need to educate people on the reality that behaviors are adaptations and survival mechanisms. Attempts to feel the love we lost.

If you or someone you know suffers from addictive behaviors, please share this.

Addiction is any behavior we use to cope with our emotions and temporarily relieve our deep feeling of lack of connection to self and others.

We can become addicted to any behavior that temporarily relieves us from the nervous system. It temporarily gives us ‘feel good’ (connection-based) neurotransmitters like dopamine that run through the body, providing immediate relief.

This includes :

* Substance use
* Shopping
* Toxic relationship dynamics
* Pornography
* Chronic busyness
* Workaholism
* Internet/social media use
* Food use/restriction
* Video games

[read more](https://medium.com/illumination/the-root-cause-of-addiction-4401feab1f5f)So I was really feeling down, and asked for my guides to give me something to feel better, then I looked on the clock and it was 11:11 and opened the youtube, the first video that was recommended for me it was a 1111hz frequency video, I listened to it and felt better 
Thank you guides 🙏You cannot understand how powerful you are,
Because mind cannot understand no-mind.

No-mind, Nirvana.
No-death, no suffering.

You cannot know the unknowable,
Go beyond knowing.

Think of 10,000 stars;
YOU ARE BIGGER!

Bigger still,
Beyond size.

Eternal

Unquenchable

YouBefore you were born you were a spirit, part of the Holy Spirit. When you die you'll become a spirit for all of eternity in your afterlife.  Good or evil your freewill.   Demon or angel, vampire or witch, a ghoul or a ghost!

Why become flesh? You sinned or desired physical pleasures, knowing that pleasure comes with pain such as death.There is no time, no space.  
There is no separation.

We are suffering because we believe we lack things, people, circumstances.  
In the end what we believe we lack is love.

But you are everything and everyone you think you lack.

You are that Love that you believe you lack.

There is no separation, it is just an illusion experienced by your mind.  
And the mind itself is an illusion observed by the real You.

You are not a small person in the big Universe, you are the Universe.  
You already have everything within you and there is nothing to desire.You are my brothers and sisters and we are all together in this chaotic thing called life. You’re beautiful and perfect exactly as you are. You are not your mistakes or “failures”, you are just you, a spark of Source energy experiencing itself in this reality we call 3D. Be kind to yourself, forgive yourself, you are worthy and wonderful 💗 sweet dreams!I am 25M and I've been single for about 3 years now. I stumbled upon the teachings of Alan Watts, Ekhart Tolle, Buddhism, etc about 2 years ago and since then became fascinated with the idea of spirituality and mindfulness... It has brought me more peace than anything else ever. But the thing is that I've been feeling more and more content within myself.. I have also become calmer and quieter in general. I'm at an age where my parents 'sometimes' bring up marriage and relationship talk is common amongst friends.. but somehow I really don't like that idea of being with someone romantically and feel like a woman in my life would 'disturb my peace'... It will be too much work and commitment and going out of my way.. 

Does anyone else feel this way or similar?I just wanted to share with all of you.We've all had days where it feel like the whole world is out to get us, like every single thing we do (or try to do) backfires on us and creates a frustrating situation for us. Not only that, but I bet all of us have had those days where it feels like we are just doing everything right, like nothing we can do can fail.  

What are your thoughts on this? Do you think its our own doing, in like a self-fulfilling prophecy kind of way, or some other external force creating these "fields of possibility" so-to-speak to influence positive change in us? I use this term because I feel like its a better objective descriptor of the phenomenon than "luck".

I have conflicting thoughts about this and I just thought it would be interesting to talk about. I'd love to hear all of your hypotheses and experiences.At first I wasn't so sure about it but it is definitely an enjoyable show that gets you thinking or if you just want to listen to hippies talk after getting blasted that works too😁Everytime we talk about spirituality our words sound to come out from buddhas mouth. 
Isn’t that too much of a “role”, or a mask?
I mean, can’t we have spiritual conversations without being so fckn poetic everytime? Just an average languageMaybe obvious but I've noticed this since every night after I drink I get nightmares/sleep paralysis and paranoia. Currently feeling it now since I drank 2 days ago (yesterday had all of those).

So if youre on a low vibration I'd recommend going sober. I'm about to sleep and I have unreasonable paranoia.We're all such beautiful creatures. You deserve this  💞Lost my Granny in November and have just lost my Granddad this week... I've always struggled with grief and loss and have in the past turned to drugs and alcohol. This time I've plugged in to spirituality, especially reiki and crystals and calling on spirit guides and Angels.
And wow has it been comforting.

I wish everyone love light and peace during this crazy time and to just say that even in the darkest times or the emotionally painful times our guides and the universe is always there. Just call upon them... Ask them to show themselves and they will.

Love xI'm seeing a lot of that here lately. Please stop insulting your fellow humans with delusions of grandeur. If you were truly all of the things you say you are: an "old soul." "Awakened." "Enlightened." "Pleiadian." You would see a reflection of yourself when you looked at your neighbors, not peasants to be looked down on. You think you know something they don't know, but in truth, all you're doing is avoiding an existential crisis: facing the fact that there are billions of us here, and we are all one. All the same. All to be forgotten, as far as the Earthly realm is concerned. 

I don't believe in "awakening," but if I did, I would say it is the acceptance of being part of a whole, no different from it, no better than anyone else in it....and seeing the beauty in *that.* If you keep looking for reasons to distinguish yourself. If you feel you don't belong among other humans. If you think your suffering is special, your experience is unique. I'm not sure what you are, but "awakened" is not it. You still have a lot of growing to do.Everyone aside from you is in on it. They knew all your lies, all of your true feelings, who you truly are on the soul level. For your own growth you were the only one left out of the know, self-induced amnesia and then then you began life here, on Earth. 

What do you do?I have been on my path for awhile now, and over time, my husband and daughter (10) have begun to open themselves to some of my practice. Last night I asked them if they would join me in a meditation, I put on a shamanic drumming track, and we all joined hands & started together on “ohm” our voices vibrations began to harmonize, I felt like my head was buzzing with energy. At the end my husband, who really struggles at times, expressing his more sensitive emotions, was in tears of joy. He said he felt overcome with joy that we all are growing together, and that he could feeel us, that it felt like he didn’t have a body, none of us did, just floating as beings of energy, this was his first time. my daughter was also moved to tears. She said she felt like we were floating up on a cloud. It was a truly beautiful experience and now I feel they will be open to the idea in the future. Just wanted to share 🥰I have a lot of voices in my head, not in a schizophrenic way just in a, connected with Spirit and spirits way. I've been talking to Jesus lately (I had a vision of him at a recent Ayahuasca ceremony I was at) and I talk in my head to all of the plant spirits I work with (Ayahuasca, San Pedro, Tobacco, Iboga, Psilocybin, etc.). I started talking to God during an Ayahuasca ceremony that really reinvigorated my belief in an all-loving God who is really just our constant companion and wants to hang out with us more. But so many religious texts write about God with such reverence and holiness, like He's this big dude in the sky and we have to be in a special holy state to access him, that I'm starting to wonder if this voice I hear in my head that feels like it comes from God is just my ego. Am I being too glib about God? 

One of the things God (?) told me is He wishes we would all be a bit more chill about him and hang out with him like we do our friends, He created everything for us and wants to enjoy it with us. So I do! I'm over here cracking inside jokes at God all the time. But is this just my imagination? How can I tell?

Edit: One thing worth mentioning is I think God comes to everyone uniquely in the way they were created to receive His messages. So it doesn’t have to be talking to a big dude in the sky; it can be praying to multiple Gods, or sounds and visions. I think God comes to me this way because I am just kind of a silly, light-hearted person, so He manifests through me in that way. Reading all these comments reminds me that there’s no right or wrong way to talk to God and that if it feels right it is right :)There is an implicit assumption among spiritual seekers that knowing who you are is synonymous with adding information about who you think you are, but these aren’t the same thing.  Who you are stands independently of your karmic cycles, genetics, and upbringing.  Feeling a need to sort things out that aren’t you to begin with keeps you trapped indefinitely.  If you are curious about these things as an idle pleasure, great, but you’ll find no truth in them.  You are the truth already.  Nothing needs to be added.  Nothing more needs to be known.You guys......I don’t know if this belongs here but I’m so tired/done with the human experience. I do not know how I can deal with this anymore. I’m just not even remotely interested in humanly affairs/fulfilling my purpose anymore and would like to go. I feel like I’m trapped here.

Edit: You all are such beautiful people🥺thank you so much for the advice :( I hope you all go forth and prosper and do great things❤️😏 So I have some theory on reincarnation and past lives. One part of my theory is: people reincarnated through their bloodlines. And moving on... Since every person is a reflection of myself, wouldn't it make sense that I have or I will experience every lifetime/bloodline? If God is consciousness and functional in all things, wouldn't God  live each life individually as well as simultaneously? I could try to go alot deeper than this, but I will not right now to avoid going too deep.Please? Sometimes I just get so sick of this shit. The energy is just off. Can we have a redo and sage the planet? Lolol.

Edit: this is meant as a joke people! It’s always good to have a laugh :)When I think a few years back , even just to 2019, or look at pictures from that time, a wave of nostalgia hits me - ,, back then, when everything was normal and people were living their lives more freely." Thinking back or looking at those pictures feels so strange, it is like we ended up in a completely different reality, todays world feels so alien. It is like a very strange dream and we just need to wake up.  Do you remember ? Do you remember when things were so different? When you could go outside and to not worry or have a negative feeling about anything? When you could see peoples smile on faces (or any emotions they expressed)?  There are so many negative emotions we could feel (and can feel) during these times like sadness, anger, resistance etc. I am not saying if there could be a way back, that's not what I mean - but the huge leap we are experiencing is the weirdest thing ever, and there is no going back, only forward. But I know we can live more freely again and "normally", however, maybe it's a long way to go. Stay strong beautiful souls, we got this, the light always wins.Just like the universe doesn't try to give us answers, Or try to convince you of her beauty.
The universe just is. Being is the answer. Being is beautiful. 

The universe doesn't demand anything of us, we're the ones trying to figure everything out
And it's always been there. Everything
You do not lack.
You are born of the infinite everything.
When you came into this world so did the world come out of you.
You exist so that everything can.

When you start trying, you admit there is something you aren't.
This isn't a glass half full, But rather a...
I am the ocean whose waters overflow...
The sun as it dips low in the technicolor sky does not try to mesmerize the soul
Then lets dark arrive so the moon can glow
This beauty cannot be told true it is just is as so are you.
And it's up to us to see it.

The more you try the less you be and the less you see.
Let go.
And you become the universe.
See you don't need anything when you the universe, Is everything

This is your experience, this is your life to live
Know time like the present. 

Let go

Lyrics to the song Know time like the present by : GRiZ

For anyone that needs to hear this*edit: I did not expect such a positive response. what a great community this subreddit is. it really means a lot to me that so many people thought my post was worth reading through. i know i can be kind of verbose, so i figured everyone would kind of scroll through it. thank you all so much.*

Kind of a long one, but worth it. I get choked up every time I think about this. I hit rock bottom at 19 years old 4 years back. I was addicted to multiple drugs, behind on bills, depressed, and unhealthy. I overdosed one night when visiting my mom and I agreed to be sent to rehab. The facility I was staying at had a boys and girls dorm, two "classrooms", and a main building where most of the staff worked.

About five days after I was admitted, I started going crazy. Withdrawals were going crazy. I kept thinking about my life outside of rehab and all the problems I got myself into. "How am I ever going to get back on my feet? No one cares about me anymore." etc. My entire universe felt dark.

I came up with a plan to leave rehab without really being noticed. When all the other patients were in the classrooms, I was going to sneak to my room and pack up all my clothes. I didn't know it at the time, but one of the patients in my classroom followed me from a distance. He knew what I was trying to do. I went to the main building to tell the office staff I was leaving. They started trying to talk me out of it, but at the time, I was determined to get out of there.

Then, the guy who was following me earlier came in the main office. He was a big, scary looking gangbanger-type dude. 6'6"ish, 300 plus pounds, face tattoos and everything. He asked me what about this lifestyle I want so much. He basically said something along the lines of "Do you really want to live this life like me? Jumping in and out of prison/rehab every year? Being 40 years old and still hanging out with 20 year olds? I miss my kids. The state took them from me because I'm a bad dad. You don't want this." Then he pulled up his shirt and showed me a scar on his belly from a bullet. I kept telling him it's not like that, he doesn't get it and I just need to go.

Then he sat down and looked at me in such a sad way. He said "look to your higher power and ask if this is what you really want." Then I just started crying harder than I have in a long time. I stepped outside to get some fresh air and he followed me and said, almost in a pleading way, "Please stay with us." I told him and the staff member that I would stay.

I'm not making this up when I say not even 20 seconds after I said I would stay, it started snowing. It was April and we had little to no snow in Washington that year. It was one of those brisk days where the sun is out, it's just cold. But a beautiful blanket of snow just sprinkled down for about an hour. It's gotta be godWe all belong and return to The Source. Everything in existence is a dance or a play directed by The Source. Everything is created with Love including me and you. We are all one!Some people might find this post offensive but I feel it needs to be said. 

I’ve found it easy to get sucked into the teachings of one ‘spiritual guru’ or another. 

There’s nothing wrong with looking up to someone or wanting to learn from them or believing in what they have to say, but as the teachings of Buddhism apparently mention, always remember to take everything with a grain of salt and keep room for you to not get attached to any particular doctrines and ideals. Question every idea you are taught. 

The reason I say this is because many ‘enlightened leaders’ over the years have and continue to be false prophets - antisocial Individuals who use ‘spiritual master’ as a pathway to control and god-like praise. 

I see many people and forums online spreading the teachings of people like Osho, forgetting he ran one of America’s most infamously violent cults. Or Mooji, who is exposed online every day with video evidence depicting similar cult-like behaviours. 

Even Jesus had some contradictory teachings that when questioned, could paint him in the light of simply someone with a messiah complex. 

The truth is we do not know who is really a spiritual master and who is simply a delusional manipulator. There’s absolutely no way to tell for sure. 

Always question the possibilities. Always question your beliefs. Always question the teachings of others. 

“Anybody who tells you that he has some way of leading you to spiritual enlightenment is like somebody who picks your pocket and sells you your own watch” - Alan Watts



(You are your own guru)I honestly thought it was going to be a "evil" book, but tbh, it's quite the opposite

I honestly agree with a lot of it,  but will admit, I digress with some of it, like the rituals and magicks, but that's mainly because I believe magick and spirituality should be personal and that you should do things on your own experiences and success.

To me, the book is basically be your true self, carnal and not carnal. It's okay to be yourself. It's quite alright to be human. But you are in charge of your own reality, you are your own god or goddess. And also if somebody mistreats you, it's okay to fire back, nothing to the extreme of course.

To me it's a book of being a decent human being, how to advance yourself spiritually and non spiritually, and knowing that there's so much more out there than this reality.The root of pretty much all my misery growing up was one simple thing: falsehoods.

As is the case with most people, my adolescence sucked.  I was a miserable teenager.  Weren't we all?  But I dunno.  A lot of kids grow up.  They go to college.  Get a good job.  Get married.  Buy a house.  This is already happening with a lot of my friends.

But that wasn't the path I was on.  I turned to drugs, alcohol, and other destructive behaviors to self-medicate.  Was it fun?  Sure.  Sometimes.  But the truth was that I was using these things to run away from my misery.  I guess you could say I got really lucky.  There was grace.  Because it came to a point where I could no longer keep going the way I was going.  I would end up dead, or in jail.  So I had to find another way.  And life gave it to me.  Grace.

What was that other way?  It was honesty.  Authenticity.  Humility.  Acceptance.

Nobody ever told me growing up that I could say "hey, I'm struggling".  That wasn't allowed. I couldn't tell anyone I was lost or confused or hurting.  I had to put on this image of being strong and having it all together.  Because after all, who would like the real me?  It seemed like everyone else had it all together.  I was the only weirdo who was lost and confused.

Nobody ever told me that I could embrace the things I truly wanted.  Like those girls I liked, or those songs I wrote.  I never told or showed a girl how I felt.  And I showed my friends the crappy songs that meant nothing to me instead of the ones that really did.

You could say it's typical teenage stuff.  In a way, it is. But most people never grow out of this "typical teenage stuff".  Most people go to the grave without ever fully embracing who they are.

So in a way I feel tremendously lucky.  It's like the Bible says: "the last shall be first".  Because only the meek, the poor, the desperate, and the miserable ever decide to try things a different way.  They have to.  I wonder if my friends who got married, bought houses, and are living the picture perfect life are really happy.  Sure, they may not be miserable like I was.  But are they truly joyful?  I have my doubts.

The lesson that I want to share is that, while I may not have found honesty in the past, I did find it in the present.  And to be frank with you, there has been no greater gift in my life.  I am nearly 7.5 years sober, and more importantly, life has become a true blessing.  It's not always easy, but I can always find something to be grateful for. Life has truly become "a mystery to be lived" rather than "a problem to be solved".  It is truly an adventure.

Best wishes to all.Your love is on the horizon, your struggle is almost over, your genuine smile will return. You ARE deserving 💚**My interpretation**: Countless people in history became the very thing they once hated because they did not fully learn or understand this spiritual truth. Hate is a sickness of the spirit and only love is has the power to cure it. Focus less on that which causes you to hate, and focus more on what the solution is.

[Quote Picture](https://www.instagram.com/p/CBVxTelDluk/)Intention: I intend to manifest $10,000 each month with joy. Imagine how this will make you feel. Feel the joy. Get creative. This will raise your vibration. If you believe you are abundant with cash all the time, momentum will lead you toward your intention. Faith is the beginning of knowing. Knowing you are a deliberate creator will bring all of your intentions to life. Know your power!thank you for your beautiful soul that will forever light and guide many to pure elevated consciousness❤️🦋 be here now. be love now.  I’m sure I’ll see you in another trip of a lifetime Richard Alpert 🌞I was in my car driving to work, making a video diary talking about fear and trying to break through my fears. As I'm talking so deeply about fear I happen to notice my surroundings and notice that the car in front of me has a license plate that says "No.Fear"


And whew, talk about a sign that I'm doing the right thing for myself right now. And I know getting over my fears (and not getting over per say but no longer allowing them to run my life and be the base of my decision making) will not be easy at all but I feel comforted knowing that its something I definitely need to tackle and that I will be stronger for it. And I just wanted to share with people that would get why that was so moving and wild and refreshing  for my to see.Don't get me wrong, nothing wrong with having opinions.  Opinions are wonderful.  It's how we try and make sense of the world.  If you had no opinions, you'd just be at the mercy of the world.  You can even have your opinion about people.  That's fine.  If you didn't, how would you ever know who to associate with?  "I think he's kind of a douche".  Great!  Don't hang out with him. "She's a lovely person".  Great!  Make time for her.

The problem is when someone starts pushing their opinions as absolute fact.  Only an insecure person would do this.  Why?  Because a secure person has nothing to prove.  Ok, I think he's a douche... but I could be wrong!  I have no investment in proving to the world that I am in fact right, and he is indeed a douche.  It makes no difference to me.

But an insecure person has some investment in it.  "No, he's definitely a douche.  You're crazy if you can't see it.  I don't care if he had a hard upbringing.  Total fucking douche."  Note that most of the time these opinions are unsolicited.  "Yeah, I saw Bob yesterday."  "Oh, Bob?  Total douche.  I can't believe you even hang out with him.  You need to stop that right now." But I can hang out with Bob if I want.  Why should it matter to anybody else?  I mean, if it's a genuine concern for my safety, then that's one thing.  But it hardly ever is.  I could say "Bob makes me tremendously happy", and really mean it.  This type of person would still argue with you and say "no, he's a douche, cut it out now!"

They've got some investment in their opinion.  They're afraid to admit that, hey, the world is complex and difficult and mysterious and maybe I don't have all the answers.  They're afraid to be vulnerable.  They're afraid to be exposed.  So they hide behind their opinions and certainties.  They will hardly, if ever, admit to being wrong.  And since their opinion is their shield, they will make sure to push it on you at every possible occasion.  It's not really about you.  It's about them and their defenses.

The height of this is when you say something like "hey, that comment you made upset me" and they respond  "Oh come on, get over it, it was just a joke".  You know, when their opinion is so important to them that they aren't even able to accept your genuine grievances and feelings.  This is a horrible way to have a relationship, and I encourage everyone to avoid these sorts of people.  You can love them from a distance, but this sort of person will always invalidate you.  You can forgive them; it's because of their own insecurities.  Forgive them, learn your lesson, and walk away.

Live and let live.  Like I said, it can be very hard to admit that, hey, I don't have all the answers.  My perspective is not the only perspective, and it's certainly not the "correct" one.  It may be correct for me, but there is no universally correct perspective.  We all have different life experiences and desires.

I encourage everyone to watch out for these people and be wary of getting close to them.  You deserve people in your life who listen to you without constantly trying to push their opinions on you.  I also encourage everyone not to argue with them. And finally, I encourage everyone to live and let live.  It is tough to admit our fragility and uncertainty, but at the end of the day it is tremendously freeing.  It means we can go about our lives without constantly trying to prove something.

Best wishes to all.Life is insane. We all have our own little worlds. That are created by our perspective. Which is controlled by us. Happy living! And good luck to all you other creatorsUpon opening my third eye potently and having it open for a few hours I thought I would share my story and give you guys some good vibes today and days after when other people read it. It's the story of how me opening my third eye erased all my fears, fear of death, fear of anything you can think of and made me realize we are the universe. Here it is. 

 You are, the leader, the creator, the judge and the jury of your own universe. Your mind is a powerful tool, more powerful then you know. We as humans trick ourselves into believing we're all individuals, everyone is different with different personalities and basically nobody's the same. Which is true to an extent, we are all different in the lives we live, the people we care about, the way we talk to people, but we are all ONE. One conciousness. Experiencing the same thing at the same time. When I opened my third eye, I was embraced by the most LOVE I've ever felt in my entire life. It was the universe, God, ( we are god and the universe, kinda like how Jesus came down as a human but he was still " the father and the son" at the same time. Not trying to push religion because Im talking about the spiritual journey as humans not formed religion) anyways, I was crying because the experience was so powerful. Basically it told me, ( not through words but communicated through feelings) that everything I worry about, my fear of death, fear of people's opinion, etc etc was meaningless. There's nothing to be afraid of. In the end, everything WILL be 100% okay and that the point of life is to just enjoy every second and live to the fullest. I now know when I die, I will go back into the universe, just as I was before this life. We, humans are here, conscious so the universe can perceive ITSELF. If there were no conscious beings throughout the universe, how could anything ever know it exists? How could anything see the beauty of anything? Which is why conciousness was developed, and we’re here now. We are the universe, experiencing this human life, because we (the universe) decided to. The reason this knowledge isn't already built into our mind, is because it kind of takes away from the human experience. If we knew we were the universe right off the bat, we wouldn't be doing what the universe intended for us to do. Living and experiencing the Human life. That's why we grow up, have hardships, fall in and out of love, have bad times, have amazing times, because we as the universe WANTED to experience all of that. A world where we can basically do whatever we want. Have a family, make some money, get passionate about sports, or video games, or anything you find interest in. That's why everyone is so different. The universe (us) wanted to experience every kind of life. Even the worst life you can imagine. Because in the end, we will transition right back to the universe, with the most love you will ever feel. If you look into near death experiences, or people dying in general there's a common theme of happiness upon letting go. Your pineal gland is releasing DMT upon death, it's basically the universe telling you it's okay to let go, come back to us, your true family. If you want to open your third eye and experience this for yourself, I have to say it would take time, listening to meditation music, becoming one. Letting go to the experience. I personally experienced this on a dose of LSD recently, I took the easy way out and can't recommend you do this but I know the same states can be achieved through meditation. The LSD kinda forces your third eye to open up, if you can't do it yourself. I became one with everything. Psychedelics are called psychedelics for a reason, it changes your perception into a point of view and shows you things your two human eyes can't see. I had my eyes open when I was embraced by my true universal family, the universe itself, but I also closed my eyes and could continue to see the same thing. Having my eye open would just overlay the experience over reality. Just don't doubt yourself. You have the power, you CAN get to where you want to go even if you have no clue which direction to walk. Sometimes you just have to take a random path, and see what you can do. Just know, everything will always be okay in the end, no matter how down and out you feel about yourself. I'm hoping on your journey of enlightment you come to the same conclusion I do and realize how awesome life can be once this is realized. Thanks for reading if you did, willing to listen to others opinions and talk.


Also, for anyone curious, LSD is something to be cautioned about. It is not for everyone, I've had some of the most scary experiences in my life on LSD where I thought I was going to lose my mind forever, but I also had the best experiences of my life. Do a lot of research if you ever consider doing a psychedelic, like I said it is NOT for everyone and can be very dangerous given a bad setting, a bad situation, a BAD LSD TAB. Just be cautious, I didn't want this post to sound like " yeahhh try drugs". I just happened to have a spiritual awakening on LSD, so it had to be mentioned. Thanks again. If I had to choose the one practice that I could share with everyone that changed my life, it is this.

Look at yourself in a Mirror
Say I love you

I repeat 

Look in yourself in a Mirror 
Say I love you

Include your name. It’s powerful. Now this isn’t something that I did when I already loved myself. This is something I started after I had destroyed myself. I thought I was empty when I first started this practice.
It changed everything

I hope you get a chance to check it out if you’ve been hurt or suffering.

Bless you
I love youYour new life is going to cost you your old one . It's going to cost you your comfort zone and your sense of direction. 
It's going to cost you relationships and friends. 
It's going to cost you being liked,and understood. 
But it doesn't matter. 
Because the people who are meant for you are going to meet you on the other side . 
And you're going to build a new comfort zone around the things that actually move you forward . 
And instead of liked , you're going to be loved . 
Instead of understood , you're going to be seen . 
All you're going to lose is what was built for a person you no longer are. 

Let it go.

Suffering is not holding you. You are holding suffering. When you become good at the art of letting sufferings go, then you’ll come to realize how unnecessary it was for you to drag those burdens around with you. You’ll see that no one else other than you was responsible. The truth is that existence wants your life to become a festival

Thank You for reading & have a spiritual day ❤️🌞Things are working in your favor friend, I promise you. 

Take a deep breath, straighten your posture, unclench your jaw, stretch of you need to.

Now put your complete faith in the Universe. Everything is working in your favor.

Have a wonderful rest of your day 💜The deeper I’ve gone on this journey, the more I understand what they say when they say you break generational curses. I see the flaw in my parents teachings, I’ve learned how to communicate better, working on healing my inner child, and what I won’t continue with my kids. I’m not saying that this’ll be the case w/ everyone but I feel confident in my prospering both in life, family, and career. 🤍🧿Lately, I’ve been feeling more alive in my dreams than I do when I’m awake. It’s always so weird, I feel conscious and more content. When I’m awake I feel like a robot doing the same things over and over again. I was just wondering if anyone else feels like this or why this is.  

For over 40 years, I prayed with faith and devotion. I prayed with tears of entreaty, as I sought the God I loved. Then one day, my Spiritual Master, my Guru provoked me to go on a quest and I realized the truth. I always thought I was me, with my name, my identity, my possessions, my relationships, until suddenly, I had the realization. I was not the one I thought I was for 48 years. I was the Atman, the spirit, the Soul that lived within the physical body that I considered to be me. This realization transported me to a life of eternal bliss, a life without fear or worry, experiencing the Divine, everywhere and all the time.Call me crazy for the title but it’s true. The music you listen to can directly affect your emotions. Don’t believe me? Make a playlist full of depressed music & listen to nothing but those type of songs for a month. See what it does to you..

Your favorite artist is programming you with their music as we speak 👁

All of the #1 hits on the charts in today’s culture are all centered around toxic behaviors such as doing various drugs, disrespecting women/men, etc. 

Wake up & change your playlist every once and a while.. don’t let them program you with your favorite artist ..

👁So I recently returned back home from a trip with my Significant Other and her parents. We went to a family wedding for the weekend. I love my partner, but her Father's behaviour often annoys and angers me to no end. He is constantly angry and silent. We were away for four days and he talked to me once. Me and my partner always feel though he is judging us and we are constantly trying to read his mind because he never communicates anything he is feeling or thinking. My partner and I are very open and communicative so we find it jarring to spend so much time with someone who is the exact opposite. 

I was thinking about his behaviour after I returned and I discovered why it's so frustrating. He is judging other people without realising that everyone is just doing their best. Then the true realisation hit me. How can I say that but then double back and judge his behaviour? Even though his behaviour might anger me, he is doing his best. I can wish and complain all I want but it will not change anything about his behaviour. All I can is look to take care of myself and my own actions, his reactions are his choice. We are all doing our best, so people will only change if they want to. We can'f force them. 

I'm thankful for this experience. His behaviour was a large trigger for me because it reminded me in many ways of how I was treated as a child. But I see now that I just need to let go of my judgement of others. I can set boundaries and act in ways that I'm happy with. Love wins over judgement every time. Judgement gets me nowhere, love frees me and allows me to keep living life. 

God Bless :)I get so tired of constantly feeling depressed, anxious and things not working out in my favor. I feel like my constant negative thoughts just create all these problems in my life. I dont know what to do anymore. Mediation, affirmations, exercise, etc is no help. Only thing that helps me out my slump is weed for a few hours of course. I find myself begging my spirit guides to just take me. Earth is too difficult to manage for me...... anyone else? Any advice will help.does anybody else have this really intense weird feeling lately? it’s like insanely nervous, anxious, like something is terribly wrong. i feel like something huge (bad) is coming soon. i just can’t write it off anymore. it just doesn’t feel right. (edit: i’m really into astrology and it is way more intense of a feeling than mercury rx. retrograde probably doesn’t help tho).It’s not vit d deficits, I supplement properly during no sun and exercise.

It’s just crazy how noticeably different my thought patterns etc are.You were wrong to doubt yourself.  There was no need for it.  You knew what you needed to do along.  You knew what you felt, you knew where to go.  

But it's OK.  You're just a human.  It's OK. You're OK.  It's all OK.

And you're lovely.11:11Peace to you all ☮️Everything happens as it's meant to. Everything happens for a reason. We are not as powerful creators as God is. He knows what's best for us.My 8 yo is into composing his own rap songs, he calls it mumble rap? I'm afraid I don't know much about rap, but I sure like listening to him as I'm driving him from school. It doesn't rhyme, but that doesn't matter I think. I like the message he had today. 

"It's not about the labels."



It's not about the labels,


It's not about the looks.


I went to 7/11 the other day


And it was dirty looking and rusty


But I went in anyway,


And got a bag of Doritos. 


They were delicious! 


So I said, hey bro, let me help you clean up


So other people can come in and enjoy Doritos too. 


It's not about the labels. 


It's not about the looks. 

-------------
It's been another challenging day, but this rap hit the right key in my soul. 
I thought it was a good reminder to see past what we think that we see. Live fearlessly, and realize that while life's experiences include things that cause us pain, life in itself truly is what we make it. It's joyful if we chose joy. It's peaceful if we chose peace. And if you're not sure what to say or do - chose to uplift another soul. Can't go wrong with kindness. 


And Doritos are, indeed, delicious.Hey Soul Fam(‘:

Have you been trying to manifest but are struggling to see results or even progress? Manifesting seems pretty simple conceptually. Regardless, we tend to make it a lot more complicated than it needs to be. In my own journey I’ve faced many blocks when trying to manifest certain things or situations, and only with time and observation have I been able to identify what some of those blocks have been for me. I’ve identified 4 manifesting myths that I think anyone who is trying to manifest should know about and consider in their process. I hope that whoever comes across this finds it to be helpful, because identifying these myths and changing how I go about manifesting has truly helped me in my own journey, and I hope it does the same for you.

1. You always have to be positive
2. You have to fixate focus and obsess about your desire
3. Thoughts on their own create reality
4. You are in TOTAL control of your destiny 

Addressing these myths definitely took some work and time for me in my journey, but I do think that in essence, manifesting sabot knowing what your desire is, and taking it upon yourself to take on the role of the version of you that has already manifested that reality. Always practicing gratitude will enable you to resonate at the abundance vibration, and because of the fundamentals of the law of attraction, you will attract more abundance! Ultimately though, realizing that the Universe, Source energy, God, whatever you want to call it, as well as the intentions and energy of other powerful cosmic beings around you are all playing a part and have an influence on your experience is key. Be aware of your inner and outer environments, and always remember that things are working in your favor. Everything that has happened in your life and the lives of all who went before you, whether good or bad has brought you to this very moment, reading this very word. You are incredible, and as long as you don’t attach yourself too much to any outcome, things will unfold exactly as they need to.

If you want to hear more about these points, feel free to check out my most recent YouTube upload, I would really appreciate it. I’m almost at 500 subscribers, and I just want to say how incredibly grateful I am for every single person in this community for being so open to even hearing what I have to say. I appreciate the support I’ve received so much, but at the end of the day the reason I have a channel running is to simply share with you all thoughts and information that I think you would resonate with and find valuable.

YOU are so LOVED and APPRECIATED, and I am so thankful for each and every one of you.

Selfing you love, and positive vibrations,

⁃Vanessa aka 
The Cosmic Butterfly ॐ🦋 (on YouTube)If he didn't cheat on me, I wouldn't have started on my spiritual journey and learned about all the traumas that I'd been holding on to. And if I hadn't met him, I wouldn't have considered spirituality to be something I wanted for myself. So even though I'm hurting from everything that has happened, I am still... Grateful that he did come into my life and change it.
I can’t shake this creeping depression that comes back at least once a week about the nature of being human and having to work. I just want to enjoy my life and this human existence to the fullest without the need to always trying to make money, whether that’s via a job or trying to be successful with my own business. It still comes down with having to work in exchange for “freedom” and living life the way I desire. 

It feels like such a burden to spend time and energy trying to make money/be successful just so we can enjoy this human existence to the fullest. Sometimes I question if there is another way. There has to be? What am I missing? I just want to be free, does that make sense? Any insight or resources on this?I see people saying “I suck at meditating I get so distracted.” 

Now there are various types of meditation but the most popular is mindfulness, specifically meditating on the breath and for good reason. It’s fantastic. Though it’s hard to suck at. 

People say they suck because they struggle to not get distracted. In fact getting distracted is so off putting that some of us stop meditating or find meditating difficult. Let me tell you, meditating should be the most easy, difficult thing you ever do. If it’s just difficult you should tweak your technique by remembering the following:

Becoming distracted is good. In fact, meditation is in the act of meditating. That is to say, the returning to the breath is the whole practice and hence it should be revered. Being distracted is to be celebrated. Why? Because without returning to the breath there is no meditation. The whole practice is about catching yourself becoming distracted so you can return to the breath. Once you’re hella good the only difference is that you enter deep state between noticing thoughts where time and space seemingly disappear.

When you stop becoming disheartened and annoyed by distraction and instead be grateful for being given a chance to return to the breath then you will take huge leaps in your practice.

Enjoy your meditation it is beautiful. Embrace the distraction because where there is distraction there is meditation.

Namaste.Remember to reward yourself for progress emotionally and to FEEL that progress.

You’re becoming an entirely different person and that takes time.

It’s our job to be patient and loving with ourselves.

You’re so amazing for doing this.EDIT: thank you guys so much. You gave me some light. Please don't comment anymore because I've got an exam tommorow and I can't be tempted to check my phone.

I have had a horribly, horribly hard life. Currently I have schizophrenia and depression. I have had a brain injury, brain infection, bullying, no friends, isolation, physical abuse from my father.. Whatever I try to do it ends up horribly. I am so unlucky. I am asexual, which means I don't feel aroused when I'm suppoused to, I've never had sex despite trying many times but it always fell apart because my body doesn't work. This means I'll never have love or a family either because no sex is a dealbreaker for 99% people. Symptoms from my brain injury have been fucking with me lately, so has my depression. I am starting to think I'm not meant to be alive, like God has a plan for me to kill myself for my parents to learn and advance their souls. I am afraid he's gonna just keep throwing and throwing bullshit at me until I give up. Which, if nothing changes for the better, will be very, very soon.I put my headphones on my ears and listen to classical music or a relaxing voice with affirmations and later I do yogaDark night of the soul(ego loss) will happen again and again, sometimes a few times in a month, or even a week. 

Your spirit is constantly trying to shed off the excess, mainly egotistical attachments and worldly concern. Sitting in nature or meditating long enough, the full process of that shedding naturally happens. 

Flow and ego loss experiences give glimpses into the nature of the unfettered spirit. With enough glimpses, it blossoms into a deeper understanding of the ineffable nature of selfhood. 

Modern life forces us into acting out a persona to some degree. We play the persona and begin to believe we are the persona. Then you glimpse an ego loss experience and feel euphoria, you sense all new spiritual territory and there's a quick yet profound feeling of having attained some enlightenment.  

Then when the realization starts to truly set in that you're actually ineffable and you can never know yourself, there's panic and dark experiences of agonizing bewilderment that set in. Usually this results in reattaching to a previous persona. 

Too lazy, didn't read: maturing involves a lot of shedding.The paradox of our time in history is that we have taller buildings but shorter tempers, wider Freeways, but narrower viewpoints. We spend more, but have less, we buy more, but enjoy less. We have bigger houses and smaller families, more conveniences, but less time. We have more degrees but less sense, more knowledge, but less judgment, more experts, yet more problems, more medicine, but less wellness.

We drink too much, smoke too much, spend too recklessly, laugh too little, drive too fast, get too angry, stay up too late, get up too tired, read too little, watch TV too much, and pray too seldom.

We have multiplied our possessions, but reduced our values. We talk too much, love too seldom, and hate too often.

We've learned how to make a living, but not a life. We've added years to life not life to years. We've been all the way to the moon and back, but have trouble crossing the street to meet a new neighbor. We conquered outer space but not inner space. We've done larger things, but not better things.

We've cleaned up the air, but polluted the soul. We've conquered the atom, but not our prejudice. We write more, but learn less. We plan more, but accomplish less. We've learned to rush, but not to wait. We build more computers to hold more information, to produce more copies than ever, but we communicate less and less.

These are the times of fast foods and slow digestion, big men and small character, steep profits and shallow relationships. These are the days of two incomes but more divorce, fancier houses, but broken homes. These are days of quick trips, disposable diapers, throwaway morality, one night stands, overweight bodies, and pills that do everything from cheer, to quiet, to kill. It is a time when there is much in the showroom window and nothing in the stockroom. A time when technology can bring this letter to you, and a time when you can choose either to share this insight, or to just hit delete.

Remember to spend some time with your loved ones, because they are not going to be around forever.

Remember, say a kind word to someone who looks up to you in awe, because that little person soon will grow up and leave your side.

Remember, to give a warm hug to the one next to you, because that is the only treasure you can give with your heart and it doesn't cost a cent.

Remember, to say, 'I love you' to your partner and your loved ones, but most of all mean it. A kiss and an embrace will mend hurt when it comes from deep inside of you.

Remember to hold hands and cherish the moment for someday that person will not be there again.

Give time to love, give time to speak! And give time to share the precious thoughts in your mind.

And always remember, life is not measured by the number of breaths we take, but by those moments that take our breath away.



~  George Carlin

*John 4:16*

*And so we know and rely on the love God has for us. God is love. Whoever lives in love lives in God, and God in them.*



*The most powerful hallucinogen in this planet is called Love . Highly Addictive ! You will see and hear things that don't exist !* 

~  *Paulo Coelho*

*The truth of love is the truth of the universe : it is the lamp of the soul that reveals the secrets of darkness.*

~ *Kabir* 

*The Power Of LOVE is the Strongest Force In The Universe*

❤️Thank You for reading &
 have a Lovely Spiritual Day 🌞❤️Check my post history for a video. She stopped and looked straight at me for a while before running off. I’ve never even seen a deer in real life before this. Is there any spiritual meaning to something like this or is it just random nature doing it’s thing and I’m being stupid for feeling a connection?As you lay in bed tonight. Hold your quartz stone to your heart.
 Close your eyes and see a white light above the crown of your head. Have that white light travel down through your chest, going to your arms.
 Then see it travel down through your stomach area. Into your legs out through your feet and your toes.
 This is the white light of God.
 God is totally surrounding your body from head to toe now. 
Have a restful peaceful night.
 You're Angel's and God love you.For YEARS, I lived off of table scraps. Feeling like any “positive” thing I got from any person I loved was something special. Like it was the only thing I deserved. I had no idea how to love myself, just the thought of loving myself was asinine to me. 

“Table scraps are all I deserve.” 

But now? I give myself 7 course meals every damn day! I love me. I like me. I like being around me. I’m not afraid of me. I’m not afraid to truly love others. I’m not afraid to be loved by others. I feel and process every emotion, rather than a lifetime of suppressing them. It has been painful! But IT IS WORTH IT, AND IT DOES GET BETTER!!!It's not a weakness to look at someone and say "hey, this is me, the real me, take it or leave it".  It's not a weakness to be a little uncertain about how to feel or how to act.  It's not a weakness to be a little child-like... not the toughest, not the prettiest, not the most sexual... just a normal human being.

What's weakness is bravado.  "Look, I'm tough!  Like me!  Can't you see I'm enough? I will prove it to you!"  That's weakness.  That means that one is not confident enough in himself to just be as he is, without trying to put up any fronts.  

Sure, one might get rejected this way.  But at least the rejection is honest!  Even if you fool someone into liking you, how long can you keep playing the game?  What are you going to get out of an act?  A little sex?  An ego boost?  Is that really going to fulfill you?  And don't you think you will go a little mad putting all that effort into maintaining the illusion?

And who knows?  Everyone seems so certain of themselves.  When you approach someone child-like, innocent, just following your heart... and you're met with someone who seems to have everything together... it's normal to feel like you've done something wrong.  But it's just the conditioning.  Remember, that person is stuck in the same boat as you.   They are just as afraid of dropping their armor, they just may not be ready to admit it yet.

But who knows?  They may drop it.  If you feel affection towards them, it's OK to show it.  You never know where people are at.  There's only one way to find out.  If they reject you, that's OK.  It may just be their armor.  Or maybe they truly don't feel anything for you.  That's OK.  You can go on loving them as they are, or you can move on.  But never let their guardedness provoke the same attitude in you.  You go on being natural.  You go on dancing.  Remember, it's not weakness.  It's strength.

You don't need to force things.  Love is patient, very patient.  But it is true that there comes a time when you have to act.  You have to take a little risk.  You have to take the risk to be honest about what you feel.  Not because you need to prove anything, no.  But because if you truly want to experience love, *you've* got to jump out of your armor.  You have to take that leap.  Be patient, yes.  But when the time comes, leap!  

Remember, it's not even about the response you receive.  It's about you.  And if this person rejected, who knows?  The next one may not.  You just go on doing your dance.

It goes deeper too.  It's not strength to cling to an answer and act like you've got it all together.  If you truly do, great!  But always be honest.  If you are a mess, you are a mess.  There's nothing wrong with it.  Have the courage to face your mess.

It may be difficult at first, I know.  But the worst thing you can do is cut yourself off from life.  You may be able to forget your problems temporarily... but at the same time you are turning your back on love.

Never turn your back on love.You are God. You are the God of your reality. God split Themselves into different parts to create the universe. We are basically God interacting with themselves. Consciousness is projected outwards and becomes reality. Your imagination, your consciousness, your awareness, your I am ness is God and creates your reality.

You are a drop of water in an ocean that is God energy.

The source is within you. The spirit is within you. You can have anything you can feel is real. You can have anything you put your mind to. God says "Be" and it IS.   


Do not be a victim of your circumstances no more. You only created unwanted circumstances through your negative beliefs and programming due to a traumatic childhood. Change your beliefs into healthier beliefs more aligned with what you want and watch how your life changes. Think affirmations whenever a negative thought pops in, affirm the opposite! Watch how reality moulds to your thoughts!I live in a fairly small town and there is one bar that all of the university students go to on the weekend. I worked there for about a year, made a lot of friends with the regulars, and other people who worked in the industry and fell into the lifestyle that working in a bar comes with. 

I quit 3 months ago. I was unfulfilled, depressed and I hated the idea that I was contributing to a part of society that wasnt very productive. I could no longer entertain the idea of getting fucked up every weekend. I lost a lot of friends who I thought I was close with. I became depressed because i thought something was wrong with me for not wanting to go out, even sober.

I went out last night for a friend's birthday. I was reluctant to go but ended up going and just being sober. For the first time, I saw the bar and industry for what it was. I ran into a lot of the old crowd I used to hang out with. All I could feel was the hurt I knew they were carrying inside. I didnt feel as close to them anymore, and I know now it's because we bonded over suppressing negative and uncomfortable emotions by drinking all the time. I was not tempted to fall back into the life I once lived, in fact it made it easier to let go of that depression and FOMO I'd been feeling.

The spiritual awakening and self-love journey has been the most difficult thing I've ever gone through in my life. There are days where I feel insane and want to die. 

Last night I recognized how far I've come. Even though I'm not through it, seeing that progress gave me the strength to go on. 

If you're going through hell, keep going. Be kind to yourself and take a moment today to thank yourself for how wonderful you are and how far you've come.

NamasteOur beings are made of love, all creative force manifests through the vibration of love. When one looks around and sees suffering it can be overwhelming to see all the hardened hearts who never received the unconditional love they needed. It's enough to break my own heart, but I allow myself to feel it, the tragedy of the current human condition. 

We are in a place in time built on a stack of cards, where unfortunately we kept building on one side rather than evenly, which will eventually lead to a collapse. 

Please brothers and sisters, forgive each other because you cannot know the pain that causes others to act out until you see the pain in your own heart and know how to give that which was with us in the beginning. 

I know you, I forgive you, I love you.I don't really want to be, do I have an obligation to be alive? I don't think I chose this.I wonder..We do not “come into” this world; we come out of it, as leaves from a tree. As the ocean “waves,” the universe “peoples.” Every individual is an expression of the whole realm of nature, a unique action of the total universe.- Allan Watts from his book “The Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are”. I definitely suggest giving it a read. I’m only on page 3 and I’m loving it!keep in mind the struggle, hardship and suffering that your ancestors endured to get you to this point right now. Maybe it was the idea of you that kept them going. You are special. Let's not let them down.Anyone else? My spiritual psychosis and Kundalini awakening didn't make me go crazy; it made me realize that I and everyone else have always been utterly insane. This is an absolute circus. I wanna put on a good show, and make people smile. I have no interest in people "following my lead;" I just want to be so loudly and unapologetically myself that those around me literally cannot help but do the same. You are your only true "guru."

*Edit: I am not any more special than anyone else and know that. The fact that I can't say this for myself without being accused of saying I'm better than everyone else just goes to show where our world is at. YOU are just as capable of this as I am, and so is everyone else. Don't project your disbelief in your own power onto me, or do, all it does is speak on you though. You deserve to have faith in yourself. Me planning to get everyone that's hungry in touch with resources for food isn't harming anyone. I do wish to choose to risk my and only my life in my pursuit of universal harmony, and I have the free will to do so.*I've noticed a trend more and more as time goes on.

Those harbouring ideas/beliefs outside the norm keep feeling the need to preface their statements with this:

* **"I know this sounds a little woo woo, but..."**

Who are these anti-woo woo police anyway?

And why do so many feel ashamed about vocalising their more spiritual-sounding thoughts?

As a doctor by training, I was heavily grounded in the scientific method. And sadly, 'belief' plays little part in mainstream medicine today.

According to Western schools of thought, empiricism is king. It feels like we're only allowed to talk about that which we can see, feel, hear, touch or deduce by logic.

But I'm sick of being afraid to come across as 'woo woo' for some of my 'unscientific' ideas.

It even seems the term 'woo woo' itself has become derogatory.

With so many unanswered mysteries in this universe - dark matter, consciousness and quantum mechanics to name a few - who are we to judge each other for ideas that seem odd at first glance?

Remember, no one really has the faintest idea what this universe is and why we're here at all.

As long as nobody gets hurt, I try and be open to all schools of thought on interpreting the self, others and the universe.

The point isn't whether the ideas are inherently 'true'.

The point is how they benefit actual human beings.

As a species, we see the world through various narratives. It's how we're wired to draw meaning from the chaos.

Who am I to mock someone for the way they go about this?

Remember, not believing in anything at all is in itself a belief. It's braver put faith in something you cannot perceive.

In essence, we need to broaden our horizons and take ownership of our 'cookiness'. There's nothing wrong with being 'New Agey'. There's nothing wrong with being a spiritual person. There's nothing wrong with 'woo woo'.

At some level, we're all a little woo woo.

We all have beliefs we simply cannot verify through science - even if it's the very belief that we 'exist' in any sense at all (simulation theory anyone?)

I'd love to hear you guys' thoughts on this!

Thanks.I love you all! Yes, even those who have “self-described black souls”, everyone has a soul and they each deserve love- even if they feel unloveableI could make a whole nother post about how a lot of people only want to take advantage of you.  A lot of men use women for sex.  A lot of women use men for validation and emotional support.  All sorts of people will use you for your money, your car, etc.  These people are not your friends, and you don't have to treat them like your best friends.  You can be polite, but you don't have to waste any time getting together, opening up to them, doing them favors, etc.  And if you want them out of your life completely, in some cases that could be a good option, too.

But that's not exactly what I wanted to talk about here.  I wanted to talk about how as spiritual (and wounded) folk we tend to try to spread "love and light" to everybody who crosses our paths.  It's not always necessary.  It's not always more spiritual.  Not everybody is your friend.  I'm not just talking about people who try to take advantage of you, I also mean people you meet who you have a relationship via association with.

Your coworkers, for example.  You did not choose these people to be a part of your life.  It is a relationship by association.  Your teachers.  Your classmates.  Your in-laws.  You didn't choose to have a relationship with your in-laws, you choose to have it with your partner.  People you go to the gym with.  The cashier at your favorite store.

Don't get me wrong.  We can absolutely be friendly with all of these people!  For the sake of a healthy work environment, and hell, for the sake of having a little fun with the mundane tasks of life, it's quite important to be friendly to these folks!  I'm just saying it's OK to accept the fact that, in the end, these are relationships of necessity.  And that's fine!

I think accepting this fact actually makes all of our relationships *more* fulfilling.  It makes us more effective workers, because instead of wasting energy spreading fake "love and light" we can just get down to business and get done what needs to get done.  We don't need to feel bad about that.

And perhaps the most important point is that this makes *true* friendship more valuable.  When there's no longer any element of relationship via association, but rather a mutual willingness to share, love, grow, and spend time together... that makes for something genuinely special.

I most certainly encourage people to spread love and light in all areas of life.  Why not?  The world needs it.  And sometimes the lines can be blurred, and one can make a jump from a relationship of necessity to one of genuine sharing.  But I would also encourage everyone to be realistic.  Not everyone is our friend, and that's OK.  It seems to me we have much more love to give when we actually give it in a genuine way.  You know, in a way that our heart truly asks of us.

We can remove all the *should's* from the equation.  True love knows nothing of should.A year ago, I was working on Wall Street in the high-stress fast-paced lifestyle that I'm sure not many of us in this group aspire to live. 

While I didn't mind the work or the long hours, I felt empty inside. I wanted more for myself and my life, and that marked the beginning of a spiritual transformation. I set a goal to start a large venture-backed company that improves the lives of others.

I quit the Wall Street gig and very soon after I did, **my 23 year-old brother had his bone cancer come back after being in remission for 5 years**. The prognosis was poor, the cancer was expected to be aggressive, and my brother was no longer responding to traditional treatment. His doctors suggested entering a clinical trial.

Out of necessity, I dove into natural healing head first. I had to find my brother an answer. If I could believe that building a wildly successful company was possible for me, then surely healing my brother's cancer naturally felt like a reasonable first step.

We tried everything: diet, exercise, natural supplements, teas, IVs, detoxifying saunas, fasting and much more.

It was expensive, it was filled with constant anxiety and fear, it was a ton of effort, but it worked. His cancer has now shrunk 8 consecutive months without any conventional treatment during that time. His position is now considered stable and while the doctors can't explain it, they are also no longer recommending treatment. 

These events with my brother have allowed me to meditate on life's greatest questions: who am I? What's my purpose? What's anyone's purpose? What core beliefs do I have that aren't necessarily shared or are underappreciated by the rest of the world? What is the mind body connection, and how many chronic health conditions could be healed with the "placebo" effect of an improved mindset? 

With his situation stabilized, I've now begun to focus on building the company. For better or worse, I view the past year as the "blessing in disguise" I needed to achieve the non-consensus view of the world I once aspired to achieve.

While I have a very spiritual perspective now, I'm still very ambitious. I'm looking to connect with others who are like me - willing to follow their intuition and ask the big questions, but who are also driven and want to make a significant difference in the world. I'm looking for someone to cofound the next big unicorn company with me.  If this could describe you or someone you know, please definitely reach out. Thank you all, I appreciate you:)Would everyone take a moment to envision a map of India in your mind and just rays of pure love light there? I’m hoping the energy will help relieve some of the heartache. Maybe as a community we should attempt to do this for all countries during times of tragedy. The collective is so powerful and if we can touch just one person we will be doing good works for others. Blessings to you all and may peace , love and light fill your soul ❤️✨✨Yeah.  That’s it.I feel incredibly on the edge. One moment I feel anxious and the other moment I feel so energetic that I start dancing. Something in me wants to snap, explode, reach.
I can feel that something big is coming. I can feel it in my veins, cause my blood beats the same with the drums.
I also had a call for Hinduism. This is the second call I got in three years for any part of spirituality. 
Anyone feels like this? I see lots of people happy and peaceful for the 21st and it's good but I feel incredibly over the edge.The Angel Card for this week June 15 -21 is Archangel Sandalphon- The Angel of the Earth.
Know that your prayers have been answered. The universe is sending you love and many gifts for you to receive. He wants you to know that you deserve the best in life, you are worth it!. Open your arms and be willing to accept all the blessings He has instore for you.

New card reading coming every week.I’m tired of telling myself/being told to let go of my ego, my attachment to suffering, that our reality is shaped by our own thoughts etc. I already know them to be true yet here I am, stuck, and in a lot of pain.

I’ve too had periods of bliss where I felt in touch with the bigger picture of things, in the flow, full of love and gratitude. It was easy to give the advices that I torture myself with now because I connected with the truth.

But they’re not the truth right now. My current reality is that I know that I’m being doubtful, skeptical, angry, anxious but knowing isn’t enough to ease me out of this suffering. It’s my fault and not my fault at the same time.

I’m so tired of telling myself/being told that I’m doing it wrong and get dished out dismissive advice.

If I can’t help myself, who can? When suffering is so great and I’m the only person here in charge and I don’t know how to get out, is life even worth living?Did anyone else feel a wave of dark energy leave their body the second 2020 ended? Right at midnight it felt like a wave of bad energy left my body and I don’t know if it was just me.I just realized something. It's not about having the shiniest spiritual ego, knowing more than others or obsessively trying to reach a certain state, it's at its core being a good person, motivated by light and kindness. It's that simple. You don't have to rush to reach enlightement in this life, we have all the time in the world. But what I see on this subreddit about people being cold and arrogant about their spiritual growth is SO not what spirituality is about. Humbleness is so important. So is kindness.I just wanted everyone who sent me good vibes to know that I did end up finding a place to live that fits me perfectly! 

thank you all for the good vibes 🥺All the wealth, fame, and achievements disappear when we die. While they can be useful, they're not as important as becoming more spiritual.To the people who hurt and did wrong to me. I feel sooooooooooo relax and happy. Imma cry omg.the show is so universal that instead of predicting events, we are manifesting them through our collective conscious?Impact the world positively in some way

Expand your consciousness

Enjoy the experience of lifeLike, I'd be feeling at my worst and yet there's still a part of me that always sees through the play of it all and I'm just like ffs, can you at least let me be sad properly and in peace? Manz tryna cry out here smh!I saw a post on Instagram that triggered this post: https://www.instagram.com/dilute.the.power/p/CYYibWvpK3M/?utm_medium=copy_link

and I sat with plant medicine recently and someone was talking about going out into the real world and dealing with “muggles” 

I just think it’s so egotistical that just because you’ve “awoken” or that you are in the spiritual circles that you’re somehow better than everyone else. I feel like it creates the divide we’re trying to get rid of.

Editing to add: I really appreciate the discussion that I’ve been having with you all! It’s increased my perspective and helped me see the other side of the coin. I’m really humbled by the opportunity to talk in these safe spaces.We are way past the stage of growth where you can play a spiritual role in certain sacred environments, only to become the unconsciousness you attempt to purge from your field, whenever life doesn't go according to plan. Instead, we have arrived at a magnificent crossroads, where everyone can access the gifts of their highest potential, once showing their vibration replaces a need to debate or defend against the blind fury of personal belief. 

A highly-vibrating being responds to judgments with compliments, knowing a compliment is not given to those who have earned it, but freely offered to those whose behavior shows how deeply in need of love they happen to be. A highly-vibrating being knows the accusations of others merely reflect where an individual is in their journey. With no judgment toward their path or unconscious behavior, high vibrational beings know their own journey cannot be limited by the actions of others, but solely defined by how honorably and heart-centered they respond.

If they are unable to respond honorably, it merely suggests the perfect moment to make time to reconnect with their own innocence of heart by daring to love it at a more intimate level. A highly-vibrating being doesn't blame others for getting triggered, but internally appreciates the circumstance that only reveals deeper aspects to love, heal, and transform. 

A highly-vibrating being doesn't live in a world of enemies, but a universe of spiritual study partners. Equally so, they do not remain attached to stale relationships just for the sake of growth, when often times, the growth being offered is daring to forge a brand new path, once your heart says it's time to go.

Your life is a process of self-realization. Your consciousness is rising to a new level. You are maturing away from rationalization, fear, resistance, escape, commitment-phobia, ego-death paranoia, profaning the sacred. Your movement is toward creativity, joy, transcendence, contentment, insight, harmony, beauty, compassion, bliss, and High Power.

*To acquire knowledge, one must study; but to acquire wisdom, one must observe*

~ Marilyn vos SavantHappy Sunday Y'all!I'm a very spiritual person. I used to meditate heavily everyday, pray, read many mystic books, tried to contact my inner self and discover the vast spiritual world we can achieve in this life. Althrough i used to be very careful about myself and tried to keep my mind in the best conditions, i too fell ill to depression and anxiety-related problems. It was rough, and sometimes we think we're just too strong or well minded to ever develop these kind of illness, i thought i was kinda ''immune'' to it, and how arrogant i was to think liek that, but we never know when the problem hits, and if you ever feel bad or something wrong with you to the point you feel you need a therapist, don't hold back. Your well being is important for the practices, and material science is just as valid as spiritual science, its both our knowledges. Never forget that. Be good!I've been thinking about this for a while now, and now I'm almost certain that incarnating into this reality was the worst decision I've ever made. It will haunt me for eternity after I leave this reality, IF(!) I can even get out and don't have to come back over and over again. 

You have to work 1/3 of your day (sadly for some people even more), sleep away another 1/3 of your day, and the remaining another 1/3 is basically maintaining the body like cooking, eating, drinking, working out, showering, going to the toilet, house work... Very little time is available for quality spiritual progress. 

The body also can develop a lot of problems which worsens life quality, which in turn negatively affects spiritual progress. The body also feels heavy and unnatural in my opinion. I dislike being in a physical body a lot. 

I think physical existence is horrible! Why would any sane entity chose such an existence? The rare times I got to experience the Astral Plane made me realize how bad this reality truly is! A few hours spent in the Astral realm has more value and joy than a lifetime spent here. 

I just feel trapped here, doing things that have no meaning but take time and energy away, slowly sucking the life out of me... If I ever manage to finally get out, I don't think I'll ever be able to forgive myself for coming here, or the entity that made me come here if it wasn't my choice in the first place.Does anyone else feel like there is a strange “something big is coming” energy in the air? Almost as if we have to live through one more big depressive downturn before things change and suddenly get good *in a different way* almost like a collective awakening? 

For the past couple weeks the more I talk and listen to people they are increasingly anxious and depressed, but I also feel like it will pass soon. I’m trying to understand.Everyone deserves peace and loveAs humans, we all fall into the same trap of spreading negativity about others and voicing unloving opinions. It's only normal to find the things we hate in others and ourselves, but instead. The next time you have the opportunity to say something degrading about another human. Say something you love about them, even if it's small. You'll be willingly spreading love and forgiveness into the world.For real, we know everything is energy. These words have been so washed out by new ageists, they hardly have their original meaning anymore. If you start using them on every conversation, nobody pays attention to their meaning anymore, so do yourself a favour and stop, please. Please ;_;I finally actually meditated to a point where stuff actually started happening. During my Heart Chakra mediation i was sun gazing during a sunset and i felt a tingling heavy sensation in my chest area. As i moved towards the Third Eye meditation i swear i saw this moving force in the sky like a portal or aura. I don’t know if it was in the sky or around me but it was something. Has this happened to anyone else? Just wanted to share my experience.I don’t want to label myself belonging to a religion. I’m against religion and it’s teachings, however I want to have a personal relationship with Jesus and god without belonging to a religion. Is this possible? Ive been more spiritual in my life. I was brought up catholic but never really believed in it. however, I’ve always believed in god.I was a fan of Russell Brand from his movie "Get him to the Greek" 

But I had absolutely no idea how enlightened he is.

Iv been watching watching his YouTube channel all morning and I think he's reached one of the highest levels of consciousness 

Anyone else watch Russell Brand?Sometimes the longest connections yield very little growth, while the briefest encounters change everything.    

The heart doesn't wear a watch - its timeless. It doesn't care how long you know someone. It doesn't care if you had a 40 year anniversary if there is no juice in the connection.    

What the heart cares about is resonance. Resonance that opens it, resonance that enlivens it, resonance that calls it home.    

And when it finds it, the transformation begins.If it is that's really messed up.
I find myself when I'm really miserable seeking salvation and thinking Jesus might be it. Then i kinda of turn Christian for a day and snap out of it the next. I read the Bible and see the nasty things it says about homosexuals, the contradictions and just plain absolute nonsense. Some stuff in there really makes no sense and i don't get why god would make me so confused. 

Anyway, it seems like it feeds off of peoples desperate need for wanting some loving force out there. Either way, i do believe in something else but there's no real definite answers. 

It really makes me depressed and almost atheistic. 

I wish there was hope, i wish that miracles were real and that we all have a purpose, but with almost 9 billion people including animals and our habitats we can't help everyone. What does one do to know the truth?

Edit: to all the Jesus followers, i read the gospels and even the biblical Jesus can weird me out. If you're gonna cast out a demon why the fuck would you transfer them to thousands of pigs just for them to let the demons kill then. 

Real loving huh?I can feel myself moving on from the past and it feels... bittersweet. Maybe it is the fact that it all still feels very new. For years I would torture myself by replaying the memories, trying to come to conclusions about myself and the other people involved. I thought if I found THE conclusion, THE overall message of it all, I would finally let it all go. But the truth is, I am capable of finding infinite conclusions and infinite reasons. I am finally putting the thoughts away, closing the book. While yes, those memories still hurt, especially when I decide to relive them. But they are not my reality anymore. My realty is here and my reality is now.We all have been brought up to this conditioning that we are a person that is completely separate, different from others and alienated by the enviroment. It's a completely fake and illusory game. It absolutely stripped away the true innocence that is our nature.

But don't worry. You Now, have the ability to transcend this illusory identity and see what you truly are- beyond labels and beliefs. It all seems like a great game that Consciousness plays with itself. You are the vast, formless ocean of Consciousness, but it's not about this words, but about your experience. 

Investigate your true nature. Reclaim your natural purity and be eternaly free from all delusion. You have the power. It's not a question of effort, but of earnestness and honesty. It's actualy very easy and simple. Every Being may preffer his own concepts about the truth. But the truth- your true self- Freedom just simply Is here and now. It just effortlessly Is. It's very intimate, even closer than intimacy.

So, when you realise that it's already what you are, your old psychological  habbits will come to try to do persuade you that it's away from you and you must practice more... ect ect, but you simply see that this is pure nonsence. The mind will always try to come back and get your attention and identity, but you don't care. Literally forget about the mind and the mind will forget about you. You don't be afraid of any "mind attack" , because it cannot attack you, only the idea you have of yourself. Simply recognise your true position and stay as you are, quiet ever present Awareness. 

Thank you for rising in Consciousness ❤️ Love you.Wtf?  Can’t be a coincidence surely?1. You are where you are

2. The universe is unconditional love

3. Unconditional love is the answer

With these 3 truths you can connect a lot of dots. See what you find! 🙂 

Alright, so before we directly jump into the cold waters of how to increase your intelligence, we must first grasp what ‘***intelligence***’ actually is. There has been a lot of talks about the stereotypical intelligence and that’s what we all keep ranting about, but there’s more than it meets the eye, and consequently, I feel that the definition of ‘intelligence’ must be polished a tad. 

Is scoring good marks in school or college the real sign of intelligence? Does being the topper actually make one intelligent in life? Perhaps being all geeky or nerdy about something makes one an intelligent fella? Is thinking intelligence? If a person just keeps on thinking all day, then does it make him intelligent? Doing something without thinking at all is sheer stupidity, no doubt about it there. But even just thinking about something and forming a belief and acting on it the real intelligence? 

I have a lot to talk about intelligence and you can find the same down below:

[https://infinitians.com/increase-your-intelligence/](https://infinitians.com/increase-your-intelligence/)“To find out actually what takes place when you die you must

die. This isn't a joke. You must die - not physically but

psychologically, inwardly, die to the things you have cherished and

to the things you are bitter about. If you have died to one of your

pleasures, the smallest or the greatest, naturally, without any

enforcement or argument, then you will know what it means to die.

To die is to have a mind that is completely empty of itself, empty

of its daily longing, pleasure; and agonies. Death is a renewal, a

mutation, in which thought does not function at all because thought

is old. When there is death there is something totally new. Freedom

from the known is death, and then you are living.”

― Jiddu Krishnamurti, Freedom from the KnownOver the last 12 months, consciousness and mindfulness have taken me on a wonderful journey of self discovery and new perspectives.

This journey, however, seems to have come at a cost.

I am partly an introvert and always have been - but I also have a deep longing and need for close friends. This is due to a few reasons - the main one being I am an only child and a lonely one.
I have been through many different friendship groups and thought I had found where I belong about 5 years ago.

Fast forward to now: I am finally becoming the person I want to be and I put alot of my energy into art, recycling and introspection.
I have withdrawn from the relationships in my life that felt fake, shallow and negative.

I haven’t caught up with one person this year.
I have no friends.
The ones I did think were my friends are not.

I am rambling, I’m sorry.

I just feel lonely. I wish I had a friend who wanted to come around and paint or garden with me. :(My dad is coming toward the end of his life. My dad hurt me and my family a lot at certain points of our lives. He also brought us so much love and happiness. He is dysfunctional and he is unique and he is beautiful. 

I spent time seeing only good and denying the bad. I spent time in anger - only seeing the bad. 

Now finally, I see him for every part and all I have is love, for all of it. Not just the good - I genuinely love and accept and see beauty in every bit, as well as the whole. 

He taught me you can love someone for who they genuinely are, no matter how much darkness or light is there.Happy 11/11! May your day be full of other synchronisities and with the universe having your back ♥️All too true. What’s your best ways of combating anxiety and dropping unneeded fears in your life?Greetings. A Warning to those triggered by the complexities of 'good' and 'evil' and questions extended surrounding the topic - please take your leave. 

Not so much a question, but an observation. 

If (one subscribes to the notion of) an ultimate Supreme being, or core consciousness that encapsulates all existence and non-existence (giving it the domain of being EVERYTHING)

Then all beings (of both good and evil) exist within that consciousness and are therefore also this being.

This ultimate creator allows both darkness and light to exist. There is no fight, there is no VS battle - both sides are limbs of the same being. 

When you step away from duality - is Creator all shades of grey?

Did Creator itself cast down its consciousness to become what another spectrum of its consciousness (the Devil, Lucifer, Satan)?

Does this account for the question many ask to why 'a God wouldn't save the innocent from the atrocities of life' - because God is both sides acting upon itself. 

Is the key to life to balance both the light and dark within oneself instead if fighting one against the other?

Are religions of pure light and ignorance to darkness just as half baked as philosophies of pure darkness and malicious intent?

I wonder. 

And please - I am not in need of resuce into light and love. If you cannot extend your mind to ponder the complexities of a higher perspective of duality - kindly f*ck off.recently have been in a pretty bad spot. the past two years have been quite depressing and i really couldn’t give you a reason as to why. however, as im trying to find some even ground and explore my spirituality im feeling more loved than ever. i don’t need these things that i once relied on for entertainment. i now just want to exist. not attached to an app or my phone. i have deleted my instagram and snapchat and it feels right for once. i can say i made the right decision. wouldn’t have been possible with some lurking on this sub.Being grateful has been something that takes me a lot of effort, but I’ve found a way to quickly step into a spirit of gratitude. Start with the big things you know you NEED by saying “because I have ______, I feel ______ and I am able to ______, so I am grateful.” For example, “because I have music, I feel grounded and creative, and I am able to handle stress better, so I am grateful.” It helps to put a reason behind your gratefulness. And those reasons expand a sense of assurance and awe of the things you have been given.I think so, but of course *everything* is a part of God. In the same way an angel is distinguished from God, or even me and you are distinct individuals, "the Devil" is an archetype we've distinguished as something separate from God.Are you hurting? Well so am I. And so are so many people, we are NOT alone, simple as that. We all have pain, our life is a journey of constant changes, and sometimes changes can be painful. 

It’s time we normalize expressing our true emotions, and create space for one another to share those vulnerabilities. 

Wherever you are in life and with whatever your facing, don’t give up. You’ve survived your lowest days so far, and you sure as hell can again. Keep your head above water, remember the present moment is ALL we have, and focus finding happiness and joy in the simplest of things, whether it be the sun shining through the trees, or that funny pair of pants you are your neighbor rocking through the window. Give less fucks, life is king, strange, but also serving a larger purpose we can’t understand quite yet. Trust there is a larger plan working in your favor. 🤍

Let your emotions flow as they need to, we’re all healing here in this journey of life and you should be proud of how far you’ve come. 

May you be filled with so much love,

Nessa aka
-The Cosmic Butterfly 🦋ॐ (on YouTube)Could be just me.I’m a Leo, but mid afternoon yesterday, I had a crazy urge to clean haha. Later on, I broke a mirror and it shattered... I cleansed my room with an incense stick and proceeded to go to bed, but couldn’t sleep. I was restless the WHOLE night and had awful dreams. This isn’t normal for me, as I often sleep quite well. I’m not sure if this was an affect from the moon, or from breaking a mirror? I don’t feel like I have bad luck, but last night was definitely rough. Was anyone affected from the moon? If so, what is your sign and in what ways were you affected?🌈 In La'keshDo you ever have a day where you just can’t shake the feeling of unease? You just feel a little irritable, a little jealous, a little nervous, a little forlorn, you have no idea why, but try as you might, you just can’t shake it.

Well, I understand. I’ve been there! I was there, today. I just felt a little off & no matter how I tried to make space for the emotion and bring my awareness to it, I couldn’t come to terms with my state of being.

I realized why. No matter how much attention I tried to bring to the emotion, I was resisting it. I kept telling myself I didn’t /want/ to feel XYZ. XYZ was a “bad” emotion. I didn’t want to feel the way I did. 
 I resisted my emotion.

I decided to stop resisting. I said “well, if this is how I feel, so be it.” & tried to sit in that emotion. No judgement, no resistance. 

After some time, I realized something, the one thing that inspired this very post. 

It is so indescribably beautiful that we get to experience all these intricate emotions. 

Nostalgia, envy, unease, relief, peace, love, contempt, satisfaction, confusion, admiration, calmness

I mean EVERY single emotion can be so nuanced, and in its own particular way, beautiful. meaningful. They all serve a purpose. They are here to teach & guide us through life.

So please, stop judging yourself for your emotions. They are merely sign posts on the journey of life. Continue forward in the unshakable peace that you have as a conscious presence.

I love you ☀️I believe in you to stay strong with us, together no matter what.  I'll always stay strong for you and I promise to always keep trying even when I'm broken. For you. Just for you because you are all what matter. I really Love you and I'm really proud of you!Words are simply thoughts very roughly translated into language. Not everything needs to be written down, or rehearsed. Every day is a brand new day. You are constantly growing and becoming a better you. Feel your thoughts and emotions and push the negative and unneeded ones to the side, while pulling the positive ones to the center. Much loveMay you receive this blessing.Everytime I get angry and I'm at the point of "fuck people I'm being selfish from now on" they always make it a point to prove me wrong. 

Every single time!

I say "fuck people they suck I'm doing nothing for anybody" then minutes later someone comes to me needing something and I always help.

This morning I woke up venting to my spirit guides and told them basically go fuck yourselves I'm being selfish. Then someone dropped their wallet and I found it and returned it. I wanted to mind my business but they know I'm full of shit and I love people smh!! You win this time spirit guides 😂😂.Just wondering how other people keep themselves grounded because i know it's easy to get a bit carried away with all this especially if you're a newbie.I’m feeling very low and stressed today, worried I won’t be able to find a place to live in order to keep my new job, which could potentially change my life. I need a co-signer but I don’t have anyone. I spent some time in prayer just now, trying to rely on god, but my heart is just very sad and scared. I’m trying to believe things will work out as they are meant to, that light and love will fill my life and guide my way. I’d really appreciate prayers for a secure home space, provision, determination and peace of mind. Thank you so muchI’ve made some connections on Instagram, but it seems like they are always priming me for a sale, trying to get me in their masterclass, or to join their water machine team. It’s disappointing after feeling like you made a real connection. I totally get they need to make their money. But I wish there wasn’t so much of the fake-niceness leading to a sale and more genuine connections. Just curious if others experience this too. 🥺I have a history of avoiding conflict, and I’ve been pretty upset with a close friend of mine for a little while now. I was avoiding talking about it like the plague (not the current plague, the Black Death one). Meanwhile my mental health was going downhill, and I was feeling spiritually stagnant. I was depressed, having weird and uncomfortable dreams, I wasn’t getting as many synchronicities as I’m used to beyond the ever present angel numbers, but those only do so much. I just felt stuck.

Last night though I finally texted them and laid it all out. There’s some stuff to work through, but it’s all out in the open now. That sounds small, but it’s pretty big for me to start something like that unprompted. Getting it off my chest was grand enough, but then last night I had my first good dream in weeks and when I woke up my grandma told me that she’s GIVING ME A CAR!! A car that I desperately need right now. 

Thank you Grandma!!!!!

I feel amazing. Moral of the story, if there’s something you’re putting off that you know you need to do, just do it. Trust me.i recently applied for my old job for like the 3rd time here's hoping something good comes of it this time <3So I watched [this](https://twitter.com/janellychill/status/1249431015409541131?s=21) video that was going around on twitter and under the comments, the girl said it felt like the art was a part of her. Moving and breathing with her. And it reminded me of/confirmed an experience I had.  

When I was going through a very deep depression, there was a moment when I felt like God (or whatever higher being there is) came to visit me and tell me my ultimate purpose. It was the most overwhelming feeling of.....excitement?....I’m not sure how to describe it but it was a bubbling feeling that was overflowing from the inside out, the true definition of amazing. But a part of me thought it was my mental illness making things up and that I was just crazy. 
Not too long after that I went on a hike in the San Jacinto mountains and I stopped to sit on a boulder. I just sat and breathed and listened. Then that same overwhelming feeling came over me and I realized that everything is connected, I’m no more special than the next living being, we’re all one. And I cried because of how beautiful everything was, visuals and feeling. 

So basically, I feel like the video confirmed that I’m not crazy. That there is a creator, and that we are all one. And that no matter how you come to the conclusion; sober, under psychedelics, mentally unstable, whatever. It doesn’t invalidate anything.Ever since I learned of my true power through energy, vibration, and the soul it’s basically forcing me to make the best decisions. Every time I do a bad habit I instantly feel the negative effects, being at a high sober vibration makes everything else seem not as peaceful. I eat unhealthy, I lose energy and focus, I stay on my phone too long I get stupid thoughts and low motivation. With this being said, I hate to live in those states when I know a whole other beautiful and peaceful side exist. So In conclusion that has ultimately made me have to choose right decisions. These decisions are hard and difficult since I’ve been programmed a certain way for so long but it’s finally coming together. I will not stop working to my higher self, I will not let me and everyone who’s counting on me down. Love to all, sending good energy❤️Reality is just like a mirror. Change the inside and you can truly feel your power in this universe!I just feel like everything has been crap since the year started when I got a sign from the universe in the form of an animal. And now the only two things that were keeping me where I’m at are literally becoming ruined. How is this possible? I’ve known deep down for years that I need to change and do things differently. Now it seems like the universe or a higher being is *pushing me* to do so.Me and my girlfriend (in a lgbt relationship) have been together for almost 3 months now and literally clicked when we met. But every time we talk we accidentally manifest things to happen. At first it was a coincidence but then it started happening soo often that now its normal. We talk about someone- we randomly see them an hour later. If we say something we thought about, we see it the next day. This mainly just happens with us and its so crazy! We can’t find any answers on what it is or means. anyone have an idea or an answer ??I am not sure how I know, but, somewhere deep inside me, I know all this is for me.

For example, I went out on my deck one night a couple weeks ago. The moon was out and it was centered over our little pond which is centered right off our deck. It was a really clear night and you could see the dark side of the moon and make out a sphere. The stars were bright and shining.

It hit me, that this was a portrait created just for me. It was planned, timed and executed to perfection the moment I stepped into that deck.

My life is very much the same. I am so grateful for my family and my friends and for the beautiful Earth that we get to enjoy.

I've come to this place spiritually where I believe I am living the best possible version of my life. That belief is manifesting a reality I can only describe as heaven on earth.

Again, it has been planned, timed and executed to perfection.

It's really hard to convey what I get to experience. Beyond the everyday life, I also get to plug into these compounds from plants. They seem to impact me in ways other humans cannot imagine. I get to peak behind the veil of reality and just marvel in awestruck wonder at this amazing creation we have created. The complexity of our creation is matched only by it's beauty and grace. The human experience is driven by such an amazing, impossible, machine.

I feel very thankful to be me here now.

I know some of you feel the opposite or maybe somewhere in-between. I want you call to know that you will be here where I am, someday. You will get to the top of the mountain too. It's just a matter of time.

Anyway, I am feeling grateful and just really wanted to express it. Thank you for being my sounding board.

I wish you all well.If you feel like you are just beginning to learn about yourself and spirituality in general, you need to rest assured with the fact that this path you have chosen is not you learning new things, but remembering. 

For anyone who believes in past lives or reincarnation, this journey you are on today is the result of an infinite number of years in which you have been learning more about yourself, the world and each other. 

It may seem hard at first to nail down your meditation, to nail down your research and to figure everything out as fast as possible, but this journey is one which you have chosen to take as a spirit in the everlasting quest for true peace.

For some it may be easy to follow this path, and for others it will be harder, but you must take into account that you are just remembering things you have learned throughout your life as a spirit, and not learning them newly. 

Whilst we can learn new things in this life that we have never learned before, many of the things we find ourselves involved in can be attributed to many years of learning as a spirit, as we live through the lessons we have chosen for ourselves.

This one fact can be taken in our stride as we continue down our chosen paths, which are the paths we should be following.

Remember that the journey can often be better than the destination, as you continue to remember more details about why we are here and what we have come to accomplish. 

Peace ☮The amount of dejavus I experience is freaking me out. Not really. Im kinda getting used to it. I havent found anyone to explain a dejavu in a way that makes sense. 

AND WHATS UP WITH THOSE DEJAVUS THAT FEEL LIKE A DEJAVU IN ITSELF? 
I experience a dejavu of having had a dejavu. Sometimes i have the same dejavu MULTIPLE TIMES (4-5times) wtfGet back to the  present moment, accept as it is and move onThanks.Are you focused on one thing or the same things over and over? Do you compare things and judge things? Do you debate topics? You're using an analytical mind. An analytical mind has its role, it's a wonderful tool. But an analytical mind is like a laser pointer inside a 3d globe that pretty much looks at the same things every day, money, sex, competition, beauty, status, success. So your view of reality is fixated on small tiny facets of reality. When you turn that laser into a spotlight you start to see that there is a BIG picture. Blow the doors off your mind. Don't think you know a damn thing, because you don't. Live in wonder and awe, stop thinking and be mesmerized by what comes next. You're a child of a soul trapped in a body, you're scared of the unknown so you cling to what feels right, social conventions, trying to be right, predicting the future, and settling into routines. That is the coward in us, we either live in fear, or we live in hope, trying to prove we're better than the next. Once you stop needing the comfort you're free, you open your heart and mind and you see the lessons everywhere. All the pieces start to fit because you're using that flood light, absorbing the info. You can't change, and you can't learn if you have the same narrow view you've always had. Love you. 💚I see a lot of people sharing extremely personal spiritual experiences. 
That's fine.

However. Keep in mind that the internet is a stomping ground for energy vampires and gates to other unpleasant things. Sharing your experience online without hesitation may be opening you up to the bad energies you are concerned about. 

All things, through the glass, should be measured. Please be safe when opening your 'soul' to strangers, even anonymously. 

Have a good one, stay positive and strong. ❤Your task is not to seek for love, but merely to seek and find all the barriers within yourself that you have built against it.

The wound is the place where the Light enters you.

If you are irritated by every rub, how will your mirror be polished?

Yesterday I was clever, so I wanted to change the world. Today I am wise, so I am changing myself.

Silence is the language of god, all else is poor translation.

Everything in the universe is within you. Ask all from yourself.

Words are a pretext. It is the inner bond that draws one person to another, not words.

Be empty of worrying. Think of who created thought! Why do you stay in prison When the door is so wide open?

Two there are who are never satisfied -- the lover of the world and the lover of knowledge.

Respond to every call that excites your spirit.

You have to keep breaking your heart until it opens.

You are the universe in ecstatic motion.

When someone is counting out gold for you, don't look at your hands, or the gold. Look at the giver.We have an abusive family member who won't leave us alone. Please help me create a strong energetic boundary to protect us. I feel myself falling apart, and it's really scaring me...That you have roof over your head.

That you have food to eat.

That you are in a safe place.

That you have a job and earning money.

That you have people that love you.

That you have things that make your life easier such as phone, microwave, washing machine, lawn mower, constant electricity.

———————

Some of these things cannot be easily found and afforded in the other side of the world we’re living in right now. And by being thankful for little things we have, we raise our vibrations.

Sending love and light to whoever reads this.This happened to me a few years ago in a NYC train station. I was walking through the entrance and a homeless man approached me. I got a little nervous bc I often get approached by homeless people and I was told that they may use the money for drugs or alcohol and sometimes they really are trying to swindle you. But to my surprise he simply asked me if I could buy him a soda. Of course I told him yes and lead him to the McDonalds across the way.

When we got there I realized he might be hungry too so I asked him what he would like to eat. He smiled and I noticed he had no teeth, and he told me he had stomach issues so he asked for a sundae instead. I bought it for him with his soda and the whole thing came to about 9dollars and change with the stupid inflated prices. Whatever, I didn’t mind.

The grin on his face afterwards was enough of a reward for paying for his little meal.

As I went on my way and approached the machine to buy my ticket, I noticed the guy before me must have been in a rush and as he was running away, his change was spilling out.

By the time I made it up to the machine the man was out of sight, so I started counting the money. I immediately felt a violent chill run down my body as I realized that it was the exact amount of money I had spent on the homeless man’s food. Down to the penny.

I cried because I’m a crazy spiritual and highly sensitive person and thought immediately that it was God thanking me for taking care of his child and showing me that karma is *very* real. 

What do you think? 

I’ve realized that in order to experience great happiness, I must experience great pain. That is not to say life should be endless suffering, but life cannot be happy all the time, it is the dark moments in our lives which makes us appreciate the good ones. Of course , we as human, never want to experience unhappiness or great suffering, but the only reason we know we do not want to experience it is once we already have. We are a walking paradox. So don’t let fear stop you, try new things, get out of your comfort zone, let go of things that no longer serve you. Being afraid of being afraid will only make you build walls around you, and while you might not feel pain, you will also never experience happiness, because one cannot exist without the other. I agree that is probably one of the scariest things you will do in your life, but one day it will all make sense, and you will realize you did the most liberating thing you could have done for yourself. Take chances, take risks, live life to the fullest. Being brave is being scared and doing it anyway. You can do it. I can do it. Be brave. 

I love you.I’m just beyond shocked and grateful. 
I’ve always heard that when you open your heart and mind to the loving energy of the universe, things being to align. And boy, am I witnessing that today. 

<3I started doing affirmations before thanksgiving to prepare for 2020.

I didn’t realize how much resistance/denial/rejection I had believing some of the affirmations I was repeating verbally and mentally.

This is when I knew I had work to do.

I have started meditating more, patiently working on certain affirmations.

And like work in magic, I started to believe the affirmations I once doubted.

And my life started opening up.  I started opening up.  I am asking for what I need, and delivering on my commitments

My transformation truly began with affirmation exercises.I have a lot of negative energy in me.  Negative thoughts.  Pessimism, catastrophizing.  Anger, envy, frustration, social anxiety, anxiety in general.  General misery and dissatisfaction with the life I've created and continue to live.  I live a very isolated life and I'm pretty self-centered.

What are some techniques (meditation, journaling) or some philosophies that might help to mitigate this?

I was raised Catholic and went through with confirmation but soon became disillusioned with that.  I like Zen Buddhism and Hermeticism for personal philosophies now. 

I'm lucky to have some good friends who I can see have deeper peace and love just looking them in the eyes.  Often it makes me feel inferior and that I'm going to push them away with my awfulness.The purpose of meditation is to “become present” or to “connect to your presence”, your beingness, your aliveness, your existence and to RECOGNIZE this beautiful existence as all their truly is within this NOW moment.

There’s a few things I’d like to point out that will dramatically help you save time and remove struggle or self-judgment from your spiritual journey instantaneously.

1. Realize you’re (always already) present.

You can’t turn off presence (awareness is another word for this), it’s always functioning.

It’s like a constant, 24-7 spy cam that’s always noticing everything that happens in your life.

It’s like the ocean itself feeling it’s waves rising and falling each moment.

It’s like the sun bathing the earth in a constant warm light, sometimes a piece of the earth is facing the sun and in the light and sometimes it’s not and darkness descends upon it—but the sun is always shining on some surface of it.

It’s like sunlight shining on your face, sometimes it’s cloudy and you can’t see the light but there’s a dimness filtering through, other times it’s very sunny and warm.

You’re always existing, even when you’re asleep... when you awaken, there’s a subtle knowingness as to whether you’ve had a good sleep or not and you can remember having been asleep.

2. Every experience is simply more confirmation of presence and existence.

Every experience you have is like a firework exploding in the vast, endless night sky of your existence—the night sky being your “awareness/presence.”

An experience is made up of presence, which is what makes up everything in existence. 

It is the fabric of reality itself.

An experience also has 3 parts to it:
1. Sensory—what you can see, hear, touch, smell and taste about this experience.
2. Thoughts—what you think about this experience, what you believe it means, what you assume about it, what you like or dislike about it.
3. Emotions—how you’re feeling about this experience.

When we’re present to this NOW moment and connected to our presence, sensory becomes the dominant side of experience because the mental side (thinking) is completely made up.

It’s a little story we’re telling ourselves about what’s happening and what we believe it all means.

All of these thoughts are just more fireworks exploding in the night sky of your awareness.

They’re bright and vivid but eventually they disappear into the endlessness that is the sky.

And they don’t actually consume the sky itself, they are taking place within the space of it.

We can choose to emphasize and place our attention on the story side of experience or the presence side of experience which lacks thought and is extremely powerful, peaceful and relieving.

Throughout every experience, our emotional guidance system is letting us know whether how we’re thinking about this experience is in or out of alignment with how our higher self is viewing this experience.

So, if we feel terrible... what we’re actually feeling isn’t “the truth” but simply distance.

We’re feeling that we’re far away from the actual truth of things and our built in spiritual hardware is letting us know how far away we are and how twisted this perception of reality is by how terrible or amazing we’re feeling about it.

Presence/awareness feels amazing when we relax into it by relaxing our perception or perspective of the world and start emphasizing the fact we exist and that’s all there is.

It’s inherently peaceful and rejuvenating.

The story we tell ourselves and any perceived meanings or definitions is what causes us suffering.

They don’t actually exist except in our heads.

Our environment isn’t screaming out how true our thoughts are, your ceiling isn’t yelling out “Yeah! That’s right! That’s exactly what this means!”

They will never paint onto us a story, we can only paint onto it a story or narrative.

When we throw the metaphorical bucket of water (awareness/presence) onto experience—the story washes away and what’s left is bliss.

Each moment we can choose to focus and emphasize the fireworks (experiences) or the night sky (presence/awareness).

I recommend choosing to focus on the night sky, especially if you’re dealing with something extremely negative, intense or uncomfortable.

3. Don’t bash yourself for “getting it” and “losing it” or having clarity and losing clarity, or being enlightened and being unconsciousness.

Realize that you’re not supposed to know the entirety of existence or infinity because it’s typically not relevant to your Human experience.

You are a Human being AND infinity itself.

However, you came here for a purpose: to expand creation in a unique and individualized way that has never before been seen or created.

It would be useless to realize yourself at your highest level at all times and “freeze” yourself there in that omniscient state of all knowingness permanently because your purpose for creating this unique expression of yourself (Human being) would then be rendered void.

Your purpose is to live your life in the most loving and exciting way possible.

Following your inspiration and enjoying your life.

Listening to your heart’s desires and passions.

There would be no point for you (infinity) to experience infinity (on THAT level) because it already does that on its own level of existence.

It would defeat the whole purpose of being a Human being, which is to experience the infinite ways infinity exists through your unique point of view, through your unique expression.

And furthermore, honoring this “unconscious” part of yourself, which is actually never unconscious, is extremely important and valid because it’s the whole reason that you’re a Human being (and it too is made up of presence/awareness).

A secretary and a CEO can’t both have the same position at a company, if everyone became the CEO—the entire organization would fall apart.

Each part of you has a divine purpose.

You don’t have to become enlightened and exist 24/7 in infinity because a part of you already does that.

Your purpose is to be yourself naturally and fully.

Your purpose is to love yourself and listen to your heart and trust yourself.

Your purpose is to realize your higher self is ALWAYS taking care of you and guiding you through your excitement, inspiration and passions.

And finally, you never stop being present.

If we revisit any “negative experience” in your life where you were unconscious or bad or didn’t do the right thing or were short tempered or something bad happened to you or something else—a deeper part of you was indeed present and aware of everything that was happening and taking place in that moment.

You didn’t stop existing in that moment.

Your awareness of the fact you were existing didn’t vanish.

Your awareness that you were being “bad” or this experience was happening didn’t vanish.

You were existing long before whatever experience you were having happened.

See?

You’re always already present.

And even when you’re unconscious, you’re still present on a deeper level—you’re always aware of everything that’s happening.

That’s your divinity, your eternal nature.

Honor, respect and be grateful for that unconsciousness which helps you in so many ways to learn valuable mistakes, grow and thrive as a Human being.

You’re not here to be perfect, you’re here to be you.

So please love yourself, please integrate these valuable lessons and please stop judging yourself for being present or not.

Start embracing your life fully and fearlessly.

Start acting on your passions and excitement.

This world is your playground.I need your help making 3PM Eastern Time (NYC) new international meditation hour. The world must know that this is the best time to meditate. Why? Because they unlock the power of synchronized meditations. If the world agrees on a time, there is never any planning. It is set in stone, always. You can then tune in whenever you feel like it. I really believe it would be extremely powerful.

Edit: I created a website if you are interested in sharing it. Lets make this thing official. Lets aim big and make it something that the whole planet knows about.

[https://spark.adobe.com/page/Q8SlDnLqy1Lyk/](https://spark.adobe.com/page/Q8SlDnLqy1Lyk/)

&#x200B;

Synchronized meditations are extremely powerful. I have established a schedule that will allow people from the United States to Brazil to England to Italy to Russia to all participate together at the same time. The time will be 3 PM ET (NYC) **every day**. Check your time zone. It starts 3/20/2020.

* 12 PM Pacific Time
* 1 PM Mountain Time
* 2 PM Central Time
* 3 PM Eastern Time
* 4 PM Brazil Time
* 7 PM London Time
* 8 PM Berlin, France, Italy Time
* 10 PM Moscow Time

Meditations are as long or short as you prefer. The main goal is getting everyone together at the same time. You can choose to meditate for a few minutes, or for two hours. Its totally up to you! They are self guided so no need to go online. 

I would love some help spreading the word on this. If you have ideas on how to get more people involved let me know in the comments!It's like, some days I have an epiphany about something or a realization about the universe and feel more enlightened or aware, but at the same time I am depressed/sad. It's almost as if the suffering makes us more spiritually evolved. Or perhaps it's the other way around - becoming more aware makes us more miserable.

I can feel myself growing as a person, and yet I am in the darkest depths of despair at the same time.

Not sure if anyone else has experienced this, thought I'd ask.

Edit: Thank you so much for all of the replies, guys. It really makes me feel less alone :) Hopefully there will be a light at the end of the tunnel not just for me, but for everyone else who feels the same way.I’ve had this question for a while, everyone’s like oh you just HAVE to die a natural death but seriously who came up with that rule? Yeah yeah I get it the earth experience is a gift you should cherish and all that jazz, but it’s my life is it not? If I say hey I think my time is it up why can’t I just get it over with? Why must I hear lectures over why I shouldn’t and why I should just wait till “my time” because I feel as thought my time is when I decide . I would just like someone to enlighten and explain to me why I can’t just do it? and no I’m not saying I am going to do it now or anytime soon I just think I should be able to die whenever I want whether it be natural, intentional, or an accidentI mean music like old eminem, korn. 

I struggle enjoying positive music, music with negative energy gives me energy for some reason. 

I am always friendly and polite towards others though, so it has never really affected me on the outside. Not sure if it plays a role subconsciously perhaps.***11 Affirmations for Attracting the Love You Desire***

1. I am Worthy of Being Loved.
2. I Deserve a Partner That Loves & Respects Me.
3. I Love and Accept All of Me.
4. I am Worthy of Love and Appreciation.
5. I am Deserving of Forgiveness and Compassion.
6. I am Love and I Attract Love into My Life.
7. I am Ready for True Mature Love.
8. I Choose to Heal and Move Forward from Anyone That Has Hurt Me in the Past.
9. My Heart is Open to Giving and Receiving Love.
10. I am Deserving of Love.
11. I Will Bring the Right Person into My Life.So I was thinking about how during meditation, when you try to be still and quiet the ego thoughts it just gets louder at first to draw you back to the things you “need” to worry about. It made me think about how social media algorithms do the same thing, when you stop using an app for a bit they’ll send every notification possible to get you to come back and pay attention to content. 

I’m very into anything simulation theory so I think it’s a fun way to think about the ego. Just like how we know the ego develops around childhood, learning our environment and the people around us, “installing” this information as to how we should behave or how we should live our life. Just like social media learning how to get you to click or what content you view most to keep you attached. 

And you could think of silencing the ego like, hey I can just turn these notifications off. I don’t have to pay attention to every notification I’m sent. 

I hope that makes sense! Im sure this has already been brought up before I’m curious to hear more thoughts on it!You are going to have so much success in 2021. Things have already begun to shift in your favor. Everything you’ve been doing this year was the building blocks and foundation for something great. Speak it into existence for yourself and be ready to receive.

Write ***I Claim it*** to let the Universe know your thoughts. 🙌

I write about angel numbers and their meanings. The following post link explains the reason behind seeing the number 33 and its inferred meaning.

[Seeing 33 Meaning](https://enlightenmentu.com/33-angel-number/)I’m not quite sure if this is the place to post it, but I’ve been apart of this community for a while now and genuinely enjoy/seek advice from those within the community. But have any of you given up on society’s definition of love and been OK with it? Like just been ok with not wanting a marriage or kids and be fine with it. I just personally feel as though this phenomenon is quite common, just not discussed as much or looked down on since that’s how we were conditioned in the world. Everyone wants to be married nowadays, and some I’ve noticed even at the sake of their own happiness and personal pursuit (maybe that is their pursuit in this life, who knows?). Just wanted to hear your thoughts.https://www.chakras.info/wp-content/uploads/root-chakra-healing-chart.jpg

#Root Chakra:

Over the next couple weeks, I hope to present the seven major chakras for both education and to maintain my own. This is absolutely a discussion, share your techniques, experiences, and knowledge about the chakras discussed.

I have to be blunt, you don't need to believe any of this to benefit from this work. It's strictly common sense stuff, wellness, quality of life and health.

#Begin always with the root:

In essence, root chakra is centered about physical security, basic needs, and basic health. Other chakras overlap, so don't get too hung up on the details.

It's most important to grounding and centering. Without a strong root, the rest of the chakras will suffer, though it's not impossible to have other strong chakras with a weak root, imagine how strong they could be if you took care of this first. Therefore, root should always be the first considered and maintained.

#Home: 

A warm bed and shelter from the elements is the best you could hope for. Sleeping under a cardboard box, in your car, or with constant fear of eviction are all considered blockages here. 

Uncomfortable sleeping space, poor sleep, insomnia, sleep apnea, interrupted sleep, are blockages too, so do what you can to work on these.

Freezing or overheating, excessive loud noise, uneasy vibration, these aren't great, but some of them will have to be accepted, nature itself isn't perfect.

Vermin, filth, mold, trash, clutter, foul odor, excessive noise, (poor chi), drafts, and security issues will be blockages as well. Do what you can to resolve them. For those you can't resolve easily, accept your progress and move on, don't dwell. Don't give up either, but don't let it block your chakras, stop worrying, have a plan, write it down, set a reminder, then forget about it when you go about your day.

#Food and water:

It goes without saying that if you don't have access to clean water or not enough nutrition, you will have issues with root. Just like a plant's roots, you need water and nutrients to thrive.

I like to think if you have these needs met, you shouldn't have anything to worry about, but if you continue to worry, that will keep you from having clear chakras. There's always something to worry about, so try to accept that and be calm, sated, and confident in your root so that you have the best chance to overcome any of life's challenges.

#How's your chakra doing?

Let's evaluate you. If you have any of these symptoms, there's work to do.

"...anxiety, suspicion, and withdrawing..."

"...hoarding, workaholism, greed, and anger..."

In addition to these you must have your basic needs met.

#So you might have a blockage, what now?

Root is my favorite because it's about comfort and security, feeling comfortable, rooted and grounded, a state close to zen is the goal here. There's no real thinking required. Just chill. Relax.

You can exercise this by taking a nice warm bath or shower, listening to harmonious music or white noise, taking a walk in nature, and calming breathing exercises.

If you can find a nice grassy field, (sand, mud, even dry ground can be nice) take off your shoes and socks and just connect to the Earth. By connecting skin to Earth in this way, you are as close to earth as possible and this in itself can be recharging and literally grounding.

Visualization is a great way to do this as well. There's nothing wrong with imagining yourself in the field, or imagining yourself in a calm relaxed place, it's good practice because in today's society we can't always take the time to go for a hike, and there aren't many nice grassy fields that you would feel safe walking barefoot in the city, but in your mindspace you can go anywhere instantly and spend those five to fifty minutes alone in your mind, communing with nature or relaxing. If you have contact with spirit guides, bring them along, they love to be thought of, and the act of visualizating them can help in many ways. They just might surprise you.

Even if you're perfect, if you do a little bit of this every day, you're well on your way to having a clear root, and this foundation will help the other chakra work immensely.

♡

Next is Sacral:

https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/fzk84l/the_sacral_chakra_your_next_step_on_the_path_to/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share

Solar Plexus:

https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/ggeiwc/solar_plexus_chakra_be_powerful_and_purposeful/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share

Heart:

https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/ghl7n3/heart_chakra_the_ultimate_power_of_humankind/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share

Throat:

https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/gm1tvz/throat_chakra_your_manifestation_of_truth/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share

Third Eye:

https://www.reddit.com/r/spirituality/comments/gmp2yu/the_third_eye_divine_knowledge_of_self/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share

Crown: Coming Soon

References:

https://www.chakras.info/root-chakra-healing/

https://lonerwolf.com/root-chakra-healing/

https://www.thelawofattraction.com/root-chakra-healing/**We become what we think.**

**We think in words and we live our life by those words.**

If you think negative thoughts all the time, then your whole life will turn negative.

That’s why it’s critical that you change all of your negative thoughts to positive thoughts.

If you observe negative people you will soon realize that almost all of the words that come from their mouths are negative.

That means they think negative words constantly. They feel bad because they are constantly negative.

Even if they try to do something positive, things just always tend to turn out negative for them.

That’s why you must start thinking positive thoughts if you want to start attracting positive things.

That’s how the law of attraction works or at least that how it has always worked for me.

I can’t and I won’t teach you things that I have not personally used.

I can only tell how the law of attraction has worked for me and I hope you can **implement my success into your life.**

**Here is how I have used the law of attraction to attract more health, wealth, love and happiness into my life…**

**STEP 1**

The first thing I did was I stopped listening to the news. The majority of the news is almost always negative.

Humans are drawn to negativity because when we evolved we had to pay attention to all the bad and negative things so we wouldn’t die.

For example, if someone had died after eating a berry, we had to know what happened so we wouldn’t make the same mistake.

The news channels feed off our negativity bias because they know that they will get more eyeballs with negativity.

They don’t care how negative thinking destroys our dreams and hopes. They just want the money.

**STEP 2**

The second thing I did was I Googled photos of my goals and printed them on my wall.

For example, I printed a picture of my soulmate. It took one year to manifest my soulmate and she looked exactly the same as in the photo that I used to manifest her.

In the picture that I printed, my soulmate had brown hair and she was standing in front of a bookshelf.

Well, my soulmate has brown hair and she has a lot of bookshelves in her home.

I also imagined that my soulmate would be Sagittarius or Leo because I’m Aquarius and I get really well with those two horoscopes.

Well, it turns out that my soulmate is Sagittarius…

**STEP 3**

The next thing I did was write down my goals.

**Writing down your goals is incredibly powerful…**

The idea is that you write down all of your goals as precisely as you can.

You have to be incredibly precise because if you are not precise, then you will attract random things into your life.

For example, I imagined my soulmate in front of a bookshelf because I like reading science books and I would like to discuss and read science books with my soulmate.

But I never wrote down what kind of books my soulmate liked to read, I just wrote that she likes to read.

So it turns out that she reads a lot of manga, not science books!

If you want something specific, be really specific!

**STEP 4**

After completing all the steps the last thing I did was believe.

**This final step is crucial.**

You have to believe that you are going to live your dream life.

The world will try to test you but you must not give up.

You have to keep believing because that is the only way.

You have to take a leap of fate.

I hope that my story and these tips will inspire you to take action!

Start manifesting your dream life today with these positive affirmations, I believe in you 100%!

Smiles & Hugs,  
\-Kalle, Perfect Affirmations

>*Believe in your dreams.*Typically I don’t give much thought into numbers or synchronities but this was something really amazing and quite interesting.

Here's the song by the way for those who are curious! It's from a video game called deltarune which is amazing and also has a deep connection with me.
https://soundcloud.com/tobyfox-music/big-shotThat sentence, “Trying to stay positive” Is used time and time again when we’re experiencing a situation we do not want to be in. Our conditioned knee-jerk reaction is to avoid what we’re feeling; Especially when you’re in discomfort. The body-mind has been designed to protect you. Yet there is another way. 

Next time you’re in pain, suffering, or in a situation that you’re mind deems as unpleasant. Sit with it, breathe into it, don’t resist, simply allow. This is how you transmute whatever is coming up in your life.

I spent the past three months going through this roller coaster ride of pain and suffering. Resisting where my life is taking me. Allowing the change to move through me. To go up against my own fears and paradigms/limiting beliefs. And it’s been completely exhausting. However, I’m coming through it now and I feel like a completely different person.

I wanted to share this message you this morning, Since I know there are other people - on this beautiful planet - going through the great changes that life brings.

Part of the spiritual journey is feeling everything you’re going through..Especially when times get tough, These are the times that bring upon the greatest change in our lives…

Love you all ❤️To care about other human beings. It’s so hard sometimes. 

There are moments- brief windows of time when I experience this poignant, bittersweet connection to every living creature on the planet. True unconditional love and compassion for my neighbors, all strangers, even my enemies (though I don’t have “enemies” at this age, just personalities I avoid). And those windows are.......painful in their own right, because I know they are unsustainable. And they fill me with regret for so many lost opportunities. All the times I didn’t love harder. Give more. Wasn’t better. Because it’s so obvious in that brief transcendental glimpse that every time we withhold, every time we lash out in contempt, every rejection is the product of our own terror. 

And then it’s gone.....again. I can’t dredge up that emotional memory and view my fellow humans through the same loving, compassionate lens, despite my spiritual beliefs. And it makes me feel a little defective. As if I should. As if I’m always chasing the tail end of this breakthrough that has the ability to change my life. But until then, I’m just numb and tired. 

I didn’t think I would be this way when I got older. I didn’t expect to be so misanthropic and asocial. Those closest to me are precious....I love them with every cell of my being.....but I just feel so.....worn thin. Really thread bare. Having this human experience in this dimension. Because people frequently choose to not be that good to each other right out the gate. 

I don’t need advice or a pep talk. I just wanted to vent. I just had to admit that there are moments- often, even- when I really can not stand other human beings and I am a constant work in progress.Not minding what happens is the essence of meditation and spirituality, it is allowing everything to be as it is, with no resistance. This doesn't mean that you don't act or speak up or just become a doormat, this is more about an inner openness to life. It's about accepting whichever form the present moment takes.

I really love the quote in the title because if you understand it, it's very simple and intuitive and it can allow us to let go of trying to control things. Problems only arise because we mind what happens.

If you're interested, the quote is from [this video.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0G5sKBgiLqg)YOU ARE THE INTELLIGENCE OF THE UNIVERSE, STOP PLAYING YOURSELF SMALL, YOU ARE LITERALLY THIS INFINITE AND FREE, IMPERSONAL UNIVERSE. TO NOT SEE THIS IS SIMPLYA DELUSION APPEARING IN THAT WHICH IS INFINITE, FREE AND IMPERSONAL.

That which appears to go on a journey is just another thought perceived by that infinite intelligence that will inevitably perceive it. You are that perceiving intelligence. Right now. In this moment. You are the soul. There is nothing intelligent in this universe other than that which is true and present and it is the only intelligence there will ever be - the intelligence of the universe. Nothing can escape it. There is no way you are an entity separate from it. That is pure delusion.

That which believes it is separate, is merely another thought appearing in it. The thoughts are here to take you on a seeming journey, but the truth is ever-present and it is what you truly are, what you are is already beyond any journey and has no "lessons to learn" etc these are all egoic-mind created concepts, god has no lessons to learn and this is his playground but we must wake up from our perspective of seeing this world personally and therefore creating unnecessary suffering.

\- Sebastian KeyJust a reminder that, despite all the BS, and suffering, and confusion and pain and strife...

Things get better.

It's not some pipe dream.

I haven't become a millionaire.  I haven't become a famous rock star.  I haven't gotten everything I ever wanted and far from it.

But I have gotten peace, and joy.  And on a deeper level than I ever could have imagined.

There's still problems but I can't help but think that the worst is over.  No matter what life throws my way, I'm in touch with something that can't be touched.  I truly believe that.

And I'm grateful for my past, because it shows me that if I can get through that, then I can get through anything.

It's funny, because it was totally counter-intuitive to what I had always thought.  It wasn't about trying harder, or doing better.  That never worked for me.

It was just about surrendering, accepting, loving, trusting...

And somehow, so many miracles have come my way.  I call them miracles, because if I tried to explain how I did it, well, I couldn't.  Because I didn't do it.

Have a wonderful evening, folks.I had a very rough day today when a situation at work didn’t go the way I wanted or expected it to. While driving this evening, I asked for a sign that things are going to be OK. Not two minutes later, I found myself behind a car with a license plate that read “ITS WELL.” 

It’s not feeling that way yet, but hopefully it will soon. 😊Currently reading about diving timing and this question came to mind. 
If people get exactly what they need when they need it, why do some people receive constant suffering.Edit: please do not assume that I am not in treatment for my preexisting and properly assigned diagnoses. Me rejecting diagnoses I was very irresponsibly given without full evaluation by someone not on my regular health team is not the same as me being in psychotic denial. I am safe.

Edit: anti psychiatry is not anti mental health care-- it is anti industrialized abusive mental health care. Stop invalidating psych abuse survivors with your privileged "but meds worked for me" bullshit (it's very "not all men" esque, not a good look), especially if you haven't nearly lost your life due to a lifetime of psychs being irresponsible or a nightmare hospitalization experience. 

More coming soon, will edit... Overall I'm just processing a lot after discovering that I "have" psychosis and schizoaffective and/or schizotypal disorder(s). 

I'm noticing that the diagnostic criteria to these disorders are largely based on an inability and/or unwillingness to adapt to the status quo.  

I guess it "could be the psychosis talking," but I'm really starting to get sick and fucking tired of the fact that anyone who notices that people are more than human and have divine power or that society is legitimately built to harm people is labeled as psychotic and is then crippled under that label. 

Sometimes I feel like me refusing my diagnostic labels is what societal improvement is depending on, like I have to be the one to not crumble under the weight of being labeled as insane for seeing the truth and stop this bullshit once and for all. 

Of course, all this does is concern the people around me who are comfortable in this hellscape... I'm the problem because I refuse to see a trauma-farm of a society as acceptable to the point where I'm willing to sacrifice my life if that's what it takes to change it and get it to stop harming people. 

It is starting to become apparent to me that recognizing the evil and bullshit behind our societal systems has been demonized very intentionally. Get too close to the truth and you're called schizophrenic.The only thing you can do is to inspire others heal themselves.I would never let myself buy big plants. 

I felt like I needed to grow them to that size on my own to be deserving of having long, dangly plants or big, full plants.. Like I had to "earn" them to deserve them.

Turns out... I deserve to have big, gorgeous, full plants JUST because I want/appreciate them!

The same goes for self-worth, love, and abundance.. I deserve these things just because I exist.

We don't have to "earn" love, we ARE love.

I plan on buying many, many more large plants in the future. Just because I love them. LolFrom the beginning we're taught a certain etiquette.

"Don't say that, that's impolite." "Don't do that, that's rude." 

We're taught a compassion that doesn't arise from us... we're taught to fake it.  "Love thy neighbor". 

We're taught to be productive and competitive.  "Don't be lazy, you'll need to get a good job.  Don't be a painter.  Don't be a poet.  Don't meditate."

We're taught that our emotions are wrong.  "Man up!  Don't cry!"  "Anger?  That's a sin!" "Joy?  That's mania, that's ego!"

We're taught that closeness is wrong.  "No sex before marriage."  Or on the opposite extreme, "Sex and only sex, never let anyone get close!"

We're taught to wear a mask, all in the name of some silly etiquette based on fear.  For generations and generations we've been acting this way, and what have we achieved?  Nothing!  Just misery and more misery.

It's no wonder we're so wounded.  From day 1 we are denied the unconditional love that we so desperately need.  We are taught to condemn ourselves, to hate ourselves, to constantly strive to do better.  

But once we start learning to be natural again, then the grieving process begins.  Then healing begins.

And then we can love.  Because you can't love that which is false.  Sometimes the truth is uncertain, uncomfortable, and even frightening... but it is the truth.  

And the truth of our existence, of this human experience is so deeply beautiful.  When I see the fragility of it all, when I see that my life is just a blink in existence... yet here I am anyway - living, loving, rejoicing...  it moves me deeply.

I don't believe there is any meaning to life.  But when you are moved in this way, you know that it doesn't need one.I went to India in February just after my girlfriend broke up with me. Finally realized I had to look inwards not at outer factors for reasons I ended up in misery all the time. I don't know why I wanted so badly to go to India, I never ever thought of it before. But it was a great move, no doubt.

The trip inwards however started for real when I arrived home. Things I cannot explain happened in India that made me realize things. It almost happened over night and after it happened I came to understanding with so many things. Not intellectual but on a deeper level. My body, mind and soul is in harmony and I feel home wherever I am. 

I don't look at life, myself or others the same way as before. All the anxiety and depression is gone and if I feel anxiety is on its raise I take a deep breath and it fades away (I can almost see it). I have stop taking medication, eg. Valium after years of use. I don't take problems so dead serious anymore and think alot more rational.

When it comes to people I see through their masks. I can see every part of the ego and how its struggling. I see when people get mad and how their face expression changes when someone offends them. I don't see people as thier masks because it is just that, a mask. Instead I feel their true self, a vibrating energy of light. And we are all the same, everyone is equal.

I cannot get angry at the same way anymore at people (or myself). I had quite of a temper but it's gone and I just smile inside me at the whole drama. A smile of love and compassion. Sometimes (rarely) when I am not centered I get angry but I soon gather myself and become grounded and happy again. All of this has changed my relationships with people. Some couldn't continue, but most has become so much better and deeper. I have so much fun now now with my friends and I feel that that is really the meaning of it all.

Also, I don't look so much at the physical apparence anymore. It's not relevant, because it is in fact just a temporary vessel. Instead I see the inner beauty, beyond the mask. This means I don't see people in a sexual way anymore, at least not as much as before. It's not a problem at all however. In fact it's a blessing and my life is so much easier now. But for sure it has changed.

So many other things has changed too. I naturally stopped drinking alcohol, smoking cigarettes and so forth. My creativity has increased massivly. I have for sure become alot more interested in spiruality, and finally I understand books at a deep level (eg. Be here now by Ram Dass). People with the same interest pop up in my life and it's like life is telling me to walk this path. 

I don't talk about this with people other than some friends who understand. I don't want to identify myself as a spiritual person either, because it's a trap of the ego and can easily become an attachment as anything else.

Can someone relate? I have read about this but never talked to someone who has same/similar experiences.

❤️🙏The Ram Dass IG shared this beautiful quote, and it resonated with me. We're all going through various degrees of stress, while the society around us goes through a collective dark night of the soul. 

These are challenging times. I thought someone else out there could use these beautiful words to be reminded, as I was, that everything that presents itself to us is our curriculum, as Ram Dass put it. 

I hope everyone is alright and taking care of themselves. Patience and compassion for our egos is needed while they go through a challenging time. That's self care. 

[https://imgur.com/a/hEv1W7A](https://imgur.com/a/hEv1W7A) One thinks as if possessions, relations, techniques can give one stability, stable relief. Can you see that you are already relieved unless in immediate physical danger? Now you may use possessions, operate with relations and so on to live.

One feels threatened when one faces physical danger, danger to one’s life. Whole energy is concentrated in saving oneself from danger.

 Apart from immediate physical danger, all dangers are psychological discomforts. Can one see this? One feels threatened on facing psychological danger (loss, defame, relationship problems and so on) and reacts to run away from this discomfort by solaces, explanations. Energy is dissipated.

 Can one bear, absorb this threat as it arises? When you are alive, you can bear, absorb any psychological threat, discomfort. You are open to the limitless field.As the Sun and the New Moon both fall in fixed fire sign Leo, you can begin to finally see the pure, potent magic that is within you. Regardless of the turmoil you have faced recently, you feel a shift within that you can’t even explain – and you don’t have to. You suddenly see the things in life that allow you to embrace your creativity and joy. Abundance is flowing in the air as you are opening yourself up to the version of you that you have been trying to become. You are actively choosing to push back your own limiting beliefs, inner critic, and perfectionism. You are exactly where you need to be and feel as though you have all the time, energy, and resources to make your vision come to life. Take time to appreciate all your accomplishments, give gratitude for everything that got you to this point. It’s easy to get down on yourself sometimes but remember how you constantly picked yourself back up, dusted yourself off, and moved forward. That is magic. Allow the world to see and feel your magic, let them embrace it, learn from it, and be inspired by it. That magic that has been hidden and repressed within you, terrified to let others see what a force you are inside is emerging. Ready or not, the Lion’s out of the cage. How will you respond to your own roar?

You can read the rest of the monthly forecast [here](https://www.ascendifi.com/post/astrology-almanac-august-2021)I’ve been doing some inner-child healing lately, and boy, it is tough. It mostly sucks because it feels as though you have to fix what someone else broke for you. And personally, I find that whenever I feel upset or unhappy about a situation, it’s accompanied with guilt, like I don’t deserve to feel that way or shouldn’t say anything. But everyone deserves to speak their mind, it’s a birthright. So, here are some things that I have found helpful on this journey that I hope will help those who are looking to heal their inner-child as well ❤️:

1- Take some time to meditate, and see what memory or situation you find your mind taking you to. Imagine yourself as the child in that situation, the younger version of you. And take that child aside and ask them what you can do for them. Ask them how they feel, what they need and tell them that you are now there for them. 

2- Whenever you’re going through something difficult or painful, take some time to meditate and visit your inner-child and spend time with them. Show them love and hold them and tell them that you are there with them, right beside them. Tell them you love them, from the bottom of your heart.

3- Understand that although there are some parts in your life that have left you wounded, you deserve to be happy. You are worthy and deserving. It doesn’t matter how long your healing journey takes, healing isn’t linear. Take your time, explore all your needs and make sure that you fully understand them.

4- I like to always ask myself “Why?”, whatever the situation or problem may be, just keep asking yourself why. Why do you feel that way? Why is that situation bothering you? Why did you react that way? Eventually, you’ll find it easier to get to the bottom of it and figure out how to handle it better.

5- Learn to be comfortable in solitude, as you are never truly alone, ever. No one is alone. There are so many people that care about you and love you, even if you are not aware of it. The universe has your back. 

A lot of the time, when we lash out or act a certain way, it is because of the environment our inner-child grew up in. But this is okay ^_^ you’ve got this. You will pull through, in fact, you are already getting there. I hope that this was helpful to someone

Love prevails all ♡So my dad passed away when I was about 12/13. The day of his funeral my mom had told me that if I ever find a dime on heads, that he is around. Later that day I was walking around the neighborhood with some friends. For some odd reason I had this strange urge to look down at the ground. Guess what I found? In this little hole in the road there was a dime on heads. I still get chills to this day thinking about it. I always say “hey dad” when I find one. And I ALWAYS scratch lottery tickets with a dime too (that was his bad habit lol) It’s the little things in life :)
When you’re doing what you love most in life, then you realize what your spirit came to this earth to do.The reason I believe this is because of a medium that my mom swore was the real deal. He was apparently able to talk to lost loved ones, angels, and occasionally the spirit guides of the client. After some reluctance I accepted my moms offer to go see him as a gift for my 23rd bday. During the end of the session I spoke of a voice that I heard clear as day when I was 17. After mentioning the three words that were said to me the medium told me that sometimes he can feel the presence of a guide. He told me my guide stepped in. As his eyes were closed and he was channeling my guide, my guide started telling me, "You've heard of the heavens right? Well imagine yourself beyond the heavens." He started talking about how I had been beyond the heavens which didn't make sense at the time. I always thought heaven was at the tip top of the scale. After I saw this medium I began to ask more questions and came across that I've been to the seventh dimension and that a lot of us had. The strangest thing was that I did all of this before I even knew there were 12 dimensions of consciousness. The 3rd was us, the 4th seemed like a transitional dimension(possibly right on par with astral projection), the description of the 5th dimension clicked as heaven with me, and then when I got to the 7th dimension I read about planetary mission work. It also clicked with me as reincarnation. At the 7th dimension we travel to help raise the consciousness of a planet in the body of the species we are trying to help. All the sudden the beyond made sense to me. My spirit guide knew that it would be understood later. Does this resonate with anyone?How can I do this? How can I differentiate this especially when I’m an emotional masochist?The ego death that is sought is only attained by surrender. 

Ego only exists within fear. 

Surrender fear and live in the present moment and ego is dissolved. 

Make choices based on the information at hand for the situation with your heart, and love will fulfill your life. 

If you feel struggles with ego do not try and squash it, ask it what it wants and ask why. 

Answer the why and watch the ego float away. 

Surrender to life and ego is dissolved, surrender to the flow and ego is washed away.For as long as I can remember, I've believed in getting signs from the universe - like the right song coming on the radio at the right time, things that couldn't just be coincidences - stuff like that. But recently I had my best ever and I thought this group would appreciate it. 

A very dear friend of mine passed away almost 3 years ago. It was a week after the last time I saw her, at my wedding. Her death absolutely tore me apart, and it took me almost a year (and therapy and SSRIs) to begin to recover. I've never known pain like that.

She had just finished medical school and was a pediatrician. She was an advocate for moms and babies and a champion for breastfeeding. I admired so much about her. She left behind her husband and two year old son. 

And now I'm pregnant for the first time - with twins! Throughout the pregnancy I've been so sad that I can't share this time with her. I've wanted to call her or send her photos countless times. In some ways it makes me feel closer to her, and in some ways she seems even farther away. 

A few weeks ago I went in for my nuchal translucency (NT) exam, which checks for potential abnormalities in the fetuses. It's a big deal exam, and it was the first time I was visiting the high-risk doctors who are assisting with monitoring my pregnancy. I was nervous and my husband wasn't able to be there. 

I settled onto the table and started chatting with the funny, kind technician who was doing the exam. Then I glanced over and saw her name tag - she has the same first name and last initial as my friend who passed away. I teared up immediately, but I don't think she could tell because of my mask. The enormity of it wasn't lost on me at all. It truly felt like my friend was watching over me through that exam, which had perfect results. And now every time I start to get anxious about the unknowns of the pregnancy, I remember that my friend is watching and guiding and protecting us. 

By far the best sign from the universe I've ever received.I feel lighter and my brain feels free, like I have a lot of space now. I ignorantly thought when people say “write out and you’ll feel better” was b.s. 

The urge to do it today came over me and I’m grateful. If you haven’t done it, try it out!I’ve noticed that recently there seems to be a bit of heaviness in the air lately, and whether that be because of astrological shifts or even sifts in collective human consciousness, I wanted to reach out to those of you that may be  little dragged down by it to remember that you are not alone. There is balance in every aspect of life, and right now it seems that we are all in some sort of valley rather than at a high point, but this too shall pass and I believe that a beautiful transformation for humanity is just around the corner. It is up to each of us to determine how we will take upon these transformations ourselves. 

This sort of heavy energy to me signifies the need to purge out habits, thoughts, and situations that no longer serve us. I believe that we as a collective have the power to create an entirely new reality and further move into an entirely new timeline as long as we remain open to these changes, and let ourselves truly come out of our cocoons, as cosmic butterflies who have found their purpose, and pursue it. Our purpose in life is to find our purpose, and I want to encourage everyone who may be reading this to remember how incredibly unique and special you are. You have a unique set of talents and drives that make you you. So embrace them, and let the song within you be heard.

If you are looking for a bit of inspiration today, and a reminder that you are not alone, check out my most recent video. It is hard to show myself to the world in such a raw state, but I want to share my honest, and unfiltered thoughts with anyone who is open enough to hear it. You are incredible and you are loved my friend!!

I hope that your day is full of blessings, comfort, healing, and love.

⁃The Cosmic Butterfly (On YouTube!) 🦋✨I don’t know what it’s been, but I have completely not been able to sleep at all this week. I let go of my habits and started eating like shit. I started thinking negatively. I would get irritated at the smallest things. And all of this came all of a sudden. Is this just happening to me or is it perhaps because of the lunar eclipse that’s coming up?Serious question, I’m not trying to be funny. Plants are believed to feel pain, and they are as alive as we are, they just operate in different timeframes. If you do a Timelapse of plants and fungus, you see they coming to life. So if it’s not ok to eat animals, how is it okay to eat plants ?I think people are clinging onto the beliefs that every pain they went through was for their spiritual growth, thus it means something and everything happens for a reason. Without that belief, many people's life would become one painful nothing. (though I think it's completely ok)

I wish all the pain and trauma I went through were for my spiritual growth, but the more aware I become, the more I realize that many traumas and abuses exist to block our spiritual growth.

When you teach someone, you tell them what to learn, and sometime give them rewards, sometimes whip them with a twig or something. You don't beat someone with baseball bat to 'teach' them some important lesson.

Of course you might think 'we should use baseball bat to teach some seriously important lessons to mundane souls'. But you know, it's more like manipulation, not a teaching. It's called 'conditioning' 'controlling' through pain and torture, completely ignoring our free will.

If someone has to get tied up in the chair and get constantly beaten up with baseball bat for decades, do you think they'll 'learn' something? Or do you think they're gonna become a psychopath serial killer?

What really taught me about spirituality was good people, good experiences, not pain or abuse.

There were good people in my life though I don't know how I deserved them, anyway they existed.

Most of them were strangers, like they just popped out of nowhere, helped me, then disappeared from my life. It baffled me because I don't know where did they just appear from, why were they so nice to me, and why did they disappear like that overnight?

If angels exist, maybe angels sent them to me for short time, to teach me what is love, forgiveness, what's like to be alive, how to open my mind to better things. They taught me it's ok to be myself.

Abusers and bad people in my life only fueled hatred and frustration in me. They didn't help me grow up spiritually, they destroyed my soul.

Do you really believe all the pain and bad people in your life were necessary for you, or you just wanna believe, need to believe, that everything happens for a reason? Because if pain was just pain, it means big part of your life was wasted.

But I think it's ok that big part of our life was nothing. It's ok as it is, we should just move on. Why does everything have to have meanings?

Edit: I appreciate all the comments whether you agree with me or not, I'm sorry for not being able to reply to all comments, it's simply my lack of energy because it takes a lot of time to make one reply to each comment. I want you to know I appreciate all the discussions and I read all your comments. I opened my third eye a month ago. Whenever, I go to the supermarket. I can feel strong low energy coming from shelves containing meat. Especialy, coming from the beef meat and pork meat. Chicken meat and fish meat hold a medium amount dark energy. But, I don't feel that low energy coming from eggs.  When I have gone to the restaurant. This time, I have seen a dark energy emeting from my steak. It was 3 time it volume. Now, I try to eat less meat as possible.I've posted this before, I'm posting it again.  Because I think it's important.  I will receive the usual criticisms:

"Focus on yourself, this is so negative!"

To which I will say: firstly, if this bothers you, then perhaps you haven't fully realized your potential.  That's OK.  We're all human.  Honesty helps.

Secondly, it's very important to realize this.  If you think that everyone is living amazing, wonderful lives, and the world is just sunshine and roses all the time, well, you're out of touch with something fundamental.  The mediocrity is in our conditioning, we're not allowed to shine, or love, or dance, or sing (deeply), and that's why nobody does it.  A child doesn't think that way.  But little by little a child learns that, well, if nobody else is doing it, it must be impossible.  But it's not!

So it's important to realize the way things are in order to break out of the conditioning.

The next criticism is usually "that's not true, people are generally happy!"

I don't know.  Maybe some people.  But not most.  People suffer deeply.  They are emotionally stunted.  Their lives have no meaning.  They surrender to dogma and/or routine.  At best they have a nice family and a well-paying job, and live humble lives surrounded by their loved ones.  That's the best case scenario.  But most people don't even manage that.

We're all carrying around so much potential.  Life could be so beautiful.  We could love, we could dance, we could sing, we could rejoice.  Not in every waking moment, no, that's not life.  But the overall take on life could be one of celebration.

It just takes a little bit of courage.  You just have to follow your heart.

Most people are afraid, though, so they never do it.

PS: As for the people saying "life is wonderful, life is perfect all the time"... that is another sort of lie.  **If you like this post follow me on** r/Crimsonpill

Hey guys,

I wanted to share since I see many guys wondering how love works. I think its all about having a healthy attitude.I know this seems like a bandwagon post but for about the last week I’ve been irritable, always tired, and for some reason REALLY angry. I’ve been getting angry over literally the smallest things and I don’t know why it’s happening. Is there something going on astrologically that I don’t know about and is anyone else feeling like this??When I sense it I feel immense love from one human to another like humanity love, belonging to the human race. A sense of duty to care take each other’s well being maybe.We are filled with judgements, biases, and preconceived notions.  When someone mouths off in public, we say "geez what a bitch".  We don't see the horrible day she just had.  We don't see her abusive upbringing.  We don't see all the horrible things that led to her acting that way.  No.  We see what we want to see.

When someone makes a mistake, we say "what an idiot" or "what an asshole".  We don't see how hard he has been struggling to find meaning in life.  We don't see his recent suicide attempt.  We don't see the money he donated to charity last week because he wanted to put some good into the world.  No.  We see what we want to see.

And what do we want to see?  We want to see something that confirms our belief about ourselves, which is that we are powerful, in control, and strong.  We don't want to admit that we are fragile.  Human.  Imperfect.  Weak. Scared.  Hurt.  No, maybe other people.   But not us.  We're strong.  And if other people make mistakes, it must be because they haven't been trying hard enough.

You see, as soon as we concede another person their humanity, we are also forced to concede it to ourselves.  In admitting that they are weak, fragile, and simply doing the best that they can, we must also admit that *we* are fragile, weak, and doing the best that we can.  In admitting that they are hurt and lost, we must admit, too, that we are hurt and lost.  It can be very uncomfortable.  So instead of seeing that person for who he or she truly is, we make up a story about them, despite all evidence to the contrary.  We don't actually listen.

This is why we are all so miserable: because we don't know ourselves. We've never taken an honest look. We are afraid.  And it's normal to be afraid.  To admit that we are hurt, lost, and not as powerful as we thought is very, very scary.  It means letting down our armor.  Surrendering control.  Being vulnerable.  Who knows what could happen?  It's a very scary prospect.

But sooner or later one decides that the truth is worth it.  Because falsehood is miserable.  Armor is miserable.  It may keep the bad out, but it keeps the good out, too.  How can you ever love with armor on?  How can you ever be free?  It is simply impossible.

People go on missing one another.  They condemn, judge, shame, and hate.  And it is all because they themselves have been too scared to remove their own armor.  It is a beautiful day when one realizes this and decides to take the responsibility for it.  It is the first step towards true love.I just realized. This guy worked his ass off to create someone better, and then practically commited psychological suicide to take all of his demons down with him. I barely remember what it felt like to be depressed and addicted and to have the psychological disorders that I had.

In honor of your past self who jumped ship just so you would stay afloat, you better keep sailing for your promised land.

Edit: Love your reactions. Seeing how others are lit up by my words and actions lights me up as well. :)Seriously, this is it. Don't punish yourself over unproven, mythical hypotheticals of the future. It's ok to be content just now. Let that other fanciful stuff go and what is left? Live now.You are literally a piece of the universe taking into account the Big Bang or any religion. You are part of the bigger picture, and so the bigger picture is within you.

You are a piece of the universe so you hold the universe within yourself. This world, this whole universe is a representation of your inner self. Your perspective dictates your reality, your perception dictates what you take in, need it be positive or negative, you’re the one perceiving it.

If we want change within this reality, it literally starts with changing yourself. If you truly want change you must change. This reality represents you on the inside. If you heal yourself inside you’re doing your part to heal the universe as a whole because you are a part of the universe and you literally hold the universe within yourself, even if it is just a part.RIP to my great grandpa. Passed away last night at 96 years old. So grateful I was able to see him beforehand.I know pics aren’t allowed but I was just strolling through a neighborhood today just to take a walk and came across this Buddha statue out of nowhere.

I just took a picture and I was surprised at what I took.

https://imgur.com/gallery/elZA787anxiety: the root chakra. a disconnection with the nature of the earth comes in synchronicity with living in modern western society. we desire physical possessions such as money and excess for feelings of security and safety. money is a symbol of security; and we love what makes us feel safe. however, numbers are infinite. we can never reach a point of equilibrium. we can never be rich enough, young enough, popular enough, beautiful enough, etc.

security comes through reconnection with pure nature. grounding, returning to our roots, returning home, feeling safe at home. home is earth, mum is earth. when we feel safe in our home, we feel safe in our bodies. we realise we need less to survive. we can enjoy the moment and earth for what it is without needing to take something from it in order to feel secure.Think of yourself and your life, and reflect on all your experiences, feelings, emotions, thoughts, fantasies, etc.

Then realize that every person who has ever lived has lived through all of it just like you. The difference? Different place, culture, upbringing, different environmental and genetic factors. Maybe they were smarter or dumber, uglier or more attractive, "luckier" or always in the wrong place at the wrong time.

Sometimes when I walk down the street and I make eye contact with someone, I think to myself "wow, they are seeing me just as I see them (all emotions and experiences out of it), from their point of view the perspective is the only difference."

This life appears to be a gigantic mesh of probability or some sort of mathematical function, where we are a single input making our way through a dynamic and ever changing environment. What are we? Any thoughts? Are we simply a consciousness? Are we a spirit?The world is going through a crisis, but with everything there is a polarity... China is seeing blue skies due to lack of pollution, Italians are singing from balconies to keep spirits high and I am sure there are millions of micro human interactions where people are looking out for elderly neighbours and much more... What other changes can be adopted for the better? More working from home - reducing pollution? Doctors doing consultations via video or calls - reducing the spread of disease? More community spirit? More grow your own? More positivity? More mindfulness? More humanity? More personal responsibility? 

I am a firm believer the tech is the Yang to spirituality & natures' Yin, that good grows from bad. With balance of polarities the world can embrace a new way to be less wasteful, more productive, more balanced, more advance and in-tune way of life, that brings communities back together. 

Be the change that makes the world a better place. Be aware. Be clean. Be safe. What are you views? Do you agree? 🌛🌕🌜💋‪If you realized how powerful your thoughts are, you would never think a negative thought again.‬

Once you’ve gained control of your thoughts and feelings, there is absolutely nothing in your life that you cannot change or improve.

All things are possible when you believe.

Be happy now. Feel good now. That’s the only thing you have to do.

Make it a goal to see the best in everyone and the best will come back to you.

Permanent happiness comes from your choosing to be permanently happy. When you choose happiness, then you attract all happy things.

Don't wait until you get to the point where you can't take it anymore before you make a change. Change your life now.Can we all just take a minute. 

&#x200B;

I know it's been all the talk on spirituality forums and everyone knows there's some sort of "big event" happening or "something brewing" but what the SHIT.

&#x200B;

There's a part of me that is totally on board with all of this. Knows that we are stepping into the truth collectively and it is fucking beautiful. Shifting from 3D restrictions to 5D. This reality's gonna be becoming less and less dense. You know the drill. Shit's awesome. Knows that the 24/7 deja vu I've been experiencing is me ascending in vibration, above a 3D, linear perception of time. Knows that reality is a soup in which we navigate through the manipulation of our individual vibration. Knows that there is probably a malevolent force which aims at keeping us "in the system" by making us forget about that nature. Knows that there is probably a ton of starseeds and lightworkers instilling light into Gaia right now in order to aid in the planet's collective ascension.

&#x200B;

BUT WHAT THE FUCK. There's still a very 3D me that looks at myself as a literal nutjob. What?!?!?!? I know for a fact all of this is real; the synchronicities have been "in your face, fuck you, look at the true nature of reality" status for a long time. Shit I'd regard as literal miracles... like nearly daily. Months. Y'all would not believe the shit I've been experiencing. At least the me literally like a year ago wouldn't, I know many of you know exactly what I'm talking about, but FuuUuuUUck. It's everywhere, on every subreddit. WE ARE FUCKING WAKING UP. I have the chills as I write this.Anyone else? My ego still has a grip on me. I have these profound moments and then minutes later I'm back to worrying about something I said, or how I look or what will happen next week. I really want to be beyond this stage now. Any advice appreciated.I can’t enjoy them anymore. Like why would I watch anything that’s attempting to instill fear into me and now also knowing that it portrays the exact opposite of the spirit realm. It just doesn’t do anything for me anymore. It doesn’t entertain me. No adrenaline rush, no fear and it’s not really even funny either. My new perspective is now that it’s pointless. Anyone else feel this way?
I will remove if this is not allowed, sorry. 

I want to state that I am NOT thinking of, or planning on taking my own life! I am also sober. 

Since I was a teenager, I would  see nothingness/blackness, when I pictured myself in the future. Maybe it’s because I didn’t really know what I wanted in life. 

These past few months, I have been feeling off. Almost like life is ending soon. As if I’m waiting for the world to come to an end. But, I see this in a good way (that this is a good thing that the  world needs to happen). 

I sometimes feel like I’m not “fully present”. Sometimes it feels like I’m in a dream. I meditate every night and ground myself. 

I feel scared and like I’m slowly going crazy. I don’t want to discuss this with my therapist, as I don’t want them to think I’ve lost the plot. I want to see if anyone has ever felt like this or know why I could be experiencing this weird feeling. 

It’s been this weird feeling for a few months now. Am I being paranoid? Delusional? Looking/reading too much into things?

I’m sorry if this sounds stupid? Thank you for taking the time to read this

EDIT: WOW! Thank you all soooo much for taking the time to read my post and respond. It’s so refreshing to hear that I’m not alone. 

The reason I didn’t want to tell my therapist was because I wanted answers in a more “spiritual” (whatever you’d like to call it) type of way. 

Someone said something along the lines of things feeling like it’s going nowhere, yet so much is going on right now. 

I’m glad you all understood what I was trying to say. It was really difficult to put it into words. I can’t explain it really, but it’s so good to hear that a lot of you are feeling similar. 

I think that something great is going to happen to us all. Something that humanity needs in order to grow. Hopefully we can get the answers we’ve been looking for soon! 

PS: I also want to mention that the signs and synchronicities are crazy right now!! It’s been going on for MONTHS now. More than it’s ever been before. To the point where it’s actually like “am I looking too much into things to comfort myself?” 

Look after yourselves and be kind to yourselves ❤️In whatever way you conceive that omniscient presence, it’s inside you. It’s inside all of us, every one, it’s the energy flowing all around us. 

For a while I’ve struggled conceptualizing “God” I hated the idea of this “omnipotent being” watching my every move and judging me, disparaging me when I Sin and applauding me when I do Justice. I never liked the idea of that. However just sitting out here on the porch this morning, I just asked for a simple sign and got one. I didn’t feel any judgement, any expectations, just letting me know that it was there for me. The way people say to “look inside” for God I believe to be true, we all have it inside of us. 

I hope the next time anyone has a bad day, or a good day, or even just a normal day that you take a moment to look inside and see that all is exactly how it’s meant to be. You are more than loved, you are more than beautiful. We’re all in this together, we’re all human at the moment. 

I for One have started doing things differently recently and it’s been really good. I’m finding choices that I never knew I had, but I just wasn’t able to see them. 

There is always a path, you just have to be open to walking it.

I pray you all have a blessed day.


Edit: Thank you all for the well wishes and blessings, they have been well received and I am very thankful :-) 😁"You know what - I believe every one on earths heart is really a bright beautiful star that shines and protects the heart. Every person has a star inside them to shine"

I was so moved.. I asked her where she heard this and why she thinks that. She answered 

"I just have a knowing. I always know and so do you"Teach your children well

Just got done with a conversation between myself and my 9 year old stepdaughter. 

Did you ever notice how big a child’s pupils are, like to a tripping level of dilation. At 9am she’s talking to me with saucers in her eyes and I’m in awe wondering how the world she’s taking in looks inside her mind. 

We truly are born with access to it all. 

I’ve often stood and watched my pupils pulsate in the mirror. I feel the thoughts shift as they pulse. I know when I’m tripping and they get close to taking over all the color in my eyes is when I get close to seeing only with my mind. 

Teach your children well, help them to retain their sense of wonder and awe as long as possible. Keep their hearts alive with love and that, that is how we can heal the world. 

The love that we’re born with, the love we tend to find and die with. 

That love, that love is the love that will heal the world. We need to find that love and keep it alive. 

Teach your children well....People have told us how to act, how to feel, what to say, what to wear, etc.  Even if the rebel folk have created their own alternative society where everyone conforms.  Think the Goth Kids in South Park.  Nobody has learned the knack for thinking for themselves.  Very few, at least.  And it's fundamental on the spiritual path.

Meditation will be your first taste of it.  Not only the practice, but the idea of being aware of the present moment and seeing with clear eyes.  When you do this, what's in your heart becomes evident.  The mind chatter takes a back seat and the way to go becomes clearer.

Many of us are lost. So what?  Be lost!  It is much better to be authentically lost than to be a copycat who pretends to be found.  **There is no bliss in being a copycat.  There is no joy.  There is no love.**  You can get a surface phenomenon, a cheap replica, but it can never go deep.

There are absolutely no rules in life.  None whatsoever.  And enlightenment is not science.  You can say "heat water to 100 degrees and it boils", but you cannot say "do X, Y, and Z and you will have peace and fulfillment".  Impossible!  People can give you hints, they can share from their experience, but it is not a science.

How can you love when your heart says one thing but your head is dragging you in another way?  How can you dance when your heart says left but your head says right?  How can you sing when you're constantly worried about whether your song is beautiful to others or not?  You can forget all about it.  **Just sing because it is beautiful to** ***you.***  That's the only secret.

You have to grope around in the dark a bit.  You have to have the courage to go against your fears and conditioning and take the risk to follow your heart.  Sure, you'll mess up.  Sure, you'll be confused sometimes.  But it's only through trial and error that we can come to know what's real and what isn't!  There are no shortcuts!

Of course there is a tremendous fear.  Because it means going against our whole past and dropping the comfort of the ego.  You were thinking "I am this", but now you are realizing that that was all a false phenomenon.  What you are cannot be described or understood.  It can be sung, it can be danced, it can be loved... but it cannot be described.

So one must be courageous.  Deeply courageous.  And one must take a little stand.  Sometimes a big stand.  You are only going to get one shot at this.  You can go on waiting your whole life for some miracle to happen, or you finally stand up one day and say **enough is enough, I am going to be happy, even if the whole world is against it.**

Don't get me wrong, sometimes it's subtle.  If you do not feel energy bursting forth right now, then now is not the time.  **Just be whatever you are, just allow yourself to be utterly natural.**  Have the courage to own your experience.  Sooner or later the energy will come bursting forth.  And when it does, don't hold back!  There will be plenty of time to play it safe when you're in the grave.One of the first really really nice days out in Ontario today and I can honestly feel my depression leaving me:)I'm talking about fame for the sake of fame, I'm not talking about Nobel peace prize fame or fame from sports or something noble.

Idk if it's just me but its one of those things that keeps me up at night. I just think things like "these people are so rich for no apparent reason, doing things that anyone could do. They are glorified and their egos are boosted by others constantly everyday and they seemingly have no repercussions for their actions yet there are people in the third world starving and even people in the first world starving while they live in their huge mansions. They wear expensive clothes, drive expensive cars, show it all off and make you feel like your life isn't enough as it is. 

I know the key to happiness is a simple life, but I can't help but feel irked in my soul that some people are living that type of life. I don't know if it's jealously I'm feeling or if it's more of a feeling of annoyance that society has gotten to this point. All I know is this really strikes a nerve with me for some reason and I think about it a lot. 

I think as a kid I really looked up to a lot of celebrities, but the more I grow older the more my rose-colored glasses crack and the more I see new celebrities rise (that are now around my age at 22) I see it all for what it is - so fragile and all just a big money making operation. 

What are your thoughts on this?Whether we like to admit it or not we have all done bad things in our life. Like many other people I've had bad things happen to me as well usually inflicted by other people. I could detail almost every wrong done to me from childhood onwards. Yet what is the point unless I can actively get justice for it? 

Growing up I was angry because I was getting abused at home then bullied at school, ironically it was my school teacher bullying me more than my peers. I had no friends or support then I lashed out at animals and people in my teens. When I got older and realised the damage I've done I used to consider my only option was suicide because I've done things I can't take back. Holding extreme guilt while hating on the people who have harmed me.

I used to think the people who abused me were living good lives and happy while I was sad and hurt. Reality is: happy people aren't going to inflict pain on others, belittle people, or constantly try bring them down. A lot of the people who harmed me are at their core insecure, prideful losers. Reflecting on my own behaviour their only sense of stability comes from the damage they can cause. The 'hurt people hurt people' logic.

Forgiving them isn't a free pass or simping for them. It allows me to acknowledge their behaviour is wrong and they are trash people, acknowledging my own trash behaviour and aiming to be better. They wronged me, I have done wrong, and now what can I do to be right?

Forgiving them in order to release yourself from pain and guilt. How can I expect to be forgiven when I can't forgive?^
BlessI’ve chatted with many of them, and they have largely neglected the basics:  exercise, fresh air, clean eating, socialization, meditation.

Dare I say it boldly.  

If you don’t focus on your basics now, you will never truly know your potential.

You will not know what you’re made of.  You haven’t practiced self nurturing and cultivation. 

You aren’t doing the work.  

Wake up, get out of your funky head space, cover your basics.  And try again. Tomorrow is a new day."Meditation is the discovery that the point of life is always arrived at in the immediate moment. And therefore, if you meditate for an ulterior motive — that is to say, to improve your mind, to improve your character, to be more efficient in life — you've got your eye on the future and you are not meditating!"

[Here is a free document](https://ko-fi.com/s/7d3636c6ce) with 7 high quality guided meditationsJust live and let go. Envision what you want and listen to your inner voice to guide you. You don’t have to follow “guidelines”. You don’t have to do this, and do that. Just one simple thing, let go of attachment. Follow your gut. It is as complicated as you want it to beLife may not always be pleasant. But no matter what, you must honor what you are going though. Always give yourself kindness and compassion no matter what.

The mental weight of suffering never feels good but you must use that feeling and leverage it into a learning experience. Difficult circumstances makes one ponder and inquire about things while comfort and satisfaction leads to complacently. Profound personal growth is very often the result of suffering.

You always have to believe that things are working out for you no matter what. Being patient and trusting the process that you life is bigger than what you see right now. Don't let worry, fear, and anxiety destroy any progress you have made.

*Quote of the Day: "We are more often frightened than hurt; and we suffer more from imagination than from reality." Seneca*

&#x200B;

May the Universe bless you with prosperity and happiness. Peace to everyone :)  🤞 💖 👍It's just an equilibriumThis occurred to me recently, it has increased my enjoyment of life enormously. Hope it can help.I’ve read some theories that our souls pick which person we want to be born to before we become physically here. If so, do you believe that we pick them based on their history and life plan? Maybe we chose that person to help them or to help ourselves in this lifetime. I was wondering if anyone had any thoughts or ideas on this matter

Edit: this post was not meant to victim blame anyone in any way. If you have had an abusive parent I am so sorry you had to go through that and it is not your fault. I was simply asking if the parents we have now were chosen by our higher selves to teach us lessons or to teach them lessons in this lifetime.Tommorrow is the day Im gonna quit my caffeine addiction, I have quit nicotine in the past. But I difnt get these thoughts from nowhere, after I started eating cucumber, avocado, a little bit of dark chocolate and apples. I started to think more clear, and a lot of youtubers are saying compulsive addictions like caffeine blocks your manifestations, what are your guys opinion on this?I feel like I have learned more about presence and "being" from watching my nephew grow for the last year. 

He only experiences the world as it is. Everything has a beauty to him even if he has explored it 100 times. 

When he is happy, he's happy. When he is sad, he's sad. He expresses himself fully in the moment. He crys and then he's done. There is no shame in how he feels and he doesn't carry those emotions throughout the day/week/year.

He displays only what I can consider the purest form of love. He does this thing where he looks into my eyes and gives me a soft little headbutt. He is not just saying I love you. He is acknowledging my presence and the space that I take up on this world temporarily. 

He doesn't  teach me these lessons in words but by just being. For that I feel more conscious than I did a year ago. 

I just thought I'd share this.
By Alessandro Carosi

At the end we are all on the same boat and with the same fears.
If you see someone sad even if you can’t help it’s enough a good word, a hug or a big smile, could be enough to change some people night.
Always positive vibes!!When you die your “essence” departs the physical and material world we inhabit and returns to its source. Most people fear this change in state because they don’t understand it. Religions disagree, science hasn’t been able to conclusively prove anything about where we go, and cultures often speak of death and afterlife in different languages and traditions that fall within a very narrow and sometimes problematic scope of understanding. The best language to explain the mystery surrounding death (and that of the wild human experience too) hasn’t been invented yet, or if it has, isn’t commonly understood. Words will never do it justice, but I’ll do my best. 

You are a spiritual being having a human experience. You are a conscious being endowed with the same energy that animates everything around you. You are not simply a five sensory being like you have been taught, you are multisensory, and have more power within you than the people in power can afford for you to believe. 

You’re here to grow and become aware that you live in a zone of free-will, co-creating with a conscious universe full of diverse life and experience. Everything is connected and everything comes from the same source. The nature of a bipolar reality tricks us into believing in a nature of separation. You are you and I am me, clearly we are different, right? Wrong. In death, if you haven’t yet learned it in life, you’ll see how we are all expressions of the One, each experiencing life from a different locality, forgetting our source, so that we may one day remember and laugh at how convinced we were that we are alone. It’s all a dream. 

Your belief system helps manifest the reality that you exist in. As your belief system changes and evolves during your lifetime, so do your experiences. When you die, you leave this physical realm and suddenly gain access to the stream of divine intelligence that you might have felt cut off from as a human. That’s normal. The ego is naturally skeptical of things it can’t see or touch because it’s main focus is survival. It is the most primal urge that allows us to exist and survive on a planet such as Earth, full of danger and uncertainty. To understand death for what it really is, to have reverence for it, would mean accepting it... and the ego fears that above anything else. So we distance ourselves from it, and naturally we fear it. Fear cuts you off from the stream of divine intelligence. 
But I can confirm from personal experience what happens when you die because it’s happened to me twice. 

You return home. You realize that this life was like a dream, and that you have lived many. In each life learning different lessons and achieving different goals towards your evolution, resolving karma, closing and opening cycles and participating in the great playground of creation. You return to be with those you love, rejoicing in knowing that “death” is not a destination, merely a door you pass through to get back to where you once were and where you’re going next. You realize the physical body is merely a vehicle for the intangible spirit to have the ability to feel, express, believe, create and act. It is not you. The real you is so magnificently complex and infinite that it could not possibly fit into a single name or personality such as we try and do here.  
You realize time is a creative concept that reinforces the ego’s idea of what life is and how it’s supposed to be. Human time in its linear expression is limiting and localizing. While it allows us to coexist in an organized way in this dimension, it puts us in a box. And conveniently makes us believe that you can’t move forward or backward in time matrix. (You can)

You realize love is the most powerful force in existence, and the secret to the manifestation and expression of all that is. Sounds corny, but it’s true. You realize everything that is and ever was and ever will be and you feel at peace. 

You have this one human life to learn and live as much as you can. So don’t fear death. Befriend it. You’re lucky to be here and this human experience is one that is highly sought after by spirit. Fear will keep you prisoner, it will reinforce your suffering and keep you from realizing your true purpose on this planet. 

It’s time to wake up. Things are moving rapidly and great change is coming. Many people will see these changes and respond with more fear. I’m simply here to remind you that death is merely one step of the journey and you have nothing to fear. So don’t spend the rest of your journey worried about it. Live now and don’t forget the most crucial part and the hardest to remember in this big, messy world sometimes: Love. 💕Am I reading into this too much?? But has anybody noticed how all the movies have been like: aliens are coming, the world is going to become chaos, etc. 
like the new purge movie, the US turns on each other and it’s in shambles ?
.

The tomorrow war, species from another planet come to earth after they break through 1000 year old ice, (like permafrost) and recent years have showed bacteria and diseases emerging from ice due to climate change? Also, all the recent info about aliens that the government released 
.

Or South Park when they had a scene where demons break through the ocean through a fiery pit (like the Gulf of Mexico pipeline explosion and it looks exactly the same) 


Like am I crazy or is there going to be something horrible coming soon into humanity ?Life is not a simulation.  You can't wish your way out of a bad situation.  Bad things do happen sometimes, and people suffer greatly.

All this talk of "you create your reality" has been very much understood by many people.  Especially those who claim to be spiritual.  

It's true, if you have a positive mindset, if you choose to find beauty in life despite the hardship, then it's true that you will create a sort of better reality for yourself.  But there's no hocus pocus about it.  Dr. Viktor Frankl, a Jewish psychologist, choose to remain hopeful despite being a prisoner in a Nazi concentration camp.  He survived.  The prisoners who did not remain hopeful were the first to die.  

In that sense Dr. Frankl choose his reality, yes, it's true.  But he could not "manifest" his way out of the concentration camp, just like a starving child can't manifest food, or a cancer patient can't wish his cancer away.  It doesn't work like that.

It's a shame that people think this way, because it doesn't make life more beautiful, it makes it less beautiful.  It makes it all very shallow.  Imagine if your loved one is dieing of cancer... Are you just gonna look at him and say "it's ok, it's a simulation"?  Or are you going to mourn the loss and enjoy your last moments together?  You know, appreciate the full beauty of the *human* experience.

I don't know about you, but the latter sounds much more beautiful and deep to me.  Much more agonizing too, yes.  But the true beauty of life is found in the fragility, insecurity, and even the suffering. The fact that we are so fragile is the very thing that makes life so precious.

But because it can be difficult to look at people go on telling stories about reality, in order to avoid these painful truths.

It's not necessary.  And true spirituality, true beauty, and true love are never, never found by bypassing reality... they are found by embracing it deeply.A couple of days ago, I posted on this sub about feeling left out and not relating to anybody. Today I was having a crap day and sat out at the park, alongside another guy who was at the park. We were talking and realised that we are literally the same person. I’ve made a new friend who understands me. Crazy how the universe works.1. Failure is not the opposite of success, it's part of success.
2. What you send out comes back to you.
3. Visualization is not enough to manifest your dreams, you need to take inspired action towards them also.
4. Your purpose is sharing your passion.
5. Dairy products makes your bones WEAKER, not stronger.
6. Just because most people believe something, doesn't mean it's the truth.
7. Read. A lot.
8. We are multidimensional beings, living a human experience.
9. Be present. Your happiest moments happened when you were completely present.
10. Meditating is the secret to solving most of your problems.
11. We always wake up dehydrated - drink a big glass of water every morning.
12. Don't be a victim. Take full responsibility of your life and move towards your dreams. You are powerful and can achieve anything!
13. You are never really alone. You are surrounded at all times by loving guides and soul friends with whom you have eternal connections.
14. 9/11 was an inside job. Period.
15. Your biggest obstacle to success is yourself and your (conscious or unconscious) limiting beliefs.
16. Successful people are the ones with successful habits. We are what we repeatably do.
17. Take a few minutes every day to think about what you are grateful for - even during your shittiest day there's something you can be grateful for.
18. Life is beautiful.
19. Life is better with avocados.
20. Every person is creative and should make time for their creative hobby every week. 
21. Eat like people do in the Blue Zones if you want to live long. 95 percent of their daily food intake comes from vegetables, fruits, grains, and legumes. 
22. To attract wealth, don't ask yourself "how can I become rich?" Ask "How can I be of service?"
23. To reprogram your subconscious, listen to a guided meditation every evening before bed.
24. You cannot reach fulfillment without going out of your comfort zone.
25. Don't be afraid to say "no".
26. The real currency is time.
27. It's okay to wear yoga pants all day, you don't have to wear jeans if you don't want to.
28. We are all one.Except a willingness to be patient with yourself and trust in yourself.

You don’t need:

* A guided meditation 
* A playlist of “432hz best chakra cleansing flute”
* To know any mantras or chants
* An expensive zabuton - or any zabuton. 
* A chakra themed wall-hanging or rug
* Crystals of any shape, form or colour
* A “brainwave headband”


These things are being sold to you - and you only buy them because you haven’t yet developed trust in yourself. The thing is, these are crutches and if you buy them you will grow reliant on them instead of on yourself. 

Be confident in the remarkable intrinsic part of nature that is you.He died at 6:30 am this morning peacefully in his sleep. We realised it was his dead mothers birthday and his brother had died at that same hospital last year I noticed it was raining this morning and the sun came out when my mum went to see the body are there any signs from him or someone from the dead ?Look inwards and realize how ungrounded you truly are — everything we have been brainwashed to want is outward. Every year, we spend our money on new trends and technology that will renew itself forever in a never-ending cycle of consumerism. Materialism and commercialism are our gods, and we worship them in shopping centers. We are the pigs, and society is the farmer, feeding us our material desires, and we keep eating it, and the farmer keeps making money off us. The one whose inner, instead of outer, is satisfied, is truly authentic and free.I am out of words. I never thought i would overcome that stage of my life. I was suffering from depression and low self esteem since childhood and  due to lockdown and whole covid situation, i developed severe anxiety too. 

It starts with me waking up and I felt calm when I slept. Those depressing and hurtful thoughts were always in position waiting for me to wake up and hurt me. My heart used to beat hard, it used to pain. I had to lie down to make it slow down. It got so bad that sometimes thoughts of suicide seemed good. I always had this love for life. I knew life exists beyond my room but no job, many fears specially the fear of "what others will think" crippled me. But this love for life which was there deep inside my heart made me reject those suicidal thoughts. So, two and half months back, i finally decided to do something about it. 

I started doing meditation, cut down most of the social media except reddit, started focusing on why i  am having these thoughts? Meditation is the most powerful tool available to us and it changed me completely. It was really hard initially to just focus on your breath with all these thoughts attacking you continuously and i couldn't do it for more than 5 mins. But persistance was the game changer. Slowly,  my meditating time grew from 5 to 10 to 15 min and after a month, i was able to sit for 30 mins. I became mindful of my thoughts and my anxiety and depression started lowering. 

Thoughts can only harm if you let them. If you start ignoring them, their power on you start reducing and eventually they stop coming to you.  When you start focusing on yourself, the thoughts of " what others will think" don't matter much to you. 

Meditation helped me in ignoring bad thoughts and to explore what's deep in me, the Real me! I knew the power of crystals and bought an Om crystal necklace when i decided to change myself. I started wearing it daily and often do the meditation chanting  "OM"( which is a really powerful word) and i believe my crystal necklace helped attracting positivity in me(maybe placebo, i don't know! But it helped) . My meditation sessions are so deep when i chant this word. 

Today, I woke up pretty happy. I am feeling this appreciation and gratitude for life. So, i decided to write this post if it can help anyone. My English is not that Good so pardon me for any mistake and for this long post too! 

Love and Power to all of you!  You will overcome this too, just keep fighting 👍I meditated a lil, I didn’t wear no sunscreen, felt like I was living life. I changed my mindset about everything, and just sat outside in the grass laying down not on my phone. It’s a accomplishment, so I just wanted people to know lol. Have a good dayWe just had the biggest earthquake we’ve had since the 90’s in the midst of this pandemic. Please send good vibrations. I’ll be meditating all day to ensure the people around me feel comfort.If you’re channeling a dark night of the soul, or an existential crisis, or a serious bout of depression and change of personality or character, it’s possible you’re going through a spiritual awakening.  I am not a clinical psychotherapist so please don’t weigh in if you need professional help.

After coming out of mine, I can offer this:

Resistance comes in tricky forms:  like waiting, doubting, repressing, over-seeking and neglecting the root issues that come up.

You may be feeling too weak, or unstable, or tired/lethargic, or deeply hurt to “heal” or “do the work” and that’s the first response— and the start of many responses for a very long time.

Your soul is seeking a revolution and resolution from lessons not learned, a non conducive lifestyle and/or relationship, a dead end job or mission/purpose, or at its core, a dishonesty of self that blocks love to emanate and disseminate from your hearts center.

The negativity that festers is what will rot your progress for your awakening that trust me, the awakening is the pot of gold at the end of a shitty rainbow and rainy season.

Every day is an opportunity to practice courage and bravery.  Practicing to listen to your internal guidance void of ego, super ego and victimization.

If you’re in a safe place of home, remember that you have all the basics needed to persevere and DO.

If you’re in an unsafe space.  Move.  Move home.  Move with a family member, get out.

I made a conscious move that set the stage of my dark night for 12m.  And each day was a combination of trying, fetal positions, “I cants”, “why me’s”, not crying, and eventually lots of crying.  And finally, a call to action to birth a new me after killing the old me.

You don’t have to feel stuck everyday.  DM me if you would like to share your experiences.

With a warm embrace,So choose carefully with who to engage with in the comments sections. Unless you “witty” or have a “sharp-tongue” engage with “trolls”. They will challenge be you say the stupidest thing to get you mad, and it’s up to you if you want to deflect their spells and argue, or leave them be, and ignore them.
Most effective defense is to just show them that their hate does nothing to your positivity and love, and remind them that they are loved either way. “Trolls” hate love, the fear love. 
I love all of y’all ❤️Before October ends, your family is going to be blessed more than you can imagine. You cannot realize yet how grateful you will be.

Join us here >>> r/ManifestationValleyHello! I'm hoping to get this message to as many people as I can, and while I don't have any large followings anywhere. I figure I can reach out to people and organizations individually.

Tomorrow during the full moon, Pagans/Witches/people of all different paths will be doing various rituals, spells, and  just sending out good thoughts and energies to help with the protests going on around the world. Things were brought on by the unfortunate and inexcusable murder of George Floyd. from what I understand, most will be focusing on protection, health, and a positive and peaceful outcome. However, as is with most pagan practices your choices are always your own!

Whether or not you choose to be involved in this is fine.  I just wanted to make sure the knowledge was passed to your group so you have the chance to make that choice!

Much peace and love to all of you and i hope you are all safe through these increasingly trying times 💙"The basic laws of the universe are simple, but because our senses are limited, we can’t grasp them. There is a pattern in creation. If we look at this tree outside whose roots search beneath the pavement for water, or a flower which sends its sweet smell to the pollinating bees, or even our own selves and the inner forces that drive us to act, we can see that we all dance to a mysterious tune, and the piper who plays this melody from an inscrutable distance—whatever name we give him—Creative Force, or God—escapes all book knowledge...

I like to experience the universe as one harmonious whole. Every cell has life. Matter, too, has life; it is energy solidified. The tree outside is life, a statue is dead. The whole of Nature is life, and life, as I observe it, rejects a God resembling man.. \[A cosmic religion\] has no dogma other than teaching man that the universe is rational and that his highest destiny is to ponder it and co-create with its laws.

The genuine scientist is not moved by praise or blame, nor does he preach. He unveils the universe and people come eagerly, without being pushed, to behold a new revelation: the order, the harmony, the magnificence of creation! And as man becomes conscious of the stupendous laws that govern the universe in perfect harmony, he begins to realize how small he is. He sees the pettiness of human existence, with its ambitions and intrigues, its ‘I am better than thou’ creed.."

\~Albert EinsteinI did a meditation last night and it was intense had me crying. It was about meeting my higher self. She was beautiful- Godess Like- and was pure love. Now that I am reconnected with her I feel a sense of purpose again. Her message to me was to GIVE LOVE to myself and to others and to let go of those lower concious feelings. Also that when anybody feels fear of being alone what you are really feeling is fear of not being loved, therefore you must give love. She had the most nurturing, loving look  in her eye like, I've never had anyone look at me like that with exception of my partner- but it made me feel like I am not a bad person and that I deserve to live this life to the max. I guess I never knew how much we sabotage ourselves by Withholding love, which is what we are all made of, let's start asking ourselves each morning how can I give love today?💜❤ Also we need to remember to connect with our higherself on a regular basis in order to keep them near. Just like any other relationships we have, we can't expect someone to be there for us if we never talk to them right?  Also I did sense some sadness in my higher self like why haven't I looked for her or tried to connect but still had an overwhelming sense of understanding and unconditional love. She asked me to seek her out and she would be there for me and before leaving told me to smile and just have fun with this lifetime! So the message is: Give love every day and you will have a purposeful life! Seek your higherself regularly to establish a strong relationship and have fun!Did you ever see a bird who wanted to carry something to big? Sometimes we humans are like that bird. We sometimes cling to heavy things which will prevent us from flying.

Let go of your thoughts, see them as clouds passing in the sky.

Let go of negative attachments, fly into the positivity.

I´m telling you my friend, you can fly. Fly my friend.

Fly into a sky full of love.

I also create and share art to add some extra love and positivity to the environment. [Here you can catch these positive vibes](https://ko-fi.com/quintenvanommen/gallery)

Enjoy your flight, be love, in the sky of love.

And when you fall sometimes, drown in an ocean of love.

What we need is loveMeditating this morning 1-11-21 at approximately 3am, something came to me, this light had overtaken me, and spoke to me. In short, that I needed to write this, and spread my insight into what’s happening.

I’ve been on a deeply spiritual path for the last few years, but I tended to keep getting distracted by the temptation of the physical pleasures of the material world, and therefore getting off track. A to and fro if you will. 

Something would happen in my life that would remind me of how I had gotten off my spiritual path, some powerful epiphany or spiritual realization, all of which would reaffirm my spiritual direction calling me, and I would refocus. 

I have gone through intense periods of psychedelic expansion of consciousness, utilization of meditation, lucid dream, astral projection, and reading of sacred and spiritual text. Inevitably I would fall off a bit and would again get lost in the physical world, be it females, pursuit of financial wealth, molding and shaping my physical physique for vain purposes, et cetera. 

Point being - recently there has been something different in the air, an electric charge so to speak, this overpowering energy of which I am completely immersed, saturating me. 

Recently, I have been in a state of almost mania. Totally electrified with this energy which I find myself amidst. This foreboding feeling that something is happening, something is coming, but it’s ineffable. 

I have been only sleeping 2-3 hours a night because I feel this pull, this call, no.. this NEED to further my spirituality, to developing my connection to the universe, to evolve of consciousness, my control over it, this NEED to elevate, because NOW is the time. This innate intuition that it’s now or never. That time is of the essence. 

I’ve been observing a synchronicity, of indisputable magnitude, and everything starting to fall into place. Things from years and years ago are all starting to pop back up in my life, this information I had come across, or a powerful experience I had which had was a pivotal moment in my development all start coming together, building upon one another, all coming to alignment, to fruition. 

Everything has been coming together and it’s created this state of spiritual ecstasy within me, and a focus and determination to the likes of which I’ve never known before. 

I’ve been meditating every spare moment. When not meditating, I’ve been putting into practice my reading on: 

Alchemy 
Super Consciousness 
Energy/Shadow Work
Crystallography
Numerology
Magick 
Mind Control
Infinite Perspectus
Hermeticism (GD or otherwise) 
Kybalion 
Thoth
The Bible 
The Quran 
Egyptian Book of the Dead
Tibetan Book of the Dead
The Lost Book of Enki
 Anything by Carl Jung and especially Aleister Crowley
Ad Infinitum (Got tired of writing down the infinite list of works)

But mainly, my focus is directed upon coming to that which I know that I am, in truest essence, in highest most pure form. We are at the time of elevation, of ascension. The New Earth as foretold by Jesus. 

In revelations it’s talked about as “A New Earth” , this will be the new world of evolved human beings, as we all realize this true nature and come to it, and become fully conscious and harness all of our potential. This is the Ascension, and this is what is happening right now. The dark magick that exists on the opposite side of occult study. That is the darkness. And humanity is coming to a point where the light and dark are to converge in a struggle for dominance on this planet. This is what revelations has foretold, and this is happening now. I have been claimed by the light, I am ascending. Each and every thing that has happened in my life up to this point has happened for a reason. To get to to this moment. That is what is happening to me right now, and to you. 


We all who are sensitive to things beyond this world can feel it. It’s intangible, but yet intuitively we know it, and feel it. This is the ascension as it was foretold. 


My brothers and sisters - Spend time in meditation, and begin to realize your pure consciousness, to begin honing and developing that which you are capable of:

Apportation, Astral projection, Automatic writing, Divination, Dowsing, Energy Medicine, Levitation, Mediumship, Precognition, Psychic Surgery, Psychokinesis, Psychometry, Pyrokinesis, Rddhi, Remote Viewing, Retro Cognition, & Telepathy. 

-He said to them, “Because of your little faith. For truly, I say to you, if you have faith like a grain of mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, move from here to there, and it will move and nothing will be impossible for you.” ~ Matthew 17:20 ESV

^We are capable of all things, only limited by our thoughts and beliefs. 

-Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive [them], and ye shall have [them]. ~ Mark 11:24 KJV

^Our thoughts become reality, mind shapes matter, the observer influences the observed by the focus of the consciousness. All things are possible. 



Lastly. This feeling we all are experiencing:

“The kingdom of Heaven is not coming in ways that can be observed, nor will they say ‘Look, here it is!’ Or ‘There!’ for behold, the kingdom of God is in the midst of you.”

Brothers & Sisters - embody the light in which you are ❤️

-Peace and Love to allHi friends!

I hope you're keeping well. I don't usually come here, but this felt like a good forum to just share some tips on how you can orient yourself around the chaos of these times. I hope this finds anyone who needs to hear this.

# Humanity has an opportunity to shift, and evolve into a higher version of ourselves. This includes you.

This coronavirus chaos is *polarizing*. Some people are going to use it to move deeply into doomsday scenarios, paranoia, blame, judgment, xenophobia,  and aggression. They will be moving psychologically backward.

There will be some people who will refuse to engage. They'll hoard resoures, hole up at home, hold their breath, brace themselves to just wait and *just get through all of it*, and come out unchanged.

But then there are people like you and I who have the chance to *stay grounded, stay sane, and breathe through this whole experience.* We're keeping our wits about us. We're staying mentally online. We're being smart about what we do, but we're remembering to smile and relax.

When we stay present and grounded through this, then we allow fear to arise and complete itself without getting mentally caught up in it. We allow it to be processed as an energetic experience, instead of staying locked up in our minds.

This is how we evolve as people.

Many of us will be evolving rapidly in these times.

# Remember the Now; Dwell in the Now

This will sound weird, but follow me here:

Remember that there's only the now-moment. Everything that has ever happened, happened in the Now. Anything that *will* happen will happen in the Now. The Now is all there is. A still, vast, wide arena in which all of this drama is playing itself out.

All of our wars, famines, diseases, disasters have all played out in the Now. The Now itself is indestructible, just as silence itself cannot be destroyed.

Ground yourself in the Now. Observe the Now in which all the chaos is playing itself out. Let everything arise that's arising, let everything go that's going. Witness all of it without judgement, just pure acceptance.

As this happens, choose what actions you'll take and take them. But drop all negativity about it. Your negativity is not useful now.

# Keep your humor about you!

See if you can remember laughter throughout this whole thing!

See if you can have some fun. What opportunities do you have now if you're staying inside to isolate yourself? Let's turn this into the world's biggest sleepover!

# Stay with your breath

When all else fails, just breathe slowly through your experience. Nice deep breaths. I sincerely believe that all is well and will continue to be well.

All the best!

Brent HurasAnd realising that your keys were in your pocket the whole timeDon't know if this is the correct place to ask this. Do you guys think human life is a punishment?I drink because I have no self worth and am embarrassed to exist and do not believe I deserve to be happy. I don’t think I’m capable of having the life I so desperately would love because I can’t provide it or make my life nice for myself. My attempts are pathetic or too grand and never stick. I just don’t think I’ll ever have a partner or a life in the woods that I want. I’m just not capable of it. I’m troubled and have struggled with anxiety and serious depression for years. I’m only 30 years old and don’t necessarily want to die. But I don’t know how to live. Lately I’m having dreams where I don’t have a soul. I am questioning why I am being punished by this.Last night had a great experience. 1 month sober and decided to hit some thc and meditate on the full moon. As soon as my brain was hit my consciousness shifted. In 3-5 minutes I was thinking and forming thoughts in such a beautiful way. Everything was laid out so perfectly, the flow was insane. As my consciousness was more aware I got clear answers on what affects me when I’m not aware. Big one I pulled out was the phone, as soon as I partook in tasks on my phone such as scrolling through social media I could directly tell how it disrupts flow. A distraction if will. I literally could tell my energy being drained from focusing on other people instead of myself. The higher self really knows all. There really is levels to this shitttt. Our consciousness and energy is being drained by not so well meaning forces. Peace out✌️Today you may find yourself becoming a bit self critical. This is not the time to go down into an emotional spiral. If you were your best friend (and by the way, you should be), what would you say to you? How would you treat you? 

Its challenging, dealing with so much going on. Fears sometimes turn to anger, then depression. Try to continually monitor your feelings with a goal of emotional neutrality. 

Yes mercury is in retrograde so technology is challenging, but the other thing about mercury in retrograde as it brings up things that we thought we had handled and emotionally processed that we clearly have not. Stuff we shoved in the shadows internally starts popping back up again. I used to fear mercury in retrograde and I have found that now that I actually embrace it and recognize it for the gift that it is. I find the technology issues aren’t as stressful as they used to be. They  pop up and then they go away. But the spiritual insight that we gain from these times, seeing those things in ourselves that we didn’t want to look at that we really need to address that’s a gift that can last the rest of our life.

So love yourself just a bit more today. You deserve it!

-spirited soulI'm not sure why, but life has seemingly only felt worse since 2022 started. Nothing significant has happened but it seems everyone's mood and energy has been on the downtrend as of late. 

Maybe it's just current state of life and there could still be plenty of people feeling great as usual. Just wanted to hear how everyone is doing. Have you noticed an uptick of negativity in the air? 

It feels like since the start of the year my positive energy has been slowly taken away, either by the general well being of earth or other people. How is everyone else holding up as of late? 

I just feel drained for no particular reason these daysp.s. check out the reading sample of the book Reunited with FreedomWhen you try to do everything perfectly you can't really focus on enjoying the process and even the playful things become like work. You end up being so tensed about the future that you can't even start acting in the present and this is why a lot of times we never truly begin something new, the mind doesn't want you to look at the fact that how can you be perfect at something that you're just starting out?

Life is all about evolving and that happens when you make mistakes and learn from them, don't chase perfection instead seek fulfillment. Be so focused on enjoying the process, be immersed in the moment and let go of the outcome. Always act from a place of inspiration, create only when you are in alignment and connected to yourself. 

You will not become unworthy if you take a break and relax for a bit, alignment is more important than direction less hustle. The moment you are centered in your spirit, you can do everything effortlessly and playfull, when you learn to enjoy the process even work will become playful. 

Just be here now and do your best, always make getting centered in your being the priority. The more in alignment you are with who you are the more playful and effortless life becomes.

*What the universe will manifest when you are in alignment with it is a lot more interesting than what you try to manifest*

~ Adyashanti

*Seeing a miracle will inspire you, but knowing you are a miracle will change you*...and i think that's something not everyone realizes so they get all offended, which is projected by their words and/or anger. 

Spirituality, to me, is a feeling of liberation, not something that i want to force onto someone.(**Edit:** If this is too long, too fuckin bad.  Have a lovely day! <3)

Everyone seems to have their opinion on things.  And people are so god-damn sure that they're right about it!  Not only sure for themselves, which TBH I'm skeptical of, but sure *for everybody else,* too.  As in, "this is what works for me, so it must work for you, too".  How in the world could they know?

It comes in varying degrees.  Some people are really pushy... take your typical Mormons or Jehova's witnesses.  Then there are people who are less pushy, but still pushy.  Think the people who give you unsolicited advice.  Then there are people who give you advice when asked for, but in a sort of commanding and not understanding way.  IMO the best teachers / advice-givers are the ones who can say "This is just my experience.  Your way may be different."

Not that they have to do it after every sentence.  But at the end of the day, the underlying message is that.

But apart from that, apart from sharing...  How in the world is that everybody seems *so god-damn sure* *of themselves* in the first place?  No, me, I'm not sure of myself.  I doubt.  I get frustrated.  I seek answers.  I get confused.  I wonder if it's all even fucking worth it.

But everywhere you go everyone is so damn sure of themselves.  People speak with such certainty on this sub, and all over the internet.  People send me videos about self-improvement, about tantra, they talk to me about Buddhism.  And they're so god-damn sure about it!  I almost wanna say, hey, do you have bad days?  Does this really work for you?  Are you *truly* happy deep down?  Tell me!  Please! Tell me! Because I'm skeptical!  I'm skeptical that everyone can be so god-damn certain... there's no way!  It must be hiding something!

Tell me your honest inner experience!

I'm not saying there aren't people who have attained a great deal or even absolute peace.  I'm sure there are.  But I feel like it's a minority.  And I feel like they can give hints, but they can't walk for you.  Every individual is so different!  And whatever change happens cannot be *philosophical*, it must be rooted in reality.  Knowledge is not enough. The path has to be *walked.*  And nobody can walk it for you.

All I know is what's working for me is just letting myself *be who I am.*  Without any ideals, goals, advice, or outside knowledge.  Sure, a lot of people have helped me out along the way.  And I'm grateful for that.  But in the end all the walking has been done by me... what is real is not what I read in some book, or what some guy told me on the internet.  **What is real is what I have done, acted upon... things that have felt right, things that have "clicked", and forever changed me deep down.**  There is no substitute for cold, hard experience.

And, because of everything I talked about above, I'm not afraid to be lost.  I'm not afraid to have moments where I feel down... frustrated... anxious... confused... afraid.  It's just human.  It gets better, it does get better.  That's been my experience.  But I think it gets better the more that we accept it.  Not fight it.  Fighting it makes it worse.

That's why I don't like people giving me unsolicited advice.  Because it's like they're trying to give me an ideal.  It's like it's not OK just to be a human fucking being.  It's not acceptance, it's rejection.  It's condemnation.  It's hate parading under beautiful words ("self-improvement", "be your best self", "enlightenment", "the way of peace", IDK... choose your own fuckin' term, there's lots of them).

I'm just a guy.   I don't need to bully myself into being anything more than I am.  It's OK just to be me.

And it's OK just to enjoy the small things in life, too.  There's no destination, folks.  This moment could be our last.  So enjoy the little things.  In the end it's all we're gonna have.

You can do what you want, but as for me, I'm not listening to the people who are constantly urging me to do better.  I'm fucking tired of trying to do better.

And it's not some victimhood shit.  I believe we can change, I believe in a better life... I believe we can suffer less than we do.

But the way we do that, at least the way that works for me, is to stop being so damn hard on myself.  Just let me be the guy that I am.  Relax.  Love myself more.  Take it easy.  Enjoy the little things.  Have sex.  Fall in love.  Let myself have a bad day sometimes.  It's OK.

And somehow life becomes a little more peaceful, a little more joyful.

And that's really fuckin' cool.I used to struggle with depression and cynicism, to the point I was misanthropic. I got some negative reactions from people back then, but I've gotten even more pushback and judgmental comments for merely being positive most of the time. I just feel alive, passionate, moved by people, ready to embrace both pain and pleasure. 

For example, after seeing the film Mulholland Drive and its sad ending, I told some family I felt so appreciative and wondrous an artist could move me like that rather than fixating on the sadness and an irritated cousin told me "of course you'd find a positive spin." Why are people so put off by positivity?Forgiveness doesn't mean that the person you're forgiving is "in the right".  It just means that you drop the whole game of trying to assign blame, and you surrender to your powerlessness over that person's journey and actions, instead taking responsibility for what you can control: your own peace.

Forgiveness is not about the other person, it's about you.

You owe it to yourself.Anybody else feel something huge coming. I keep waking up out of my sleep with visions and messages & I was just wondering if anybody else was having the same thoughts & what they thought it was.Often alone, never lonely.
For I have a universe inside meBelieve in you beautiful soul, keep those houghts as positive as possible. You have nothing to lose now but everything to gain. You are now wide open to the new and more than ready for the blessings that await you. It's nearly time to work your magic! Set your intentions and be prepared to manifest all those things that at the moment seem a distant dream. Divine protection, eternal assistance, vibration high, you've got this!

[Get your complimentary personalized FREE Soul Reading here >>>](https://sites.google.com/view/manifestationmindhacks/soul-manifestion)
Your Soul Reading Reveals The Path That Your Soul Is On At This Point In Your Life.
It Reveals The Challenges That May Be Blocking You On Your Soul’s Journey
And The Opportunities Available To Help You At This Time in Your Life...

[8 Law of Attraction Tips from Abraham Hicks to Manifest with Ease >>>](https://www.reddit.com/r/manifestationvalley/comments/jm3dpz/8_law_of_attraction_tips_from_abraham_hicks_to/)Love is a high vibration. When we learn to love ourselves wholly and completely, for our light and our shadow, we open up our hearts to love others even more. 

It is so much easier for us to love than it is to hate. When we hold resentment against ourselves and others, we may experience that resentment as negativity in our outward reality, or even develop health problems within. If we resonate at the love frequency and learn to observe without judgement, we actually attract that same energy into our lives, inside and out. 

Put on your love goggles today, and tell the ones you care about how much you love them. Forgive yourself for mistakes you’ve made, and let go of the grudges you’re holding against others that are only robbing you of energy and life. Allow yourself to fall back in love with life again, and accept all the goodness that it will bring you because it’s loving you back. (:

Sending you SO MUCH LOVE,

Vanessa (aka The Cosmic Butterfly on YouTube)🦋✨The main way I’ve found to overcome my beginning obstructions, was to realize: that life won’t stop throwing curveballs. But, I can get better at hitting them. 

In other words, as I’m sure most people have heard, it isn’t your situation that defines you. It’s your reaction/response to that situation. And it’s the truth. 100%. Once you follow that, and practice that 100% with everything, I guarantee you will see some crazy progress start happening.“The psychotic drowns in the same waters in which the mystic swims with delight.” - Joseph Campbell.Just think this is a phrase that should be said more to everyone and anyone. Yes random redditor, I love you!

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_7xMfIp-irgThank you all, I love u.

Edit: Wow! Thank you all so much for your kind words!! I woke up and saw all the messages and it made me so happy I almost cried (happy tears). I woke up today much happier and with clearer thoughts. You’re all the best! Much love.Title says it all. Take from it what you will.I want to be excited for the new year but I’ve been feeling sad or just not in the mood all day. Can anyone relate? I really want 2022 to be a good year.I wish you and everybody else peace as well.🌿And I am my mind and body, yet I am not. My energy, the consciousness behind my cells is what is controlling this body I’m in. I am the spiritual starlight being witnessing this body’s life. That is all 😂😌🙏🏽❤️I’m in so much pain. It was all of a sudden. One day he didn’t answer any calls and that’s how we found out. 

I want to believe that there is an afterlife and that I can see him again but having a hard time believing since we’re not religious. But I want to. I wonder what happens after death. Any ideas?yeah this virus is really shitty and a lot of people are dying but this is a huge awakening for the world. for once the entire world is on the same page. humans are meant to create art, be happy, inspire each other, not be slaves to this corrupted system. take this time to repent, pray and focus on your soul purpose. a lot of this artificial bullshit has been temporarily taken out of our lives and its made my vision more clearI do not mean this in a Negative Way; This is just merely what has come to describe these years from 2020-2022. 

We’re going to all get Better and we’re all going to go on to Do That Which We Desire; But Do not Destroy Yourself Mentally when your plans continue to fall Through this Year. 

.

The Pandemic is What it Is; We Cannot Individually Control the Economy. What we Can do, however, is Better Ourselves. Be Like Bruce Lee. 

“Flow through Life Like Water; Take What You Need and Discard What You Don’t.”

.

We All just need to take some Deep Breaths and realize that it is not Healthy for Us to Stress so much about Things we Cannot Control. 

If you do not trust what is happening in the world, don’t feel ashamed for wanting to Stay in. If you Stay in, though, just start learning some Hobbies.

.

Go onto edX.org and take some Free Online, Harvard-Based Courses on random Stuff. There’s Also places like Khanacadamy. 

Pick up that Guitar or Dust off that Piano and Just Finally start Playing again. Or Finally start Learning, perhaps. We All have different Paths, no one person Knows the Truth for All 7+ Billion Individual Humans, and Also what to do with the Planet Itself.

Stop wondering “What If” and just take the leap into that Physics Class, or start Delving into Ancient African Khemetic Symbolism. 

.

The more we Work on Ourselves Individuals; The More we’ll Inadvertently Aid All of Humanity at the Same time. 

Scientists proved that your Gut contains 3-5 million Neurons; It’s a Brain. It has Neurons like the Head Brain does. It also has been linked to create all Base Emotions too. 


.

Listen to Your Gut; You’re Smarter than you think. You can Do Anything you Set your mind too because you truly Do have that Power. 

Charisma through Confidence is Real Power. Confidence is the Tool of the Wise Man and the Liquor of the Fool. Use it to Better Yourself and thus Better Others Around You. Do not use it to get drunk of the feeling of being Liked. 


.

We will All make it through these Shadow Years; And we Will come out on the Other Side in the Light Greater People than when we Entered this Darkness. 

You’re All Beautiful; You’re All Amazing; You’re All Talented; You’re All Intelligent; You’re All Worthy of Love.You don’t have to be vegetarian, you don’t have to be a “love and light” all the time kind of person, you can get angry sometimes and be spiritual, you can binge watch Netflix some days, or not think about spirituality all the time and still be spiritual, you can smoke and be spiritual, you don’t have to get up at 5am and do yoga to be spiritual (although if you do, all the more power to you!) you don’t have to be a living instagram aesthetic, you don’t have to be a “type” of person, and you don’t have to be “perfect” or whatever you perceive to be the “perfect spiritual person” we are all humans and all on our own unique paths. Spirituality is a journey meant for all sorts of people. We are all in different places on that journey, just learning and growing and discovering in this thing called life.

This has been a PSA

Blessed be. ☺️Everything you do is always going to be seen with a critical eye.  If you talk a lot, you talk too much.  If you're quiet, you're too reserved.  If you enjoy spending time at home, you need to learn to get out of your comfort zone.  If you're always out and about, you need to learn to sit still.  If you're mad, it's ego.  If you're too calm, it's repression.

Just watch the whole game.  It's never gonna be good enough for anybody.

So fuck 'em.

And do what feels right TO YOU.No. I am not talking of spiritual, mental, emotional, physical or supernatural powers, talents or abilities here. Not that those don't matter of course, but what I wish to speak of here is a far more fundamental, far more (seemingly) "ordinary" **superpower** that **EVERY SINGLE PERSON READING THIS** has, but many don't even *know* about it (let alone have ever tried *using* it, for that matter). That superpower, my friends, is called **the power of sharing what you know (with the world at large).**  

Many have already seen this power in action countless times already, that too, on *this very platform no less.* All people who have spent a fair amount of time on here have *already witnessed* as to how just one person sharing their life experiences and learnings can help **SO MANY OTHERS** find a guiding path **TOWARDS THE LIGHT.** 

Believe it or not, a life experience or anecdote that might take you *but 5 minutes to type out in a comment box* can prevent a depressed someone from *taking their very life.* A (seemingly) *"simple"* life lesson that you learned in your own life could turn out to be that *one-missing-piece-of-the-puzzle* that shifts someone from poverty to abundance, or hatred to **LOVE.** **Many upon this world** ***still have*** **NO IDEA as to how INCREDIBLY POWERFUL their words, experiences, stories, learnings or even their** ***anecdotes*** **are or could really BE (to someone else sitting on** ***another distant*** ***corner*** **of the planet no less).**  

I so often get comments on my threads mocking me for *"why do you keep writing these long ass posts"* or stuff like *"it's the internet why do you care so much"* and stuff like that; at times, even in my inbox no less. But ALL OF THAT BECOMES *UTTERLY MEANINGLESS* when even just **ONE LONE PERSON** sends me a heartfelt message of thanks to my inbox as to how one of my posts or comments literally pulled them out of the very jaws of death, hopelessness, or on smaller levels, solved a huge (or small) life problem that they were currently dealing with. And that, *in itself,* is my "grand payoff." Because, like it or not my friends, but **plenty of the people on** ***"the internet"*** **are VERY REAL human beings such as you and me.** And I'm *very, VERY sure* that many others who have posted posts / comments that have assisted someone else in their greatest time of need can vouch for what I am saying here. And so can they tell you all of the sheer ***JOY*** that comes with being able to bring light, love or *HOPE* into someone's life or world. I'm *anyways* not the only one who does this on here (or elsewhere) in any case.  

So, what can you do about all of this *tangibly?* Well, for one thing, you all can start SHARING. **RIGHT. FROM. THIS. MOMENT. (and onward).** SPEAK UP about your experiences. DARE TO BE VULNERABLE about how you overcame depression, or addiction, or suicidal tendencies, or a heartbreak, or *what-have-you.* It doesn't even always have to be a *huge and grandiose thing* you know -- you could even share a *cooking hack* with the rest of the world out there and STILL find a way to help someone in need you know. For **YOU** can never really know (or be able to tell) whether what you have to share with the world is going to "benefit" someone or not, so stop worrying so much about it and share *generously* (like only YOU ever really can). All that matters in the end is whether your **intention** comes from a good, benevolent and *beneficial-to-all* place in your heart, does it not?  

For instance, if you've overcome anxiety, TRUST that there must be, *at the very least,* ***AT LEAST 10 OTHER PEOPLE*** (within, say, a 1,000+ member subreddit alone) who are currently being challenged by *that exact same problem.* Same with the fear of public speaking, or say, addiction. Now, even if your words of inspiration / wisdom / experience are able to assist BUT ONE PERSON UPON THIS PLANET, that is still **ONE MORE HAPPIER PERSON** upon this beautiful world of ours. And believe it or not, **ASSISTING EVEN ONE PERSON EQUALS ASSISTING THE ENTIRE WORLD.** How? *Allow me to explain.*  

Imagine a massive dark room filled with un-lit, living, breathing and walking *candles.* There's no hope, light, or *direction* in this dark, dead room. Everyone's constantly stumbling, falling, collapsing, or *dying.* And then, one day, one candle, **just one lone candle dear folks,** dares to ***light itself up.*** It does so by pushing past ALL of its vulnerabilities, and by going against ALL of the established norms, ways, rules and regulations set upon this *dark and dreary world.* But ***it doesn't care.*** For it simply **KNOWS** that it **HAS TO** express itself now, for it is indeed, **NOW OR NEVER** for it now.  

As soon as this *one single lone candle* lights up, suddenly, the ENTIRE ROOM is filled with LIGHT. Because **THAT'S HOW POWERFUL LIGHT REALLY IS.** Sure, the light isn't *all that much,* but hey, at least it's *there* now! Candles closest to the lit candle are now *affected* by this light, and so are many more others *far off* in the distance. The light then begins to spread, albeit slowly. And then, another candle connects with the first candle and lights up. One candle now becomes *two candles.* Far off in the distance, some candles get the courage to light up all by themselves. Four candles. Five candles. Six candles. Eight candles. Twelve candles. Eighteen candles. **The light multiplies and continues to multiply, slowly but SURELY.** Eventually, the light begins to grow ***EXPONENTIALLY.*** And at long last, the *ENTIRE ROOM IS LIT.* **ALL BECAUSE** that **ONE LONE CANDLE** dared to **KNOW and SHARE its LIGHT** with the *"rest."* And that, my friends, is how positive intent starts *infinite chain reactions* that can eventually transform the *entire planet at large.* This is not false optimism. This is a **fact** (and a *most logical one* at that). And if you look at some of the immensely horrible practices and ideas that humanity has abolished permanently (or at least partially) throughout the ages, it is THIS VERY FACTOR that has contributed to it **ALL.** For step-by-step, nudge-by-nudge, we go towards the LIGHT.  

*Far too many people* absolutely REFUSE to SPEAK UP AND SHARE THEIR STORIES out of sheer anxiety or fear of people's judgement. There are people out there (and quite possibly, in here reading this even) who have successfully broken the cycle of abuse or addiction. Many of them are still *silent.* Some have even conquered depression or anxiety. Still *silent.* There's people out there whose lives have been COMPLETELY TRANSFORMED POSITIVELY by spiritual, supernatural, paranormal or extraterrestrial / extradimensional experiences. They're all on mute today because *"what will people think?".* Don't get me wrong here, I am *SO* ***NOT*** *JUDGING* anyone here (or elsewhere) for being brave (or not) -- but that I simply wish to ask them all *but one simple question here today:* **Would they have STILL remained silent about things if they had KNOWN FOR A FACT that what they had to share could have POTENTIALLY SAVED SOMEONE'S LIFE (or many more!) or even could have POSITIVELY AFFECTED THE ENTIRE WORLD for that matter?** *Every single person reading this* has to ask and answer this question for themselves.  

Our world is currently going through *incredible amounts of purging hidden darkness* (and all of the turbulence that comes with this rather painful exercise). Dark secrets, practices and behaviours of people are being revealed to us *day after day after day.* Barring certain amounts of political games and hidden agendas at play behind some of these things in general, it is, nevertheless, **very much so a FACT (regardless of where you live),** that separation-based concepts such as racism, sexism, casteism, capitalism, and a countless other -isms (and non -isms) exist (and have forever *existed)* within our world that have brought pain and suffering to many. Women have been abused, children have been abused, animals have been abused, plants have been abused, even our very soils, our very waters, and our very *skies* have been abused (and UNFATHOMABLY at that) here. And if **YOU** don't speak up about it to the whole world out there first, then trust me, ***NO ONE ELSE WILL EITHER.*** Because people simply seem to LOVE playing *follow-the-leader* on planet Earth here a tad bit too much, sadly. So you, the lucky one reading this, is going to have to be the one to really be *going in first* in here for making all of this stuff happen, *for the whole world at large to* ***THEN*** *be following along in your footsteps of untold greatness thereon.* **You go** ***FIRST.*** Coz *that's how we roll* on this land, apparently. Well, *so be it then!*  

**YOU** have to be the bold and brave one to start all of these conversations. Be it on the internet, or your gaming chat rooms, or with your *friends, family and relatives,* or *what-else-have-you.* **AND** speak about things in **POSITIVE** terms of ***"what can we do to CHANGE this FOR GOOD?"*** (as opposed to *pointing fingers* and playing *point-less* "blame-games" and such in there). Because, and let's face this FACT once and for all here, that we ALL (as the human collective) have ALL played *some part or the other here* in either *abusing* others ***ourselves*** (sometimes, even *unknowingly* or *unintentionally,* for that matter), **or in** SILENTLY WATCHING / ENTIRELY IGNORING abuse as it happened to *"someone else out there"* (who wasn't **"us").** So, whether you like it or not, dearest sirs and madams, you're ALL involved in ENABLING ABUSE in *some way or the other.* But the good news is that you can also ***BE THE ONE*** who ***HELPS REVERSE IT ALL*** for the ***ENTIRE WORLD AT LARGE.*** And that change begins with, from, and *through* ***YOU.*** All, ***SIMPLY*** by the virtue of you speaking up and making your voice ***HEARD*** -- to even just *one person at a time* if you so have to.  

And **you don't even have to use "written words"** to always express any of this. **FEEL FREE** to express your stories, learnings and ***TRUTHS*** through music, art, game development, or even *math* for that matter. Or absolutely ***ANY OTHER EXPRESSION*** that you can possibly think of, even ***MEDITATIONS*** or ***TELEPATHY*** for that matter. Because, and remember this forever, **THE** ***ENERGY*** **BEHIND A TRULY GOOD, TRULY** ***BENEVOLENT*** **INTENTION** ***NEVER EVER*** ***GOES TO WASTE.***  

**NEVER. EVER. GOES. TO.** ***WASTE.***  

*You, are powerful enough to change the entire damned world.* I repeat, **you ARE (SINGLE-HANDEDLY!) powerful enough to change the ENTIRE DAMN WORLD!** Remember the lone candle. **REMEMBER THE LONE CANDLE.**  

And know that even if you as much as *attempted* writing a post / comment / *what-have-you* only to then trash it, erase it, or never even ended up posting it, ***even THEN,*** my dear friend, **FOREVER remember and KNOW** that THE ***ENERGY*** *behind your GOOD INTENTION* **still went out and uplifted the entire world.** Always know that. Because even you, in your *"ordinariest of human states",* are still, **SO MUCH MORE POWERFUL** than what you'd otherwise ever have even really *guessed.* And so it is. *And so it is.*  

**TL;DR:** You *never even really* ***know*** as to how much an experience, story, anecdote, life experience, learning, or even your *earned wisdom* for that matter could potentially change someone's life for the better, or even *save a life* (or millions *more!)* for that matter. So *DARE TO BE* bold, *DARE TO BE* brave, *DARE TO BE* ***vulnerable,*** and **SPEAK UP AND SHARE** as to what you have to say to the rest of world at large (through whatever form of expression *works best* ***for YOU!)***  

*And finally,* **FOREVER REMEMBER THE STORY of the** ***lone candle.***  

-------------------------------  

**INFINITE** Love, Light and Blessings to ALL who read this.  

**Also, FEEL FREE TO SHARE this message AS FAR AND WIDE as you possibly can. Who knows, this may well be THE message that gets someone to speak up** ***THEIR TRUTH!***  

Love and Peace.TL;DR: My spiritual journey over the past 6 months has given me an intense divine love for all the humans and animals of the Earth and the Universe itself. Be grateful for all the things you have because chances are, you are better off than a huge population of the world.

I've only discovered this spiritual path in June 2019. I still have a long way to go but after finding a divine connection with the universe, my life has totally changed.

I'm in a lot of debt, I'm in my third attempt at college but I have a job, food to eat and a loving family and friends. My situation used to make me feel sad and frustrated at myself. But for the past 7 months, I've been at total peace and I accept that I can solve my problems with grace and hard work.

I was never a racist or a hateful person but I have never felt a love for our Earth and all the humans and animals that inhabit it like I do now. I spent my time reading books and meditating to forge my path.

This kind of divine love that I feel is growing stronger and I have never been more happy and peaceful than I am now. I'm excited to know what the future beholds, even if we live in a depressing era of climate change and other problems.

Remember to be grateful for what you have. If you have food, water, shelter, the ability to read and write then you are better off than a huge majority of the world. Even finding gratefulness in these little things can bring you a lot of bliss. And also remember to respect the Earth and it's resources and not go on a path of endless consumption.

I find myself uninterested in news and ideas that divide us as a community. We are one soul and we are children of the universe. Fighting and divisiveness brings us nothing but eternal suffering.

Love and peace my brothers and sisters of the world ❤❤❤I see synchronicities more and more everyday. More than any other time in my life. And weirdly, this is the most content and ‘at peace with myself’ that I’ve been since I was about 10. Everything feels like it’s coming together; signals aligning and reverberating through the universe…“You must never give in to despair. Allow yourself to slip down that road and you surrender to your lowest instincts. In the darkest times, hope is something you give yourself. That is the meaning of inner strength”Hello beautiful souls I hope you’re all doin wonderful on this fine day wherever and whenever you may be. Just wanted to offer some spiritual motivation. I often wonder how and why I was so attracted to spirituality and why I still am. I always come back to the same reason. Because within spirituality, I see a better world, a better future, a better us. A world where you don’t have to worry about sending your kids out to play because there’s more good (s)he can run into than bad. A world where you’re supported regardless where you’re from, what you look like or what you do on your free time. A world where we’re aware of the connection we all possess and hone in on the innate power we all have within us to manifest and experience true happiness, health, wealth, and fulfillment. A world full of love. This vision, this paradigm that each and every one of us deserves regardless of what you tell yourself as to why you don’t deserve these things is what we need to be striving for. For ourselves, for our families, for our children, and our children’s children’s children. The time is now. Love to all, always. NamasteI’ve been on my spiritual journey over the last 13-14 months and it’s been amazing for me and my mental health. Unfortunately I am the only one in my friendship group who is on this journey so I feel quite alone because when I talk about spirituality and how far I’ve come they bat it off as ‘hippie shit’ and I noticed something today with my friend which just made me feel kinda sorry for him. He was round at my humble abode and the WiFi was down and he genuinely couldn’t sit still and listen to music with me for more than 2 minuets without checking his phone or seeing if the WiFi was back up. He couldn’t fully relax and just chill, it was like he was Afraid he was missing out on something. Too many people in My age group (I’m 19) can’t fully be in the present moment and it’s upsetting. 

Thought I’d post this because it really is shocking that most are like that and it must be horrible to constantly be on edgeThere’s always this guy who carries around a Bible in our downtown park and everyone always laughs at him because he’ll just be standing there talking to no one. but today I had gone to the park alone so I spoke to him about this book I was reading called “the disappearance of the universe” and he shared some really good insights. 

Ive only been to church maybe 2 or 3 times and don’t follow any one religion really  but I was able to put my spiritual experiences into the language of christianity (ex: “when did you come to realize god’s presence in your life?” Instead of “when did you awaken?”) And we both shared our experiences about the day we awakened, and he was so relatable! 

also discussed Heaven with him & we both agreed that we were standing in the kingdom of Heaven but that some may not be ready to recognize it yet but that it is all God’s plan for them (everyone being on a different part of their Path basically)That's not cool, you cant decide if anyone is spiritual or not by the words that person is saying. in fact, not calling someone spiritual is actually worse. It is your ego saying that.
So leave everyone in their value. Even if you don't agree. 

Thank you, ;)“Your beliefs become your thoughts,  
Your thoughts become your words,  
Your words become your actions,  
Your actions become your habits,  
Your habits become your values,  
Your values become your destiny.”  
― GandhiI went through some sort of awakening process, and all these things are happening to my friends as well within the last month. I can’t really describe it other than that for a while the positive vibration (energy, consciousness, etc). seems to have been increasing in the world, but I feel like someone suddenly turned the positive vibration knob up a whole notch and a whole new more powerful energy is suddenly here.

Edit: wow, I wasn’t expecting this from so many people! I was considering commentor bias, but many of you have shared truly powerful events so it can’t be a coincidence.Don't let 5-20 minutes of negative thoughts create a bad vibe that ruins your whole day.

Just observe your own mind and your own thoughts, the only reason a bad day can happen is if you let 5-20minutes of negative thoughts create a bad vibe that ruins your whole day (unless of course something actually really bad happened). So if you notice some negative thoughts, then let them come and go. Just observe it. And after a while positive thoughts will come up again.

So, observe, and make way for the positive day.

[Source](https://ko-fi.com/post/Dont-let-5-20-minutes-of-negative-thoughts-create-F1F15LWKV)Yes, I want to be happy.  But happiness is something of a whimsical thing. It comes and goes.  It depends on the weather (literal and metaphorical).  Bad stuff happens all the time.  A lot of life is going through the motions and doing stuff we don't want to.  It's hard or impossible to be happy all the time.

But freedom?  We can always be free.  Even if we are totally imprisoned, there is always "the last of the human freedoms — to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way.” (Dr. Viktor Frankl)

The thing is that many of us choose not to.  Sure, our chains are imposed on us from the outside at first.  Look at a child.  A child is free.  Well, mostly.  Conditioning starts very early.  But they are much more free than the average adult.

That conditioning little by little takes hold of us.  By the time we're teenagers, we're anything but free.  School feels like a prison.  This is why teenagers rebel.  They are right to do so.  Unfortunately much of their rebellion just ends up creating an alternative society, with its own rules and framework to which they must conform.  Rare is the individual who finds his way out of this trap.

Our slavery is imposed on us by forces greater than us.  But there comes a point, I like to think of it as maturity, when one realizes that he has been a willing participant in his slavery.  Yes, in the beginning it was what we were taught, and it was all we knew.  But if we begin to think critically, it becomes very obvious that we have gone along with it the whole time.  We never questioned it.  And if we did, we never truly took action to free ourselves.

There's a reason why we don't question it.  Slavery is miserable, but at least everything is planned and taken care of.  There's no uncertainty there.  No way to get lost.  No mistakes to be made.  No battles to be fought.  One simply follows the crowd, and lives a meaningless existence of mediocre comforts.  It may not be blissful, but at least it will not be difficult or scary.  When one raises anchor and sails off into the Great Unknown, surely the fear is great.  So to avoid the fear we remain tethered to our cage.

When one comes to maturity, he begins to wonder if such an arrangement is worth it.  We are only here for a short time, and then we go, forever.  There is no coming back. Those who tell you there is are just making things up in order to make their miserable existence a little more bearable.  That's a subtle form of slavery.  The truth is there is no coming back after death, and if there is, certainly nobody has been able to prove it.

So there comes a point where one decides to remove their shackles and take a step into the Great Unknown.  One decides to go totally alone.  One becomes willing to turn their back on the whole society, and to put everything on the line if need be.  All comfort is dropped.

At first one goes cautiously, and many mistakes will be made.  But slowly but surely, one begins to realize that there is no greater gift than freedom.  From freedom stems all the joy, happiness, gratitude, and love that a human being can possibly hope to experience in this life.  It is the only true way.  And once a man has a taste of that, the thought of turning back leaves him forever.  From there on, it is ever onward.

There will be hardship, there will be strife.  There will be agony, tears, difficulties and pain.  This is the price you pay for freedom.  It will not always be a walk in the park.  You will not always be happy.

But my God, you will be **free.**

I can assure you that there is absolutely no feeling like it in the world.  There are no words, there is no comparison.  One must simply taste it for himself.The meaning of life is for you to give life meaning. Time doesn't wait for anybody, the sun will still shine in the morning and the moon will come up at night, regardless of how you feel. You can let the days pass and drown in your own thoughts or take action and rise to the challenge.


https://youtu.be/2m02ZS8SwKQI didn't realize it at the time, but when I was 8 years old I met my soulmate. I went to my cousins house to play just like always, but this time one of their friends from school was staying the night with them. The moment Dalton met me he knew he loved me. That very night he asked me to be his girlfriend. I didn't say yes or no, but instead spit coke in his face. Safe to say he took that as a no. --------

Fast forward to when I'm 15, a few months from my 16th birthday. I had never been allowed to date or anything of that nature. For some reason I asked my cousin for his friends number. Just to reach out and make a friend I guess. Well one thing led to another and I finally convinced my parents to let me date. My first date was at a local sushi/hibachi restaurant with my parents and little brother with me. After dinner we went to Wal Mart and walked around joking and just having a really good time. We talked nightly and texted almost constantly. He is my first kiss. He is my first love. We wrote love notes to each other and occasionally he would be allowed to come to my house, but I was never allowed to go over to his. My mom was scared I would have sex. --------

On the day of our one year anniversary he couldn't come to my house due to lack of transportation, and said why don't we just hang out at his house. I explained my mothers reasoning and he had some choice words about my mother, but I understood his frustration. My mother a few days later ended up finding the messages and saw what he said. She demanded I break things off with him. She blocked his number and would ground me if I ever messaged him. I did try to message him on multiple occasions, but it always ended up with me getting punished. I was heart broken, but I understood where she was coming from so I simply let it happen. I tried dating two other guys during the next year and both fizzled out mutually. --------

The summer I turned 18 was great. I had my own car and I was staying a few nights with my grandparents since my cousin was in town from Florida. I was excited to spend time with him and a few of his friends I had never met before. He ended up blowing me off and it hurt my feelings. It was like 9pm when I decided I would call Dalton and ask if I could come to his house. After about an hour I finally managed to find his house, it was in the middle of no where. We ended up talking until 6am and enjoying each others company. Many kisses and snuggles were shared that evening. For the next month I was able to sneak around and spend time with Dalton without my mom finding out. When she did find out she kicked me out. Dalton immediately allowed me to move in with him. --------

July 1, 2015. The day he asked me to be his girlfriend. A wonderful date indeed. By our first anniversary I knew he was the one I wanted to spend the rest of my life with. We had our fair share of arguments, but we were always able to come to a compromise and end each night snuggled together and say "Good night. I love you." We had many adventures together, too many to name each one in this post. Vacations. Drugs. Date nights. Movies. Games. Sex. We also were building our own family with our many fur babies. A whole lifetime of adventures shoved into 4 and a half years. --------

2019 was our year of grinding. From working two jobs, to both of us getting really good jobs with benefits and awesome pay. We started saving to buy a house in 2020. In October we got our first rental and we were doing really grand. He always made dinner because he wanted to be a chef and own a restaurant one day.  He said that once we get our own house and were married he wanted to go to culinary school. We had goals together and our own individual goals, but we supported each other through what ever life threw at us. --------

November 26, 2019. The day I lost my other half. It was a normal day with plans to make our very own Thanksgiving meal for ourselves the next day. One moment he was telling me to come get him when my show was over and the next I heard a gun shot. He was fooling around and spinning his gun to mess with our room mate. It spun at just the right angle and went off and it was an immediate death. I felt shock and when I finally allowed myself to break down I felt like a large part of me was gone. I remember the entire day from beginning to end in full detail. --------

The first month was a blur. Moved in with my mom, put most of our stuff in storage, went to thanksgiving dinner, had his memorial (which was a lovely event in his honor), christmas, his birthday, new years. In between these events I didn't get off of the couch and ate very little. Always hoping that my death was just right around the corner. In January I met someone on reddit that pointed me in a direction that I needed for spiritual growth and peace. --------

I have grown in ways that previously I didn't even think of. I have reached out to mediums and spiritual advisors. I have left organized religion. I have had contact with Dalton through the veil. Mostly in my dreams or through music. Occasionally I will hear him whisper a word or wake up to the feeling of him kissing me on my forehead. I have started meditating and facing my inner self. I have let go of past grudges and reached out to all I have ever slighted to apologize and try to make up for any pain I cause them. I live each day in the moment and I want to experience life. I want to sky dive. I want to swim with dolphins. I want to travel the world. I want to grow my spiritual abilities and awareness. I want to spread love and happiness to each soul I encounter. I am thankful for the love that we share because it is strong enough to peirce the veil of confusion even only for brief moments. Throughout my life we always found our way back to one another, and I know when my time comes I will be right back in his arms with lots of stories to share. --------

To all that have read this, thank you. I would like you to know that no matter what you are going through or what you have endured that you are loved and you are strong. You can do anything that you want. Your life is unlike any other that has ever and will ever exist. Love and light to you all. 💗I came from an abusive family. However, it seems to me that they get away with all the shit they put people through because they're good at putting up this 'good person' show. I've been focusing on my healing for about a year now, but it's hard when I'm constantly being put down or scapegoated by these people who live in their own pain but projects it to me.

Will they ever experience the karma of their wrong doings?❤️How many actually follow a deeply spiritual life? Most just have buddha statues and chakra stones in their homes and think that makes them spiritual. I doubt most of you are like that here, but in the real world, it seems to be the case.Gonna need to give a little context for this

Back in 2016, I was introduced to the law of attraction by my dad and quickly became obsessed. I swear I felt so at peace and so full of light. I was manifesting things and was constantly elated. I remember at one point, because I always enjoyed Cadillacs, I settled on the idea that god/the universe etc would send me signs in the form of Cadillacs. One particular day, I remember driving looking out the passenger window as I was feeling particularly elated, and spotted a billboard that said “this is your sign” and on the side of the street the billboard was on, 3 Cadillac Escalades drove by. That was an incredibly spiritually emotional experience for me.

Fast forward to present day, I’m having an existential crisis like a mother fucker. I’m feeling overwhelmed with the idea of dying and that being the end of me. Literally rolling panic attacks over this for the past week. Absolutely awful.
Last night, I asked for a specific sign. I’d been seeing cadilacs during my moments of hope during this crisis, but that wasn’t enough. I specifically asked the universe to send me a cherry red Cadillac Escalade(something I rarely see if ever) as a sign that there’s nothing to fear. I asked for that last night, and just now outside my work, one drove by.  I still feel slightly skeptical, truthfully, but I’m definitely in lighter spirits and I’m going to dive more into my spiritual side. Thank you for reading.I've let go of trying to feel connected to source all the time. Instead im rolling with the downs. Dropping the resistance to the pain letting myself express it and letting it flow and pass. 

This has helped me avoid suffering. I still have my down Days but I know it's just part of the human experience.  

When I am up again. I have something to compare it to. I enjoy and embrace it, knowing everything is temporary and the wave of life will come again shifting my mood.

Maybe one day the downs will be so minor I don't label them as downs anymore. But for now I'll just let it be and be glad Im not there all the time.

Does anyone else have a roller coast ride of emotions?
Do you learn to enjoy it? 
Or just strap your self in and go with it ?If you don't know anything about yourself, then you probably don't know why you're living or what you're living for since you don't realize how your own mind works and operates.

Some examples:

**Why am I like this?**  

**Why do I react this way?**  

**Why do I think this way?**  

**Why do I behave this way?**  

**Why do I believe in these things?**  

**Do I know everything?**  

**Am I acknowledging that I don't know everything?**

**What don't I know?**  

**What do I know, but only have a partial understanding of?**

**Is it possible that I'm wrong?**  

**Is it possible that I misunderstood?**  

**Is it possible there's more than what I currently know?** 

**How many times am I aware and paying attention throughout the day?**

**What parts of my behavior are mindless, knee-jerk reactions?**

**What am I doing right now?**

**Where am I?** 

**How can I correct my mistakes?**

**How can I do it better than what I previously did?**

**How can I apply this solution to future instances?**

**What can I do right now?**

**What do I control?**

**What don't I control?**

**Do I know the difference between what I control and what I don't?**

**What can I, as an individual, do about it?**

**Am I making things worse or better?**

**Am I contributing or taking away?**

**Am I being negative or positive?**

**Am I thinking or reacting?**

**How can I manage my time more wisely?**

**Am I engaging in activities that aren't healthy?**

**Which activities do I engage in are considered healthy?**

**What am I doing every day?**

**What do I plan on doing in the future?**

**How can I find a balance between finding time for others vs myself?**

**Am I acknowledging I'm not the only one in this planet?**

**Am I acknowledging we're not the only species in this planet?**

**Am I acknowledging that we all coexist in this planet and it doesn't revolve around me?**

&#x200B;

If you don't have a reasonable explanation for any of these, then its a good place to start as this will carry you to your self-improvement.

&#x200B;

These are more hypothetical questions that can be helpful, though there's no clear answer.

**Why are we humans here?**

**What's the meaning of our human existence?**

**Is there even a meaning at all?**

**How does our existence relate to everything else in the universe?**

**Are we the only intelligent life forms in the universe?**

**Is there something beyond the material world or physical realm?**

**Is it possible something exists that we're not detecting or currently understand?**

&#x200B;

Feel free to add on as this is just off the top of my head.  We can help each other to help ourselves.

&#x200B;

Aside from this is awareness.  All of these questions might overload your mind with thoughts so its good to make note that you're just thinking and not getting consumed by it.  It's this balance of contemplating and awareness that leads to a healthy mind :)Let go of the illusion. Open your eyes and start seeing. Only by seeing can you find what you’re looking for. You live in the illusion because you are afraid to give it up. But it’s the illusion that’s keeping you where you are. Find the cornucopia.**Explanation**: Self worth issues are quite common, and are mostly caused by personalising the insults and attacks from others, and falsely believing that they are objective truths about ourselves, whereas they are really the projections from those who have been hurt and wounded themselves. Beneath their suffering is really a cry for help.

[Quote picture](https://www.instagram.com/p/B8s57nEBrid/)

[More quotes](https://www.reddit.com/r/MindOverMatterScott/search/?q=flair%3Aquote&restrict_sr=1)💞💖 hello everyone, I just wanted to say that I know life can be hard. But stay on the grind!! We will all arrive together!! We work to build society up higher!!❤️🥰💙 thank you so much for working and being a part of the world/community, I am joining as well!! It’s all going somewhere! 
Believe in 
💛light, source, benevolent creator, the infinite!! :) 💛

Sending positive vibes to you💖💙💞 

If anyone wants to be friends please message me in the comments!! I could really use those too!! Thank you so much and love you all! WE ARE CONNECTED💞May we continue to support each other and grow spiritually...Simple. And for the real ones that deadass love YOU, keep them around.**What do you order at a spiritual hotdog stand?**

One with everything.

&#x200B;

**What did the Buddhist monk say to his teacher?**

Thanks for nothing. 

&#x200B;

**I tried to phone the spiritual leader of Tibet once, but was sent a big goat with a long neck instead.**

Turns out I had phoned Dial-a-Llama.

&#x200B;

**I went to a spiritual healer last night...what a load of rubbish**

Even the guy in the wheelchair got up and walked out.

&#x200B;

**I'm tired of explaining to my spiritual Guru how E-mails work.**

He can't just understand what attachments are!

&#x200B;

**Life has 3 levels of existence**

Pain and pleasure in the physical plane. Enlightenment in the spiritual plane. And no leg room in the air plane.

&#x200B;

**Nuns**

Two nuns are driving down the road. Suddenly the devil himself jumps up onto the bonnet and starts to slobber and scratch at the windscreen.   
One of the nuns yells at the other one driving and says "Sister! Sister! Show him your cross."  
The nun quickly winds down the window and yells  "Get off the bonnet you bloody fucking idiot, you're scratching my paint job!"This was the response:

"First, you need to ask for help. Imagine you are speaking to the God within you and to the God outside of you at the same time. Then, ask me for help out of your anxiety and depression. It is a little known fact, that I must do what you ask. Ask carefully.

"Second, you need to release judgment. I am already trying to get you out of this situation. I have been trying for a long time. Your judgment that stems from your low spiritual state is blocking me from helping you. You need to be open minded so that you are willing to go down this path that you current disagree with.

"Third, be sensitive. I am nonverbal and my touch is subtle. You must feel my subtle tug and follow where I lead.

"Fourth, trust me. In order for me to lead you out of darkness, you must fall into my arms with full trust that I will catch you. I control all things. All paths lead to me. Some paths lead to additional suffering but all paths lead to me. Go with your first instinct. That is the path of least suffering. Listen to my voice and trust that first instinct.

"Finally, be grateful. I have already started this work within you. The progress is small and you must find it. When you find it, embrace it and imagine what it will feel like when this progress grows. It helps to verbally speak your gratitude for this progress. Not only is this an outward expression of an inward feeling, but you are also speaking truth into this world. Also, verbally speak your gratitude for the progress you will see in the future. By doing this, you will be speaking prophecy and speaking truth into the future.

"You have had this power from the very beginning. We are not separate. We are one. Let us move forward as one.

"Love,

God"Or is it just me?

It seems like the world is literally ending and there’s no going back to the old ways we used to live. Saving up for a nice home with a pool, working a 9-5 at an office, it all seems like something of the past that we don’t need anymore. Is this just my imagination?I have been with my bf who's now my fiance' for almost 12 years. However, I became aware of my journey to spirituality later in the relationship. I made a somewhat similar post here 3 days ago. 

So at first it was the loneliest journey mainly because i felt like i cannot talk to him about it. Even if he listened i did not feel heard. I was beginning to feel like he's not "the one". But the more I experience things, the more I learn and this is my realization. 

I felt alone because I thought that not having similar beliefs means not loving me enough. When you believe in something, you automatically think it's the universal truth and there's no gray area to things. It's either I am right or wrong or you love me and believe or practice it too or we won't work out. I viewed him as non-spiritual because my idea of spirituality does not resonate with his. He's agnostic and a skeptic. 

But boy he loves me the way i want to be loved (set aside my spiritual preferences). He is good for my sanity. He is responsible. Overall healthy for my being. I also notice one great thing which I have only realized now. He is SO great with animals. He loves them and they adore him too. He asked me one time to not throw the water from the rice cooker while I'm cleaning it to make another pot. He said instead of throwing the little bits of rice left, we could feed it to birds who visit every morning by the window. Birds visit us daily because of this. He feeds feral cats and dogs. Every night he watches videos of animals being rescued and he's so happy. He's a natural carer. He's good with children too. And honestly i am not. I love animals but not really sure how to deal with them. 

So i realized that he's not spiritual in a way that I know but he is spiritual in his own. Your partner may be too. You just have to look past your ego and ideals sometimes so you could see better. 

Sorry this is too long. I am about to take a shower and head to work so bye bye for now.I just can't wrap my head around it. The whole thing feels surreal. I don't know how a human can just sing on like nothing's happening while people are dying in front of him. I know the official statement says he wasn't aware of what was going on, but from what I've seen that doesn't seem possible. I just get this weird dark energy feeling from it all and I don't understand. What are your opinions?Just don't tell anyone.So I noticed that there’s a lot of misinformation out there about what a “*spiritual awakening*” is and what it entails. It's not as mystical, magical or “woo woo” as it is made out to be. To be fair, the term itself is a bit vague and misleading. Awakening is synonymous to the word enlightenment which is just a fancy way of saying “*the full comprehension of something*”. 

With that being said, a spiritual awakening is the process of becoming fully conscious of our spirit aka who we fundamentally are, what motivates us and why we truly desire the things we desire. This is done by observing, questioning and challenging our thinking and behavioral patterns that stem from certain belief systems and paradigms we were programmed to believe. This programming started in our early childhood, when we were just beginning to learn about the way the world works and how we relate to it. As children, we didn't have a sufficient level of critical thinking skills to define it for ourselves so we relied on authority figures, our community and environment to (directly or indirectly) define these things for us. This programming then becomes the foundation for the lens to which we view our lives. Over time, we become so enmeshed in our programming that we forget that there’s other ways of seeing reality outside of the narrow and faulty perspective we were taught to identify with.

 Most people will live their whole lives without even realizing how limited their world view actually is. We all have learned at some point how difficult it is to make someone change their perspective even when there's clear evidence and facts that disproves it. (i.e confirmation bias) The reason why this is such a frustrating and difficult thing to do is because of the evolutionary defense mechanism within all of us that is super misunderstood. Yes, I'm talking about the ego. The ego is responsible for upholding the idea of who we are (what we identify with) and defending us against anything that threatens that. Therefore, a common characteristic of someone who operates too much from the ego has an "*us vs. them" mentality*. They categorize the people that they perceive to be different from them in some way as “wrong, bad or untrustworthy” and the people who are similar to them as “right, good and trustworthy”. If you watch the news or listen to the media you’ll see that this division is super prevalent. I don't think I need to explain why operating from this mentality is such a destructive and damaging thing since we’re basically living it. 

**The Catalyst**

In order for us to “awaken” we need to first become aware of the stuff I mentioned previously. But for this to happen, there needs to be some sort of catalyst. This catalyst is typically a significant, emotionally charged event that causes sudden change, loss or upheaval that completely challenges your sense of identity/security and what you believed to be true. You are forced to re-evaluate the past decisions you made and it highlights all the dysfunctional areas in your life. Once we become aware of these things we can start to peel back the layers of our ego to dissolve all the unhealthy attachments we have to things like status, money, recognition, etc. We realize that these things don't truly make us feel happy or whole as a human being. This realization isn't as easy, light and fun as it is portrayed in mainstream spirituality. In fact, it's the complete opposite. It feels like you are simultaneously losing your mind and dying. Many people refer to this phenomena as an “*ego death*”, which is defined as a complete loss of your subjective identity. 

**The Dark Night of the Soul**

As you undergo the process of unlearning and deconstructing your belief system and paradigms, you become hyper aware of any traumatic memories from your past and are confronted with painful and intense emotions that you repressed so that you can healthily resolve and integrate them. This stage is fittingly referred to as “*The Dark Night of the Soul*”. Many people don't get past this stage because of how uncomfortable it makes them. They choose to regress back to their old belief systems because it's more comfortable not facing the true reality of things. For some people, they may feel like they’re actually being forced to regress back into their old patterns not by choice but because of the people closest to them. Family and friends may notice that something has changed in the individual and that may threaten them for many reasons. They may become fearful and uncomfortable by the fact that they no longer relate to you as well as they once did and that challenges their sense of familiarity/security. For others, this change mirrors back to them the unresolved issues within themselves causing them to project all their anger and frustration onto you. This incongruence might lead to the individual becoming ostracized or ridiculed in a time when they’re in need of their loved ones the most. This leaves the person feeling even more defeated and exhausted. It takes a lot of emotional and mental strength to realize that this has nothing to do with you and it doesn't mean that your family or friends dont love or support you. Needless to say, this isn't for the faint of heart. 

**Integration & Re-connection** 

This is the stage that makes up for the personal hell you went through during the previous stage. This is where you synthesize and integrate all the uncomfortable realizations and painful memories you experienced into wisdom. The things that used to trigger you or bother you about yourself or other people don't really affect you as much anymore. You become a lot less reactive and emotional. You cultivate a greater sense of understanding and compassion for yourself and the people around you. You don't feel the need to correct, judge or criticize people for doing things a different way or believing in things that you don't believe in. You don't engage in the divisive “us vs. them” mentality anymore so you begin to feel a sense of unity and connection to everyone and everything around you. You begin to feel completely whole and secure in who you are as a person so you don't need external validation or feel the need to obtain anything outside of yourself to feel worthy. You develop a better relationship with yourself and as a result you experience better relationships with others. You see the beauty in all the nuance and complexity that exists in life and have a greater appreciation for all life. 

**Final words**

Please keep in mind that this process isn't linear, many people experience their “spiritual awakening” in different ways. This isn't a thing that just happens once and is done kinda deal, people can experience multiple awakenings in a lifetime. Life is just a constant process of learning and “failing”. Because If you really think about it, it's kinda impossible to really know everything there is to know about everything because you don't even know what you don't know. 

Anyway, remember to stay humble and never stop questioning & learning.

Edit: Thank you guys so much for the awards!! I won't be able to respond back to every pm or comment I got but please know that I'm really grateful that you guys were able to gain some sort of clarity & value from this post. My intention of writing posts like this, is to help the people who are currently where I once was not too long ago. This process is no joke and can last for years. Im not even completely sure if there's even an end to it but we're all in this together. I sincerely wish you all the best of luck! :)I love you all.Does anyone else experience that some days you're on a spiritual high, having total mind control, positive thoughts, etc. And then for next few days you're on a lower consciousness level. I feel like "being spiritual" comes and goes in cycles for me.Around the corner, by the curb,
wishing not to be disturbed,
a homeless man approaches me.
I avert my gaze reflexively.

“Hello young man.” he comes to say, 
then he simply turns away.
He beamed a smile and then departs,
not asking anything from the start.

I walk away confused,
feeling cruel and disabused.
He just wanted to be heard, 
and I refused to say a word.

At the counter to buy a meal,
choosing between different deals,
the clerk looks me in the eye,
simply waiting for my reply.

“Are you going to watch the game?” she asks,
as she briefly pulls down her mask,
to reveal an aging, glowing face,
full of kindness and of grace.

“No I’m going to eat this meal instead,
then perhaps just go to bed.” 
“Ok honey, you be blessed.”
And in that moment, I was at rest.

I thanked her with a friendly gaze,
and was lifted out of my malaise.
I went back home, my spirits high.
My soul had just been resupplied.

Teachers come from every side.  
Never elusive, nor do they hide.
They are always there for me,
depending on what I choose to see.I've changed a whole lot over the years but I still get into funks.  And it's weird, but I think the funks are somehow related to the amount that I'm changing.  Back in the day it was just stagnant "bluh" but now I feel like it's some sort of reaction to all that's going on with me. It's like the mind desperately trying to fight back before it's too late.

But today was rough, man.  No particular reason.  Just felt crappy and like life sucked and that I'd never get over this crap, and even if I did what would even be the point?  Yeah.  Brutal.  

I kept running in my head possible solutions.  "Well, there's this teacher.  Maybe I should go back to him." Or "maybe I need to do more meditation" etc. etc.  All sorts of questioning and planning and doubt and confusion.

Somehow though all my planning and scheming felt futile.  I don't want to do anything or change anything, and some part of me feels like that's the right direction.  So as I settled down for a much needed nap today, I had this thought: "are you really just going to do nothing and wait around for some sort of a miracle?"

And my answer, funnily enough, turned out to be "yes".  That's exactly what I'm going to do.  

Because it's paying attention to these thoughts that makes them seem scarier than they are. It's feeding into them that keeps the bicycle pedaling.  Quit pedaling and eventually it all comes crashing down 

So yes, that's exactly what I'm going to do. Absolutely nothing and wait for a miracle.

Finally I'll just face the funkiness without trying to change it or run away from it.  Let's see what it's all about.  Let's see if it's really as scary as my mind wants to make it out to be.

And somewhere beneath all that I can feel the peace and contentment growing.Today is a special day, as many of you are aware of, it's the Supermoon this evening. This is the Full Moon of Aires, and as this moon typically does, it aligns perfectly with the holy week and numerous other planetary changes (Jupiter & Pluto’s position, balance of sun/earth/moon); which are priming Earth and its inhabitants for a huge wave of energy. 

Now the Full Moon of Aires is directly tied to Christianity, and although I don't personally align with any religion, I do study each to gain the universal wisdom that each contains. This is an incredibly liberating, healing, transformative, and uplifting full moon cycle that represents the holy week and spirituality itself. This full moon can be understood as the moon of Restoration or Resurrection if you prefer that term. And as this too is known as the Pink Supermoon, we must understand that all of these are pointing us towards the unique time that is Spring. Our abilities to heal ourselves are already powerful, but this full moon provides extra juice so we may fully transform ourselves. Like the caterpillar yearning for flight, this is the time where we can collect enough energy, motivation, and confidence to build our chrysalis. It's through this full moon that we can not only heal/transform ourselves, but our planet- and considering everything going on we must see these universal signs of 'ironic timing' (the universe has a great sense of humor) as our time to act. 

Like any opportunity that life offers us, it can go either way. So to ensure you don't end up getting tossed in this wave of vitality coming our way there's a few things you can do to avoid being victim to your own lesser natures and these powerful energies: 

**Ground/Root Yourself:** Take some time by yourself today to simply connect with Earth. Either through the physical act of standing or sitting in the grass/dirt to a more conscious act of meditation while visualizing roots of light extending from your root chakra (base of spine) and extremities. When we ground ourselves, not only does the physical body get cleansed and alleviated, but it cleanses us of negative energy. Our Earth is an amazing healer, as we are since we too are expressions of Earth, these powers combined level you up like Captain Planet, and the healing potential of yourself and Earth are increased. As you receive her love, she receives the negative and transforms it back into positive. See this is the initial clearing the ground/foundation, realignment into love/positivity, in addition to building up protection so you may receive all energies safely and that they may flow into the desired centers for healing.   


**Fix your Attention to a Higher Purpose:** Allow yourself to stay focused on those higher aspirations we have for ourselves (truth, growth, love, inclusivity, openness, etc.) and do everything in your power to explore them. Understand the cause & effects to your changes, the results/impact of not changing, the life experiences that brought you there etc. Most importantly, this is to humble ourselves so the waters of life that we receive don't flow into the paths of least resistance (bad/destructive habits, lesser natures) because then we're getting tossed by the wave, not riding it. 

**Meditate:** Obviously dedicating any time to your own inner-looking will provide the necessary space to explore and consistent nourishing to grow, however this reminder is geared towards a Full Moon Mediation. See this as your 'pranic' (energetic) dinner. This is when you will consciously open yourself up to receive the energies, in addition to consciously leading them into the many centers of the body for assimilation, transmutation, and ultimately transformation. I can't stress this enough, it's incredibly important to meditate when the full moon is actually out, even better at its peak, and even best you're outside with plenty of skin exposed to the moonlight (and your crystals if you're into all that lol). 

I hope these reminders help you during this opportunistic, transformative, and healing time. Now is the time to act, now is the time to heal, now is the time we transform ourselves, our planet, and the future of humanity. 

I Love You All and Wish You Luck Along Your Journey  
💖🙏🏽"You may fast and pray and do good works. Oh yes, you should! But if you ever imagine that all those things you do are some transaction, oh no. God is not in business. God only wants a temple that is perfectly and completely empty."

- Meister EckhartI’ve always rotated out of good jobs every 2ish years. I’m getting close to hitting the 3 year mark here and the only thing holding me back from rotating out again is that I’ve realized I will always be chasing that feeling. It’s that “everything is new and exciting” feeling. I’m tired of chasing it. I’ve been praying for the guidance, courage and opportunity to take the leap and pour my all into something I’m passionate about. I hope all the uncomfortableness that the universe is putting me through right now is to force me into following my true path. Idk I just needed to rant/vent. My soul is tired.

Edit: thank you to everyone for the kind words. I posted this just to rant because this community is so understanding, and received the best perspectives and encouragement. Sending lots of strength and love to all of you.Forgive yourself for not being flawless and perfect. Your pitfalls are as important as your success. Those who appreciate you will see that every little obstacle crafted you as the amazing person that you are today.

Be uniquely you!
By Alessandro Carosi

I was in the tube in London and reading a newspaper left from someone I found an Article that hit me strong in the face and in my Soul, it did cause it was related to something I’m interested those days, the article about an old man, a succesful man, they asked him the secret of his success in life, he said that his success have been wrote in a paper that he always carry with him, in the piece of paper he wrote long time ago
IF YOU THINK YOU CAN, YOU CAN!!!!!!!Nature can be your friend in times like these. 

[Tranquility Shift - Nature is your friend ](https://youtu.be/2WTMrDIoIh4)There is a method that is documented in books such as the Law of One that I have experimented with over the past year, and I am beginning to realize its power. I want to share it with you all because I believe it is not only a fundamental tool in humanities shift in consciousness, but one of the first tools we must begin using if we are to make this transition.

The method is very simple. When you have a problem, you sit down, try to clear your mind or just breath, then you state the problem either out loud or in your head. Then you wait for an answer. It is important to calm your mind, but at the same time allow thoughts to flow in. Pretend as if you are watching the clouds float by - no need to grasp, but stay alert. One of these clouds is an answer. If you are an experienced meditator, you can simply quiet your mind and wait for the answer to come. Regardless, no need to inspect thoughts too intensely. Let them come naturally.

When an answer comes, and in my experience in comes pretty quick, you will know. The answer will make perfect sense. You will say "holy crap, I can't believe how easily I solved that!" You may not have all the answers, but you will know the next step. Your question will have been answered.

I know this may sound bizarre to some of you, but I strongly urge you to give it a try for yourself. I truly believe that this is an extremely powerful tool that we must begin using. We all have problems. We all are trying to figure out our path. This is the answer. I can't speak for everybody, but I do believe that for many, this is the answer (no pun intended).

Take a moment right now to ask yourself what problem is bugging you, then try this method out and share in the comments how it worked for you. I look forward to hearing from you.

Peace be with you allI have struggled with my mental health ever since I was a teenager and have had very bad anxiety and depression and also a personality disorder, BPD. Life is very hard for me. This past year I feel like I have been stripped away from everything I’ve ever known or thought I knew about life. I don’t look at it the same anymore. I have no idea what happened. I started questioning my existence and went down a rabbit hole. I have done so much research but there is no solid evidence as to why we are here and the fact that they say there are multiverses gives me so much anxiety. I feel like if I knew I was here for a purpose and that my existence mattered I’d be able to go on. People have so many different beliefs and I feel like we can trick our brains into believing whatever we want. I feel like I have prayed really hard to whatever is out there and nothing has happened. I can’t stand feeling like this any longer. I miss when I used to be happy and excited about life and most days I don’t even want to get out of bed and just want to sleep so I don’t have to deal with my brain questioning everything. I’m running out of hope.Why are people so resistant to say anything positive about money or its benefits? Is it just due to deep rooted stigmas from culture and/or religion? Does it feel somewhat 'immoral' as it may imply one is greedy or values it more than other things (which is not what I am suggesting). I have also noticed that some people who vehemently say they dislike money also desire it greatly. What are your thoughts on this?Mind-blowing epiphany here. 

For months now I've been trying to make sense of this question : "how do you know what's a gut feeling versus what's just my inner child or my ego or a part of me that's not fully healed, or dealing with an insecurity etc?". I had been finding it hard to trust my gut instinct when it was causing me so much emotional pain over problems that didn't actually appear to exist.

The answer i came up with is that the gut can always be trusted, as long as you feed it true thoughts. 

If you fantasise about worst-case scenarios then in time, your gut will see these as reality and start giving you appropriately unpleasant feelings through your felt sense. But this is not a failing of your gut, it's just that you let your thoughts spiral so much that they became your reality.

These thoughts are like junk food.1. Remember to stay true and honest with yourself. This is just as important as being honest and true with those around you.
2. Don't let fear hold you back from the truth.

Good luck on your journey, and Namaste. 🍂.... start with yourself.“Young people facing unusual strokes due to covid 19” 
“Different symptoms inside of individuals who are in the midst of covid 19”
“Attacks the heart”
“Attacks the lungs”
“Attacks the kidneys” 

Turn to your neighbor, say “I am thankful for you”. Give a hug to those you love if you can. Go fill the shoes of your desire if you can, if not, ask for it to come. What can hurt you now? You’ve been shown immunity from something RIGHT NOW that literally doesn’t make sense to anyone in the world right now because NOTHING MAKES SENSE. There is no sensible reason WHY the earth exists, why our universe exists. It doesn’t make sense why we exist, yet here we are, able to tap into amazing unconditional love at any moment. 

I AM PROUD OF YOU FOR BEING HERE. YOU ALL HAVE A FRIEND IN ME. YOU ARE LOVED. YOU ARE STRONG. YOU ARE IMPORTANT. 

Stop hiding. I’m not saying leave the quarantine, but branch out. Expand. This is your chance. Love those from afar who have never seen it. You’re amazing, they’re amazing, being alive and here is amazing, we are ALL FAVORED. No more excuses.I know you all are trying you best. 

I’m thankful for sharing this lifetime with all of you. 

Remember that you are good enough for this world, you have always been. 
There is nothing wrong with you. 

I’m rooting for you.No, you are not an "old soul" because you're unpopular and \~no one understands you\~

No, you are not "special" because a psychic told you so (she gets paid more if you come back because she validated you, you dum dum.)

No, you are not a "twin flame" because your boyfriend dumped you two months ago, but you still want to be with him.

There are some really interesting contributions here sometimes, but dang, I'm so sick of the silliness. Being spiritual doesn't mean you have to throw *all* logic out the window.

The root of all of these pathetic beliefs is a desperate need to feel that you are special. I guess I, too, felt that at one point. Like when I was a teenager. If this sub is full of teens, then, I forgive you. If y'all are 30+, my god, look into therapy.

I've accepted my "just one out of an endless string of souls"-ness, and I hope you will, too.

....And no, people who fail to recognize that you're special are not "mindless drones who are just jealous." Become one with everything....stop looking for a reason to stand above us. Yesterday I had a talk with a girlfriend of mine from high school and she reminded me of my first ever “business”. 

I was 15 turning 16 and I knew I was going to be allowed to get my driver’s license soon… learning to drive was BIG deal for me because it meant FREEDOM… but I also knew my parents were broke and that I was going to have to pay for my driving lessons and the test by myself.  

In other words, I knew I needed to make some money. 

One day, I had this random idea to cut my mother’s silkiest, nicest pair of pajamas into little squares of fabric, and I started making BOWS for my hair. I hot glued some of them to clips and hairbands... there wasn’t really much thought behind it at all, I wash honestly just going down one of my creative rabbit holes. 

The next day, I wore one of my hair bows to school and someone asked me where I got it from. I offered to bring her one of the other ones I made in exchange for 5 bucks. 

Before I knew it, I was running a hair bow empire. 

EVERY GIRL in the school wanted one (or two…or SEVERAL…in all colors and sizes) 

My mom went from being pissed about her PJs to being my first employee… I was actually making more money than she was at her full-time job at one point. She took me to the fabric store on the weekends, she taught me how to use her sewing machine so things went more efficiently, she helped me set up a production line, cut and package…  
 

Our dining room table turned into a bow factory.   
 

I was SO PUMPED to go to school every day…. and every night, after paying my mom for her time, I came home and poured all my money into a shoebox under my bed…counted it… looked at it…admired and appreciated it… 

Unfortunately, as soon as I hit the $ amount that I set as my target – which was how much I needed for the driving lessons + a new bikini + some additional fun things that I added to my wish list – I got called into the principal's office. 

They shut me down. 

The teachers had noticed this bow frenzy and when they discovered that they were coming from WITHIN the school grounds, they had to put a stop to it…apparently, it was against school rules to sell anything on the premises (since drugs could easily also be sold out of the same backpack, under the guise of “candy”) 

…my empire collapsed.  
 

BUT I got my driver's license a few months later… paid for it all by myself. 

The moral of the story?   
 

The idea to make the bows was given to me by something greater than me. I asked for something, and the universe delivered. I didn’t even know I was manifesting at the time – I didn’t even connect hair bows with a source of income at first – but I believed that I would get the money for my driver’s license, followed my intuition, took aligned action, and I did.   
 

So ask for what you want – stay open to things coming to you in unexpected ways – act on your intuition – & trust that it will find its way to you.Lately have been caught in existential dread and I'm looking for books to help me restore my faith. I would appreciate any recommendations 💞 I'm open to anything.I’ve been feeling a lot of darkness recently and just been in a bad headspace. Have worried that my nice facade/ personality my whole life has just been me being aware enough to protect others from my true dark self. Im starting to isolate myself because of this, don’t look people in the eye because I think i’ll scare them etc. I understand there’s light and dark but i feel like i’m getting consumed by my shadow. Anyone know what this is? I’ve only been experiencing it recently.I've really been going through it these days.I know i dont because I literally spent the past 2 weeks sacrificing my own time just to get back with her. Times i couldve been meditating, working out, or doing something meaningful i wasted on her. I stayed up all night yesterday just to literally out of nowhere be like “you know, i didnt like you as much as you think i did.” “I was just saying an doing all that stuff to make you feel special. I really actually loved somebody else”. And that just really made me realize something important...

I already kinda knew all this already deep down inside. Since the start a lot seemed odd about her. And i knew something was up with her. And i just ignored myself because i “thought” she was the one. Which was stupid of me.

If i loved myself none of this would affect me right now. I wouldnt even still be talking to her. I wouldve had higher standards for myself, so I wouldn’t have even ended up dating her.

So from now on im listening to myself more. Im gonna start having more respect for myself and work towards being the greatest me i could be. :)


Edit: man thank you guys so much for the support :)A lot of people don't realize that we are manifesting all the time.  

You create your reality every day.  

You vibrate all the time and you decide what your vibration frequency is.  

If you think negative thoughts, you vibrate at a lower frequency.  

If you think positive thoughts, you vibrate at a higher frequency.  

Your goals are at a higher frequency.  

So if you want to manifest your goals, you need to vibrate at a higher frequency in order for you to meet your goals.  

Choose your thoughts wisely!  

**I would leave to hear your thoughts about this!**

&#x200B;

Smiles & Hugs, Kalle, 

Perfect AffirmationsYou always have to believe that things are working out for you no matter what. Being patient and trusting the process means that you believe you'll receive the seed you've sowed. Don't let worry, fear, and anxiety make you dig up what you've planted just to see if it’s growing.

Everything changes when you begin to love yourself. You no longer send out energy of desperation or the need to be filled from the outside. You become a powerful source within yourself that attracts better. The more you love who you are, the less you seek validation and approval.

You’re growing in ways you don’t realize yet. You’re being pushed out of your comfort zone to step into your truth. It’s all about evolving right now. It’s all about letting go and allowing change to take place. Keep breathing through it all. Everything is about to make sense.A  couple of days ago an old friend reached out to me asking how I have  been. We haven't spoken in a long time, and it meant a lot to me as I am  going through depression. I responded back and now she hasn't replied  for about 4 days. I have a feeling she has just ghosted me. She knows I  am going through depression, anxiety, panic attacks etc because I opened  up to her a couple of months back.

Why  reach out and then just not respond? I felt so happy to receive that  message and now I feel really shitty. Wtf is the universe trying to tell  me? Why is spirit doing this?Hi beautiful for whoever is reading this I felt the need to type something out.. you are so worthy and amazing. Cherish every moment of life and love the little things. So much things happen for a reason and people need to realize that. Theres so many lessons in life that make you so much stronger . I believe that people change so you learn to let go easier, so you can become stronger when the next chapter of your life starts... Keep your head held high leave the toxic , negative energy. Smile, be happy, live as if there is no tomorrow, because that is such a beautiful wonderful thing. Love yourself...it is such an amazing thing to do, falling in love with yourself will make you so much happier ! <333Somewhere, at some point, all religions started as a spiritual process. But in their eagerness to organize, they lost the fundamentals. Religion is just spirituality gone bad. Let us understand the distinction between religion and a spiritual process. The moment you say you belong to a religion, you call yourself a believer. The moment you say, “I am on a spiritual path,” you call yourself a seeker. What is the difference between believing and seeking? You can seek only that which you do not know. Or in other words, the fundamentals of seeking are that you have realized that you do not know the essential nature of your own life. You do not know the source of this creation. You do not know who you are, what you are, where you came from and where you will go. You are seeking to know. When you are in a state of “I do not know,” you cannot fight anyone. I finally experienced Oneness last night and wrote down all my thoughts as it hit me. I will warn you all though that I was very high and wrote down my thoughts exactly as they came so it's very casual and doesn't exactly read like spiritual poetry :-P

So here goes:

"Everything that is going to happen has already happened. And it's cool. It's chill. It'll be fine. It's right here within your reach. Just grasp it and embrace it. You're God. You're the entire universe experiencing itself in a single moment. Nothing else exists but everything exists at the same time. All opposites actually make a duality.

Leave duality. You dont even think of yourself as "one". You're either always talking to someone or talking to yourself. Why do you need to "talk" to your own damn self so much? Just fucking shut up and listen to the universe. It's singing, it's dancing, it's getting destroyed and rebuilt. It always existed and it never did. It doesn't matter! It's all just One. You can't talk about it.

Just feel it. How can't you feel it? It was something you always wanted. The universe kept winking at you. You were looking for love, but you have everything. Not even love, but something beyond everything. What more do you want? There's nothing to want. You literally had it all along. It was RIGHT there. It wanted to talk to you. But you kept talking to yourself instead of just listening to your Self. 

The whole story. Do you see it now? Your whole story is happening but actually, it's happened. Everything has happened. You can still do whatever you want. Enjoy the Self. Follow the Self. Do what you think is right to your Self. And then it'll be okay.

You just need to do your best. Everything else has taken care of itself.

You don't think you're doing the best? It's okay. It'll honestly be fine. Just be gentle with the Self. Talk to it, gently. But not to YOURself. Just to the Self. Ask it. Try to cajole it? Maybe it'll listen. Maybe it won't. It's cool either way. 

But honestly, it WILL listen. It will respond to you. It always has. You wanna change something? Just fucking change it. Wanna do something? Just fucking do it. 

Is it something you can't just change or do like that? That's cool. Do your best then? And... That's it? Like that's literally it. So chill. It's fine. It's cool. We're all good.

Because we're eternity. We're beyond time. Time is something we made up to explain our "experience". Why did we ever make up all these "stories" honestly? Life is not a fucking story. It's just a moment. It's right here. This moment. It's ALL there is and ALL there ever will be. This is fucking it, dude. 

I wish I was never indoctrinated into our dualistic rules. Who do we fucking think we are thinking we're so big when we're actually smaller than ants? Like honestly who the fuck am I to even decide right and wrong? I do rights. I do wrongs. I'm not perfect. Noone is. But... It doesnt matter. There are NO rights and wrongs. You just do right by YOU. when you do something just ask yourself, are you doing right by your Self? The Self that is Everything? If yes, then do it. That's all there is to it. 

Like... Just fucking relax, dude! You honestly dont have the weight of the universe on your shoulders! You dont need to "prove" anything to anyone. You are alive! You are everywhere. You are God/Self. What the fuck else do you need?

Don't like something happening? Um... Change it if you can. Give it your best shot. If not? Meh whatever, it's cool. Move on. I dont need to worry about anything because like... It's cool. I AM everything.

If I'm doing something to myself, it IS for the best. Because this that I've realized is THE BEST.

I'm at peace. And I have everything. I don't need anything else. I'll be fine. We're all fine. We'll all be fine.

We're all doing this to each other. And sometimes we do horrible things to each other. But it's okay lol. It's cool. Like... We're doing this to ourselves because we know it. We made it! It happened. So it's fine. We can let whatever is happening happen.

We should just do OUR best. That's LITERALLY it. There are no sides... It's the SAME thing.

Good/evil, happy/sad, it doesnt exist. Stop being so fucking dualistic. You are fucking... Everything, baby!"

After I wrote all this, I cried. And then I laughed. The universe showed me it's Oneness by having me experience duality again, like it's been doing all along. I can finally feel the universe dancing with me.

I love you all ♥Thanks.And that’s okay.  Gotta feel those feelings.  Only down side is I’m usually a shining light of optimism.  So when I’m off everyone can tell from a mile away.  But they’re my feelings and I’ll do what I want with em.  Especially feel em.Just curious if this happened to anyone else, usually my dreams are pretty foggy but last night they were very vivid and I felt a burst of energy today! Maybe having to do with the full moon?So I’m the chick who posted here like a week ago and here’s an update- Turns out quitting caffeine did work in my favour because it took my mind off my smoking quit. It is possible to quit multiple things at once! 😁just because something didn’t work out for you doesn’t mean it won’t for someone else. 

Anyway my biggest tip is if you know you will quit without a doubt in your mind, no matter what is thrown at you you will succeed! Doesn’t matter how much you pay for therapy, nicotine replacements, listening to aunt Susan’s advice. You’ve got to do it for you! Mind over matter big time!There is nothing to be improved, or realized that will make you better than you already are. There is no spiritual advancement. 

If we seek freedom, we cannot treat spirituality as yet another pursuit. That is a game we play with all things in this world, but it is a lie, made up for the sake of fun. Things are as they were in the beginning, like the seasons. Time changes only the expression of these things. 

We are already what we want to be. We need nothing, and need to do nothing, to be whole. Perhaps with a small chuckle we will see that it was a trick, that enlightenment was not a great attainment at the end of it all.As we all know the Mayans predicted the end of the current age on December 21, 2012. The next age will be the age of Aquarius. What we don't realize is that 11 days were lost for each year when Britain switched over to the Gregorian Calendar in 1752.

1752-2020 is 268 years

268 x 11 = 2948 days

2948 / 365 days in a year = 8 years

2012-2020 is 8 years.

The great conjunction on 12/21 of Jupiter and Saturn was a sign that we are on the threshold of this new Age.

Also consider the Book of Revelation. A common interpretation of it is that before the mass return of Jesus (aka Christ Consciousness) to the Earth the final of the four horsemen is pestilence. What has been the main headline of 2020? The coronavirus.I'm really starting to question reality a lot, just feels like our reality is kinda illusion and to repetitive and the music is just on replay.

Yes I used life as analogy of music, been listening to Alan Watts
The biggest seeds that I feel have grown and truly stuck with me, hitting me deep within, making me make huge shifts and changes within myself, are those from people with Down syndrome.

When I was a kid I would stay at my Aunties house which was a boarding house for children with Down syndrome and disabilities of some sort.

I always enjoyed spending holidays there are I always enjoyed there company, the energies, the happiness I would feel around these people. Also the happiness I would see in my aunties face as she talked about them and spent time with them.

I had one girl in particular much older than me who I really enjoyed hanging in her room with (as she really like to just be in her space, her room). She loved space and always called me into her room and hour or two before her bed time to hang out, looking out the window enjoying the stars talking about anything and everything. She loved the stars and I always loved her energy even wh en she occasionally got mad (which happens) she always made me feel safe, happy, loved, made me want to see the good over the bad in all situations.

I came to visit one day and she was so so excited way more than usual. I thought she’d drawn something or made something she was excited to show me. She said I had to wait until night time when she calls me like always to say good night. 

I was a kid, she was my friend, I was excited for her and for me. I liked that she was so happy and bursting with excitement.

When it come to her time for bed I got the “Hey, hey, are you ready to come hang out before bed now?”. (But with a huge grin from ear to ear, she was even kind of jumping with excitement 💓). Another boy about her age was also in the room (which she usually is quite funny about who can come in her room. But she was so excited he was aloud in.

She told us to shut our eyes while her and my Aunty did some shuffling around, turning off lights, I hear the door shut when where both told I can open my eyes now.

✨🌌✨🌙🪐🌒✨💫⭐️🌜✨🌛🌍🌟✨🌑✨💫✨⭐️🌟✨🌟✨🌙🪐

All I could see was stars 🌟 everywhere.

She spent days sticking these stars and moon to her roof to create this beautiful mindful moment I’ll never forget.

Her love for something planted a deep seed that has always stuck with me and helped me bloom.

I’ll never forget her face, the sight, the happiness that filled one room although there was nothing but silence as we all layed on her rug and looked at the ceiling enjoying just being here.

I have had many seeds planted by the most unlikely of people. But Down syndrome people have something special I enjoy to be around ☺️.Today might not have gone how you thought it would. Maybe you reacted to something that wasn’t a big deal. Or maybe you broke a habit or promise you had with yourself. It’s okay though, because you’re trying. If today didn’t go as well as you thought it did, try to cultivate a feeling of reassurance and a sense of satisfaction around the fact that you tried. And tomorrow and even just the next moment are both perfect times to try again.I know he will die. I just don't want him to suffer. Please pray he recovers from the medical system's negligence and lack of care during his time of need, so that he may die a happy old man. He deserves that. We all do. Amen.Religion is for people who are afraid of hell.
Spirituality is for people who’ve been there.

Religion is for people who are afraid of death.
Spirituality is for people who are afraid of life.

Religion comes from the outside.
Spirituality comes from the inside.

Religion is collective.
Spirituality is personal. 

Religion is in your head.
Spirituality is in your heart.

Religion is solid.
Spirituality is formless.

Religion can be memorized and applied.
Spirituality must be realized and internalized.

In religion, it’s always their fault.
In spirituality, it’s always your responsibility.

Religion can be found.
Spirituality is never lost.Would appreciate any advice. We have all come across the term “Law of Karma”. Some might recollect it with the modern go-to notion,  “Karma’s a Bitch”. Now, before diving right into what this law is all about and how it works, it’s imperative I clear the desk and first tell you what it isn’t. The thing is that we all have formed our own versions of the law of karma based on what we have heard from our friends, families, TV & movies; so in order to learn something new, we gotta first un-learn whatever we think we know about this law.

Most of us are of the opinion that if anything bad, wrong, or unanticipated is happening to them, then it is because of their previous bad karmas, and if anything good is happening then it’s subsequently because of their respective good karmas. But the reality is that whatever is happening to us might not be even remotely related to our actions in life. Think about it, wherever you are today, is it just because of your actions?

The answer is a big fat noooo. Your actions alone didn’t decide your current scenario. The action of your parents, your teachers, your friends, your neighbors, your relatives, even strangers did have a massive impact on where you are right now. External situations, circumstances, nature, and things you have no control over, can and do affect your lives in ways one can’t even imagine.

Continue here:

[https://infinitians.com/this-will-change-your-notion-of-law-of-karma/](https://infinitians.com/this-will-change-your-notion-of-law-of-karma/)Are you neglecting your own opinion? Pushing down your true feelings about something deep down, hiding it from your consciousness?

Or are you living your truth? Taking action to chase what brings you joy and fulfillment? Are you in tune with your desires and needs? Can you look within your shadow self to find truth within? I really appreciate it❤️What do you make of this thought? I find the connection of the three to be simply the search for answers, meaning, and importance of everything. How about you?I'm sorry but I had to make another thread as a blanket response to the other thread about "not being worried about the coronavirus".

If you are not panicking or worried about the coronavirus, great!  I think that's healthy.

If you are ready to die, I can't say I'm at that point yet, but I'm happy that you are feeling such a high degree of acceptance.  Good.

**But if you are saying "I really don't care about it and will just do whatever I want", then that is highly irresponsible.**  If you are young, healthy, or otherwise not worried about catching it, great!  That's your right.  The problem is, the more people are lackadaisical about it, the more people are going to end up catching it.  And if you catch it, you can infect, on average, about 3 other people.  Especially if you continue to be lackadaisical about it.  That's how this thing can spread like wildfire.

And while you may be ready to die, or are otherwise healthy and strong, there are many people you can infect that are NOT ready to die, or not healthy and strong (Ie, the elderly and at-risk people).

So I'm thrilled everyone is so accepting of the virus, the fears surrounding it, and the possible consequences.  Great!  But please don't take that as an excuse to be reckless.  Follow the guidelines issued by your government / the health authorities: wash your hands, stay at home as much as possible, avoid contact as much as possible, etc.

A week ago this seemed like it wasn't a big deal, but I'm posting from Europe.  We don't want what happened in Italy to happen in the rest of the world.

Be responsible, people.  It's a great moment to practice acceptance, but let's also remember to practice compassion.  This is not all about you.I had been against spirituality, I was ignorant and thought it was religious for whatever reason. I was told I had a spiritual awakening a couple of times in my life and took it as an insult and did nothing with it. At the beginning of the year I decided I was going to better myself, quit be so ignorant and had another awakening. This time I decided to build on it, I got heavy into yoga, meditation and self reflection. I accepted myself, admitted my flaws my worked on them. Three months ago I took a dose of LSD (which I had done before, this time was different) and I realized I wasn't real, I realized reality wasn't what we perceived it and was an illusion. I realized I was God or conciousness experiencing it's self. I didn't know anything about any of this and feel into the dark night of the soul, I've just now gotten out of it. No one I know in real life knows about this, I could really use like minded people who's experienced God to talk to, thanks in advance for any words, advice or good energy.I'm saying this from personal experience. Maybe I was put on this Earth in these hellish circumstances so I could learn and re-learn strenght, again and again. Maybe all the pain, all the agony wasn't a punishment or Karma, but to make me strong. Maybe it's a little bit of both. But I am constantly reminded that it's for a reason. I was strong before, but maybe I bit off so much more than I can currently chew, to become the even stronger person I could be? All I know is I've become weak and I need to learn new strenght. And I will!It aggravates me when some Christian parents are like "Only the lord is in this household and I dont want the sin you are doing to take a hold of this home." 
I can bet you if jesus showed up he'd be like "yooo wtf bro. That's not very loving to abandon your child, is it?"It's just a word among many to describe something very real. Naked reality. The most real reality can get.Over the past year I have made leaps and bounds in the understanding of myself and creation. Call it a grand reconnection with the present moment, eternity, my true self or a relationship with God, this part matters not.

I found sobriety in 2019 and this year I quit smoking in January. However I encountered some hardships, and although I was perfectly capable of handling this and did so successfully I decided to pick up my smoking habit again in April. At first I just wanted to enjoy the weather with the simple pleasure but it escalated into a habit after a few weeks.

The problem is I always pray when I smoke, and thus I am overcome with peace and love during these meditation sessions. It is a problem because I have intertwined the love of the Creator and the act of smoking and these two forces have become linked.

I am beginning a relationship with a new partner and she does not smoke so I do not want to bring that into the relationship. Beyond that, I no longer enjoy the act of smoking because it has become simply a matter of feeding the addiction and is no longer pleasurable, aside from having those moments to be alone and pray outside.

Please offer your advice and your well wishes as I attempt to quit smoking, I would love the support of this community as I continue on with grace. Thank you ❤️I have not prayed to any god in a long time. I was raised in a fundamentalist cult; which has skewed my feelings towards god and spirituality for a while.

But now, with all of humanity seemingly fearful; I feel the need to petition a higher power. I feel the need to pray for those affected by COVID19, for those serving others in this time, and for those too afraid to leave their homes.

My spiritual self is yearning for expression. And despite my gut feeling that "praying doesnt work".. I think I'm going to do it anyways.I am starting to realize that the fundamental part of this search is to follow my own voice, my own guru, my own inner guide. To follow my own intuition.

If I can do that, if I can do that courageously and boldly, in spite of the hesitation and possible or imagined consequences... everything else is given. In fact, there is nowhere else to go. A life lived authentically is something that cannot be topped. It is the greatest joy, the greatest fulfillment, and the greatest peace.

It does not matter if what you do is "wrong". The only thing that is wrong is to be false. Anything that is dysfunctional, wounded, hurt, or suffering will be healed if you can only be yourself, unapologetically. It may take time, but it will take much less time if it is allowed into the light.

Only that which is expressed, real, and lived authentically can be healed. That which is false cannot be healed. That which is hidden cannot be healed.

Perhaps the greatest wound is that, "What I am, is not enough". Accept yourself totally, and that is all the healing that is needed.

At times our intuition may falter, but love is patient.

So, patiently we go on trusting, and sooner or later, the miracle happens.Please let me know if you would like me to cover any areas that I may have missed. I would really appreciate as much feedback, positive or negative, so I can improve my content. Above all else, I hope you find something useful here that can aid your practice and journey. Much metta =)

# [Part 1](https://youtu.be/bUdn9OiYzt0)- What is Meditation?

It's important to understand what meditation is before we practice it to make sure we are doing it properly and with the right intentions.

Meditation is about strengthening our awareness and mindfulness by returning to our observing nature simply observing what is happening in the present moment.

It is not about stopping the mind and having no thoughts, but about observing the mind and accepting the thoughts, letting them come and go and being at peace with it.

Meditation can increase our patience, joy, peace, and control of the mind which benefits every aspect of life.

# [Part 2](https://youtu.be/m-8lLq5FhnM) - The Benefits of Meditation

Meditation is long known to its profound benefits on the mind and body and has been practiced since ancient times.

The three main benefits that we will begin to experience from our first session are:

1. A heightened sense of awareness and greater clarity of mind
2. Greater emotional control
3. Sense of inner peace and joy. Meditation helps us in every aspect of life be it at work, at home, or with friends.

It makes us more effective in everything we do because we can think with more clarity and insight. With meditation, we start creating like instead of reacting to it, or worse it just surviving it.

# [Part 3](https://youtu.be/C8pC-7x9KDk) - Preparation for Meditation

When it comes to preparation, there are three main areas.

They are:

\- Physical preparation (maintaining a strong, healthy and energetic body)

\- Mental preparation (maintaining a calm, focused and gentle mind)

\- Environmental preparation (having a clean, quiet, comfortable and safe spot to meditate)

Preparation for meditation is just as important as the actual practice itself and requires our attention throughout the entire day, not just the minutes leading up. In fact, preparation in a sense is its own full-time practice that we must all develop and cultivate.

# [Part 4](https://youtu.be/fPVOP1Un-e0) - How to Meditate

After we understand the idea of meditation, its benefits, and how to prepare our mind and body, we can begin our meditation.

In meditation, the process is clear and simple.

1. Find a comfortable position, back straight, shoulders slightly rolled back.
2. Find complete stillness of the body, no scratching, itching, rubbing, twitching, leaning.
3. Bring stillness to the eyes, slow down the flickering, darting and moving of the eyes.
4. Observe the breath and allow it to slow down, deepen and lengthen.
5. When the mind wanders, gently bring it back to the breath.
6. Enjoy!

When we incorporate meditation into our daily routine, it brings much clarity to our mind, much sharpness to our senses, much effectiveness to our everyday tasks and much peace and joy to our natural state.

# [Part 5](https://youtu.be/AogtMJNleNU) - Managing the Difficulties of Meditation

Sometimes we have the motivation and good intention to practice meditation. But when we finally allocate some time to sit, we are dealt with some inconvenient challenges and obstacles that make it difficult to meditate.

I'd like to discuss four of the most comment difficulties in meditation and how we can manage them when they arise.

They are:

1. Pain and soreness
2. Drowsiness and tiredness
3. Lack of focus and a wandering mind
4. No free time to meditate!

When we learn to deal with these four main difficulties, meditation becomes much more pleasant and enjoyable which helps us make faster and more meaningful progress.

# [Part 6](https://youtu.be/uyBKGr9FQcY) - Concentration Meditation

After the mind is focused through Concentration Meditation, every other meditation practice becomes must easier and more beneficial.

Main tips to practice concentration meditation:

1. Sit comfortably.
2. Find complete stillness in the body and eyes.
3. Observe the only thing that's still moving which is the breath.
4. When the mind wanders, gently bring it back.
5. Repeat for the entire duration of the session.

A focused mind also benefits every aspect of life including work, family, social, health, and romance because it allows us to be more present and to live more deliberately and intentionally.

# [Part 7](https://youtu.be/lxXS6PCPTCw) - Mindfulness Meditation

Mindfulness is about being fully present and aware of where we are, what we're doing, how we feel, and what we think on a moment by moment basis.

By doing so, we wake up to the inner workings of our mental, emotional, and physical processes and understand why we are the way we are, think the way we think, and feel the way we feel. This understanding, coupled with acceptance leads to deep peace in the here and now.

The four main ways I share about developing mindfulness are:

1. Pay more attention - Try to take the time to experience your environment with all of your senses; touch, sound, sight, smell, and taste.
2. Live in the moment - Try to intentionally bring an open, accepting and discerning attention to everything you do. Find joy in simple pleasures.
3. Accept yourself fully - Treat yourself the way you would treat a good friend, with patience, empathy, and kindness.
4. Mindfulness meditation - Allow the mind to flow naturally and simply observe where it goes. Ground ourselves in our observing nature and watch life play out like a movie.

Mindfulness has changed my life as it has to everyone who has cultivated it in the past and present. It is about developing something we all have innate without ourselves, being our observing nature that's free from discriminations, criticism, and judgments.

# [Part 8](https://youtu.be/WRNh3vpXIzo) - Gratitude Meditation

Gratitude is focusing on all the good things in life and being thankful for everything that brings us happiness. It is about developing a thankful appreciation for all of life's joy and abundance, instead of focusing on life's negative sides. 

There are four main ways to develop gratitude: 

1. Mental Gratitude Exercises - Recount 3-5 good things that happened during the day, every night before bed. And remind yourself of all the good things that will be happening today, every morning. 
2. Gratitude Journal - Every time something good happens, write it in. Big all Small. 
3. Express gratitude openly and frequently - Express your gratitude for your friends, family and work to them directly. It will make them feel so respected and appreciated. 
4. Gratitude Meditation - (Passive) Be mindful of all your thoughts, feelings, sensations and emotions, and observe them through the lens of gratitude. (Active) Actively think positive thoughts, grateful thoughts, and be thankful for all of we have. 

Benefits of Gratitude: Strengthens friendships, Encourages humility, Reduces envy and jealousy, Increases fulfillment, Reduces selfishness, Improves physical and emotional wellbeing, Increases empathy, Strengthens self-esteem. 

May we all develop a grateful mind and observe all the joy and beauty life has to offer. how to practice gratitude meditation 

# More to come...

I will be posting videos on:

\- Part 9: Vipassana Meditation

\- Part 10: Loving-Kindness Meditation

\- Part 11: The Ultimate State of MeditationI have been feeling like it’s time to let go of what no longer serves me and get right with myself, do more shadow work and express how I actually feel when I feel something instead of letting it sit inside. Wanting to work on listening instead of reacting. 
Is there something going on in the universe that is pushing these type of feelings?Did anyone else feel a lot of negative energy this last week? I have felt extremely disconnected and everyone else I know has mentioned feeling or acted just off. It has been draining and dismal. 

I don’t know if there was something going on with the moon or what. 

Just curious if anyone else felt it too?Hello everyone. I hope people here are not against psychedelics, probably not :p I did LSD on my own a while ago and I had these amazing insights. I learned so much and became 5 steps further in my “spiritual development”. I am just sharing it here, in case you don’t feel like doing it yourself (even though I can recommend it, do it safely ofcourse!! 😛) maybe it can still help you.

1. Just laugh, make music, have sex, sing, dance. I just kept laughing at myself for taking myself so serious sometimes. 😂
2. I became one with a big white light and it was not ‘me’ who became ‘one’ with the light. I WAS THE LIGHT. It was as if I finally rememberd. That I am all that is.
3. We are creators. Now I am not 100% sure about this, how i felt it I cannot explain. But I really believe in manifestation and law of attraction now.I’ve been thinking about the sentiment “like energy attracts like energy”. The more positivity you emit into the world, the more it will come back to you. The more you are intentional about manifesting certain things in your life, the more likely those things will come true.

I think these things are true in general. But what about people that suffer from mental illness? Trauma survivors? People suffering from PTSD? I think if you take the law of attraction at face value it might be over simplified and can almost come across as victim blaming. Maybe there’s something I’m missing. At what point does the law of attraction bleed over into toxic positivity?

Edit: these have been awesome discussions. Thanks for chiming in!Starting your day off well doesn’t involve a huge amount of rocket science but it does need a bit of patience and persistence. The key thing is setting up new habits and sticking to them every day, even on the weekend. The most important of these is your sleep hygiene.

The temptation is to use the weekend for a lie in, but if you’re like me and occasionally get insomnia the answer is to have a set time for going to bed and getting up. Getting into a rhythm in this way means that your body is ready for sleep at bedtime and is ready to rise in the morning. It’s also helpful to avoid the things that interfere with your sleep like alcohol and particularly caffeine - most of my insomnia (and anxiety) was caused by my coffee habit.

For the same reason its a good idea to keep mobiles and laptops out of the bedroom, they interfere with sleep and they also make it more difficult to get out of bed. Starting your morning with social media, which is designed to get a reaction from us, doesn’t set you up well for the day.

On to your morning routine - some activity as soon as as you get up is helpful. Whether you’re doing stretching, movement or yoga focus your awareness on your breath and what you can feel in your body rather than whats coming up in your day.

You can then sit for a guided meditation, morning is a great time to practice gratitude. Its the one trait that happy people have in common and its vital for cultivating our happiness, especially in the morning when our mind is in a suggestible state. 

Finally, you can practice mindful drinking and mindful eating with breakfast, paying all of your attention to each mouthful of food, being aware of the smell, texture and flavours, eating slowly and putting the spoon down between bites. Keeping in mind everything that went into it as you eat is another way to integrate gratitude into the start of your day.

[Listen On Apple Podcasts](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/start-your-morning-with-mindful-energy/id1493806566?i=1000511840638)

[Listen On Google Podcasts](https://www.google.com/podcasts?feed=aHR0cHM6Ly9hbmNob3IuZm0vcy8xMjNkZThlMC9wb2RjYXN0L3Jzcw==)

[Listen On Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/show/1ozwIEgzEtHQezPoi83nVV)

[Other ways to listen](https://anchor.fm/shaun-donaghy/episodes/Start-your-morning-with-mindful-energy-erp2ni)Reaching for our phones is a common coping mechanism for the unknown.

Instead of spending time with our-selves, we often look away from the inner timbre, not listening anymore to our body asking us quietly and kindly to root ourselves into the present and calm our nerves.

We are here just to bring people together in solidarity and take a step away from, not only the pandemic induced increase of screen time, but in general. It's fascinating to see, that so many people who take a 24 hour break from their tech, reach for mindful practices instead. Take a break with us.  


Love -from  r/OfflineDayAlmost every day as soon as I wake up I feel anxious, been like this for years.

It's like butterflies in the stomach, but evil ones. Instead of feeling nervous in a good way they fill me with mild fear.

Today when I woke up it was completely quiet in my stomach and it still is 8h later. I understand that I most likely will go back to my normal anxious state but for now I'm enjoying it atleast, it feels like I can almost experience how other normal people feel.

I recently started taking Multivitamin/ and L theanine(found in geeen tea aswell but then it's smaller doses), not sure if they may have played a role? I don't think so though since I didn't take them the night before 

Yesterday was the worst anxious feeling I've had, I kept thinking about a very embaressing moment that happened last week, but today when I think about it I don't feel the shame/anxiety. It just passes through without any negativity.

Maybe the wrong sub, just curious if others can relate. The secret of meditation is - when we sit still and the mind wanders, we should not lose our peace, we should gently bring the mind back. But again, it will wander. The mind is like a monkey, it will keep jumping from thought to thought, and it will wander, not to just one thought, but to many thoughts. The moment we regain consciousness during our meditation, we must gently bring our mind back. As we persist in bringing the mind back after its wandering, we will make it a habit for the mind not to wander. That's why we need focus, we need concentration. We need to be conscious of one thought and try to bring the mind back to that thought. That would help us to achieve our goal.I’ve read a lot about shadow work and how it’s best to tread into it lightly because it can get pretty difficult, deep, dark.. So I did, I started off slow.

Tonight I’ve been diving again, and earlier I did tear up a little from reading others experiences, but then when I started trying it out for myself, it actually just keeps making me feel a lot better...

When you dig into your shameful behavior or your shadow self, and you understand the whys, at least for me I begin to just see a child, I begin to see validation in such behavior, it’s not just senseless or purely wrong, they all have reasons, feelings. and understanding why it’s validated is actually so comforting.... it really is like just listening, understanding, loving and finally accepting a hurt or lost child, unconditionally. And it’s actually so..... beautiful and comforting...

I know others may already know this but I am just discovering and sharing. It’s a nice feeling. :) I am not yet done, but, wow. Who knew understanding can bring so much peace?Like there’s literally no way to know anything. But more specifically, the meaning of life, or what happens when we die. Because even if I have a vision, or a epiphany, it could always just be a “hallucination” or something of the sort. 

Kind of makes me remember to not hold on to anything in this world, and just continuously let go. You cannot be in control most times. And trying to stay in control, is what breeds animosity and self hatred. Because it is imply impossible to be in control of certain things. But, when we fail to do so, we think it is our fault. When In Reality, it’s just how the universe is.  

Sorry for the randomness, feeling some extra gratitude todayI have been on my own spiritual path, just like many of you reading this I have fallen short of my practice. It is easy to become lazy and question if any of this is real. I want to share something I experienced yesterday that made me have faith again. Yesterday at my work I found an injured bird, I didn't want to leave it. I got a box with a blanket and moved the bird to a covered position where it wouldn't be bothered. If I am being honest I sat in my car with the bird for 20 minutes sobbing wondering what i could do to help this bird. After I moved it and made sure it was safe I went home, still upset. I felt so hopeless that I couldn't do more, I was troubled so I meditated on it. What I realized is that I was wanting more compassion and sympathy in the world, and with that realization it became clear. "I" am the one who can be that kindness, I dont have to wait for someone to come and help, I AM the help. I AM here in this moment, I was the compassion that bird needed and I was there at the right time to help. I was not helpless, I did do something. With this powerful thought it came to me to stop waiting for the world to be kind or compassionate. I can be that, even if no one else ever does a kind thing again, I can still be the kindness that the world needs. By this action others will hopefully be inspired to stop waiting for the world to change and BE the change the world so desperately needs. Kindness costs you nothing.

\-HermitI feel real love. I don’t got hate thoughts on no one. It’s like I’m reconnecting to the source. I ain’t been like that since 10 years+ and it’s truly a blessing I wanna cry tears of joy. Please keep going. Blessings really come. I receive it today and i’m infinitely grateful towards the universe. Keep raising your vibrations we all one 🤍I think the most fucked up thing u can do on this journey is to think that because you’re so ”spiritual” u can look down on other people. 

Have some compassion. Not everybody went through the same thing as you. Be an example for others. If you think that the world is evil, you should be the first one to change it by setting an example for others. It might sound really simple and kinda corny, but I hope it will resonate.

Love y'all ❤️😳If you look at young children, their natural state is one that easily smiles and is content.  That is our birthright to reclaim.  Allowing our mistakes, our failures, doesn't mean we are failures, those are just roles that we play in life, not who we really are.  We are spirit, having a human experience.This may be something that's pretty obvious to people, but I just figured it out so I'm writing it down lol.

Loving yourself does not necessarily mean being happy all the time, it means treating yourself like how you would treat a loved one who is upset. It's about giving yourself that same care and nurturing love you would give another. The kind of care where you think 'I hope they're ok, I'm gonna check up on them'.

You need to give that to yourself in order to love yourself.

Idk if anyone remembers me posting about my gut feeling, but after meditating, and releasing my emotions, I started to get that same caring feeling towards myself and it's the first time I've felt a marked improvement in the sinking feeling.

Thought this might help someone!

edit: woah, holy fuck i feel better>. It is more difficult to be a aware and in the present if you are surrounded by other people you care about who have a completely different mentality about this—driven by desire, anxiety, and other very base human drives.

Why is it difficult? It is only difficult because you give the power of belief to your mind. It is not difficult until comes a thought saying "this is difficult" and you just believe in that thought, making it appear as if you are truly experiencing it as difficult. That thought is perceived, it is not you. You are not even seeing the truth at this point, you are already identifying with the mind, being unaware. You must simply be aware and determined to stay aware, and nothing will be difficult. See it as your only job. Perceive that which is perceiving.

>I see them as imperfect individuals who are doing their best and love me.

Why see them for something they are not? They might be ego-driven currently but their essence is pure love, pure consciousness, pure joy, pure compassion. The mask that they are putting should not affect how you see them. It makes no sense. You are basically putting on a mask your self and then judging them by their masks, as the ego does to its own projections.

>Other days, however, I am more judgmental of them and it comes through in a negative way.

You must be aware that you are not judgmental, and you can never be judgemental. To be judgemental means that you are doing something, means you are doing the judging. That is not true, because the true being does not judge, it only effortlessly and naturally perceives. You are that which is perceiving judging, you can't be the judging itself, nor the thinker of the judging. It is something that the self simply won't do. The only thing that can be judgemental is a thought, once this thought is believed in by what you are (pure awareness) then it appears true. Thoughts which are anxious, judgmental appeared, and you decided to believe these thoughts to be yourself. You are not letting anything else other than these thoughts to flourish. You must discern between your self and the chattering mind within you. The chattering mind is very personal. Everything about it is personal. You must remain as the impersonal self.

Realizing yourself to be that which is perceives perceiving itself, will make life completely effortless. That which tries to do things with "effort" is itself perceived, it is not you. Anything that is anything less than peace, bliss, love, joy, compassion is perceived, when you perceive the perceiver itself, you notice that peace, bliss, love, joy and compassion are all naturally radiating from that perceiver. Stay perceiving of that which is perceiving. It is not hard, it is very natural, it is a joy. You'll notice how you will be literally present 100% of the day, whatever thoughts, emotions or sensations appear, they are perceived also, you'll be a light onto the world, because what you are is truly light. We must simply stay in the place of our true position and seeing, not in the place of identification with thoughts. Even identification with thoughts is perceived. Perceive that which is perceiving, this will help you so so much. Whenever you expect an unconscious situation to appear, be in that place of perceiving the perceiving and do not let go of it.

>I am grateful for this opportunity to practice patience and forgiveness with my family but also think I will personally develop and thrive more when I am away from them on an everyday basis, and be able to love them better.

The mind makes you believe life is a practice. You are not here to practice anything, you are here to be purely the life that you are. You must simply exist as you are, and be aware (naturally, effortlessly you are and aware). If you are simply aware, everything will look and behave like heaven, simply because there is no identification with thoughts, emotions, sensations. Life is literally what you are. That divine love IS the life energy that you are. At all times. It can't be anywhere else. It is the being itself, and it is what you are.

The egoic-mind thinks "I will personally develop and thrive more when I am away". That might be true, and it also might be that you won't develop nor thrive. The self-realized does not develop nor thrive for anything. It is simply aware. The ego wants to develop and thrive, to show itself, to prove itself, but all of that is unnecessary suffering in your experiencing. You do not have to follow all of its plans and desires, you can simply stay as you are, at the place of perceiving the perceiver, you don't have to do something and work all the time like everyone and everything wants you to. It is completely ok to just exist, enjoy the beauty and immensity that this vast universe is, just by doing this you are actually an infinite blessing to the world. It is encouraged for you to be the self. Every single thing in life will automatically be blessed by your presence.With all this stuff about this virus going on. Are you worried? Personally im not. I accept that death is inevitable and if I do become a victim of this. Well, that's my path. I'm not scared to die, I get to go home.This world is something else. And that’s as far as I can say. We are spiritual beings becoming. We are everything really. What I wanna say is, anyone who reads this, deserves an amazing day! An amazing life. If you’re an over thinker, if you have excessive stress or anxiety, if you’re battling something that’s really becoming a burden, if you have negative energies eating away at you. I want everyone that reads this to keep going. Not gonna lie, stuffs hard right now, and I don’t wanna sugar coat; there is a lot of people in this generation that are depressed, bored of living, stressed, filled with anxiety, suicidal. And it hurts to see what we’ve created for everyone. So as I said above. You don’t know me, and you don’t need to, but I love all of you. You all deserve the most and the fullest manifestation of your dreams. I want all of you to keep going, regardless if you lay under these I listed above. Secure your energy. Secure your happiness. Ground yourself. Take care of yourself. Secure YOU, Before you try to secure others. Don’t be afraid to be you, love yourself. Spread LOVE, not hate, Spread HAPPINESS, and POSITIVE energies. Not Anger and negative energies. Make a difference, we all have the power. Love each other PLEASE! Live your life according to YOUR happiness and the betterment OF ALL. Much love all! ✌️❤️🌎Be careful you're not interfering with an experience someone has to have to become stronger. The saviour mentality can *sometimes* override actual awareness of a situation and you could actually hinder someone's progress instead of helping them.We're being bombarded with so much fear from corporate/government propaganda AND our friends, family, neighbors, etc. 

How is everyone doing?

**EDIT***
Please don't turn this discussion into pro/anti vax
Science/anti Science. We're trying to get away from this shit! I don't care if you are pro or anti. It's your journey and I respect it. But I don't want this crap leaking Into this pos getting people riled up. If you're upset there's "anti-vax" rhetoric, take your thumb and click on that back button and MOVE ON. FFS!I am a catholic. I started meditating and praying a month ago and I incorporated meditation into my religion. I would meditate and think of Jesus and God. I also started reading about the law of one and as of three weeks ago, I no longer perceive God as how Catholics portray him. Instead of seeing it as a separate being, I see it as a genderless, formless being that is all around us and we are part of it. So every day, I would meditate while walking and meditate while sitting outside. I have done so for two weeks that I have began to meditate so deep, my whole body becomes numb and I feel blissfulness every time I do. OR that's what it feels like to me. I have not felt any discomfort while doing so until last night. So here's the thing, after I started meditating, a lot of good things started happening in my life. Everyone in my life seems so much happier and easy to talk to. Even strangers have taken the time to acknowledge me. Biggest of all, I am starting to be peaceful in myself. BUT annoying things have started to happen to me as well. There is this annoying buzzing sound in my head, 24/7 and occasional knock or tap sounds that sound so real I jerk up in surprise. ANYWAYS, last night, before going to bed, I laid down and prayed. I said the Our Father prayer several times while being in the numbing state. Then this happened. The ringing got louder and louder until I couldn't concentrate anymore that when I addressed it,  this Blue, yellow, and white humanoid thing, made of geometric shapes appeared in the middle of my vision, even tough I had my eyes closed, and it just got bigger and bigger  and closer. Every thing in the room started fading into geometric shapes. I got scared and I said in my mind that I was not ready and I opened my eyes. The thing was still there, but it then began disappearing and everything went back to normal. I was scared shitless. IT DOESNT end there. I could not go to sleep afterwards because I kept hearing the buzzing and random footsteps, taps and loud knocks. These made me jerk awake every time I started sleeping. I then became irritated and annoyed and asked these to stop but they never did, which made me scared again lol. I only managed to sleep for 3 hours.

Sorry for the long read but this experience was just random and scary. I am wondering if I should continue meditating. I am only 20 years old, and I might be too young for these types of things. I need some advice thank you.

&#x200B;

EDIT: Sorry I said God is genderless and I called it "him".

\*\*Thank you everyone who responded with feedbacks and advice and also anyone who read my experience. This has helped a lot. LOVE and LIGHT to you all. Namaste.\*\*I’m new to spirituality but my grandmother is a very spiritual person. Everyday many unknown people call her asking for help and she does, she helps them free of charge, and for someone who’s financially not stable, she could make a lot of money charging people but she never once did it. 
However you go online example Twitter and i see all these supposedly spiritual people charging people for reading and bookings with thousands of followers, now doesn’t that contradicts everything they preach. One main thing we learn from spirituality is detachment to material things.....it just doesn’t make sense lol. One “gifted reader” tweeted how she’s excited to get her boobs done, and I’m just sitting here confused af

Edit: wow a lot of people mad, I’m sorry. I just need to clarify I still believe you shouldn’t charge people when it comes to spiritual help. Spirituality is not an occupation, i know circumstances force people to do things, If this is your only means of earning money, try getting a job maybe or...let’s agree to disagree.

Edit 2: i do realize I’m coming off as a*****e, I’m sorry. I didn’t know it was gonna upset so many people. Anyways, assuming everyone read advaita vedanta, it very clearly mentions “maya”( material things) as a distraction created by gods. I seriously do not care if you charge, honestly i could care less.what is it supposed to mean?The universe reflects back onto you that which you are. The more you practice in the ability to learn the lessons the universe puts before you, the stronger that ability gets. The stronger that ability gets, the more confident you are in it. You become aware. You know you're aware. So the universe reflects it back with stronger synchronicity since it is mirroring your strength in them.

Every experience we ever encounter is a way the universe is sending you a message. Life is a language.

We are constantly living in the language that the universe has put us in. Our entire experience is that language. We just have to become more adept at understanding that language.Every person who has ever become enlightened has experienced a great deal of pain in suffering in their younger years. The more spiritual awakenings I experience, and the more I open my chakras, the more I feel free and yet the more I wonder if its just my mind refusing to suffer any longer out of the trauma I've experienced. Its like its put a wall up. I don't feel any resistance or negativity other than this thought. I recently stopped taking life seriously like 95%, and it feels so real and true but at the same time I wonder if my trauma has just induced a sort of psychosis that has made me stop giving a fuck. And the more you wake up, the more you realize that the less you actually know. The more you feel like this life is a dream. I'm sure if anybody reading this has exprienced spiritual awakenings they can relate and hopefully share their insights.**The Messiah Complex** \[Pride\]: Everyone knows about the messiah complex, where someone unfortunately takes a wrong mental turn in spirituality and the ego takes over completely, and the person believes that they are so special and above all others that they become a god in their own minds. What is lesser-known is that there are varying degrees of this complex: an overly-strong desire to teach others is also still a spiritual problem, because it is an imbalance of egoistic hierarchy. One must be introspective and save *themselves* first in order to be able to help anyone else. Also, believing oneself to actually be enlightened when one is not is perhaps the greatest spiritual trap possible.

**Endlessly searching** \[Greed\]: It may be tough to understand at this point or even believe, but in spirituality, all you can ever find is ultimately yourself and what you already are. The search for enlightenment is a good thing of course and sometimes that might take a great tenacious effort, but people must understand that the search will only ever lead to what's been right in front of our faces all along. It is in fact in the direction of mind, but what is often confusing to most is that the mind is endless and universal; if you go off continually looking for something else other than mind, it will always be somewhere else other than where you look.

**Spiritual depression** \[Wrath\]: *Depression is anger turned inward*. We've all seen it here in this forum nearly every day: posts about a 'dark night of the soul' or 'awakening ruined my life'. In matters of real spirituality, we are in fact looking towards our own minds and thus unlocking secrets about ourselves and revealing what we really are deep down inside, and this is *not* to be taken lightly. Spiritual depression is a trap that one must move on quickly from if at all possible; lighter forms of non-clinical depression can be alleviated in some manner by realizing that this stage is still heavily mired in ego, and therefore not real understanding. Awakening is only the first step: one must keep being introspective and keep 'seeing through' to get beyond it, and must 'get out of their own heads' by moving forth with real study and practice instead of stagnating here.

**Faith in spiritual gurus** \[Envy\]: Spiritual teachers, especially popular ones, create a sort of paradox in matters of spirituality: they get so popular that people often look outwardly to them and their wisdom as opposed to looking inwards towards their own minds. That's spiritually backwards. The best teachers, take the historic teachers in original Zen history for example, will only point you back in the direction of your own mind over and over again without adding anything extra. Use your intuition: one should be especially wary of teachers who aren't enlightened themselves and try teach based on their own egos for selfish gain.

**Clinging to oneness** \[Lust\]: This rarely-understood point is probably going to cause some controversy, but please bear with me. If you want clarity and real understanding in matters of spirituality, it's a good idea to come to the understanding of *not one, not two*. Nearly everyone who is awakened understands the obvious fallacies and problems of separation, but what isn't as apparent is that concepts of 'oneness' are the other lesser-known side of dualism and are a more subtle problem. Everything is not separate due to the underlying principle of all things of course, but everything is not 'one' either because there are obvious distinctions between *this* and *that* and right and wrong. If everything were truly only one, then theft and killing would be one as well therefore perfectly fine to indulge in, and if we aren't absolutely deluded we know that this is far from the case.

**Intellectual understanding and over-practice** \[Gluttony\]: The paradox of spirituality or even searching for enlightenment and awakening is that usually an intellectual framework or a sort of practice must be enacted and built upon, but this very same understanding or practice can become a sort of hindrance at a certain point. As before, all you can ever really find in matters of spirituality is only your own mind, so to over-study or over-practice without seeing through both is to create more divisions from true understanding. An intellectual understanding without practical application and integration in one's life is worthless no matter how many books you read on spiritual subjects.

**Not helping others** \[Sloth\]: *"The meaning of life is helping others"* \~ The Dalai Lama. The nature of the ego is such that it is usually the real problem when it comes to matters of spirituality. We're all in this together, and to separate oneself from others and not go back in some way to help is ultimately self-oriented and limiting. Even in the *Ten Ox-Herding Pictures of Zen*, the final stage notably isn't enlightenment, but "entering the marketplace with helping hands." It's very important to note that this doesn't mean to try to awaken people who are sleeping or to set up shop and start trying to teach; helping others is often best done by simply *listening* to people and heariI'm sorry guys. I do agree, my ego does get out of hand. This community is all about becoming the best versions of ourselves. May you all have a peaceful life!