This is a short one but I keep laughing about it and want to share it somewhere. 

Now my boyfriend is typically an intelligent and successful man, but we all have our moments. The weekend in question though was a solid Kevin moment.

So he's staying over at mine and forgot to bring toothpaste. I generally keep things in a particular place and so he kind of wasn't thinking and reached for the direction of my toothpaste. Now he has fully functional vision (unlike myself) and, I don't know, maybe should have actually *looked* at what he was grabbing? Anyway he goes to another sink and does his thing.

So this was on a Saturday and we went about our day. I happened to be brushing my teeth on the Sunday when he does it again, and I see him grab my hydrocortisone (anti-itch) cream.

I full stop. I question my sanity for a full 3 seconds and question if I *really* just saw that happen. Now I have a mouthful of toothpaste so I'm really only making noises at this point but I don't think I was capable of much else to be honest. I turned to stop him from going to the other sink and just kind of looked at what's in his hand and back up to him. 

Words escape me. I'm basically just standing there in front of him for like 15 seconds or more, making weird noises of surprise and incredulity. I finally come to my senses and spit the toothpaste out and asked him if that was the same thing he grabbed the day before. 

"Yeah, why?"

"Um, did you look at what you're putting in YOUR MOUTH?!"

*cue confused look until he saw the label*

I'm cry laughing at this point. He's laughing but obviously embarrassed and mutters out something about it tasting weird the day before but he didn't want to say anything/offend me. We end up laughing for like 15 minutes about it and I told him that he's never going to live it down.

Anyway, tl;dr: boyfriend goes to grab my toothpaste but uses hydrocortisone cream insteadBack in highschool I knew a Kevin who I was pretty close with. I have a ton of stories about Kevin, but this one will always stand out.

March of 2015, we are waiting for the city transit busses to come around so we can board and go home. It had snowed a ton the past few weeks so it had piled up quite a bit. Kevin decided to play in the snowbank for laughs across the street for fun. We thought nothing of it.

Bus comes barreling around the corner, this kid books it towards the street and eats it on the last step, doing a scorpion as he hits the ice covered pavement. He gets up like nothing happened, walks over to the bus while we are all boarding and sits with us all at the back. We had a large group, so to accommodate everyone we sat in back.

We are about 15 minutes into the ride when I look over at Kevin, and he was incredibly pale (he is first nations/native so he was naturally darker) but when I say he was pale, he had almost no pigmentation to his skin.

"Kevin, you okay buddy? You don't look too good."
"Yeah, I'm fine man. Just really tired. Gonna go to bed when I get home"

He gets off at his stop, and goes about his way. We worried for him. A week passes before we see Kevin again. As easy going and cheerful as ever, he greets us after being gone. 

"Hey Kevin, you good? Haven't seen you in awhile."
"Yeah, I almost f-ing died."

 Turns out that when he tripped and fell he landed on a glass bottle, it had gone up his shirts (it was only -10°C so he wasn't wearing his coat) and stabbed him in the stomach, leaving a huge gash. It wasn't until he had gotten home that his mom noticed that he looked really pale, he took off the button up he was wearing that his white shirt was painted crimson with his own blood. He had to go to the hospital to get stitches. I'd have never believed it happened if I hadn't seen them myself.

By all accounts if he had just went to bed rather than check his shirt he probably would have died. Ever since then we assumed that whenever Kevin disappeared he had some freak accident and would just come back life at some point like nothing happened. He was a good kid, but he wasn't the brightest man I ever met.

TL:DR: My highschool friend Kevin tripped in the snow, broke his fall on some glass and almost died from his wound.Many years ago I was at a housewarming party with two friends with strong Kevin traits, I will call them  Big Kevin and little Kevin for this story. 

So we were all at the point of wasted where everything is funny and a bit silly when I walked in a room  and heard Big Kevin say "I  could hold you out the window  by your ankles easily " and Little Kevin replying that he would let him do so. This is when I  remember that we're on the 6th floor and  joined the conversation. I managed to persuade them to do a practice run in the living room,  during which Little Kevin was dropped on his head in less than thirty seconds,  and they decided against the original plan.First time posting in this sub.

I knew Kevin beginning freshman year of high school. We were friends through freshman year but I started to distance myself from him in sophomore year for the reasons I'm about to explain.

In my sophomore English class (15-16 years old) we had a project assigned during second semester. We were put into groups of three and told we had to give a presentation of a historical event (from a given list) and explain why that event was important. We had three days to research and make our presentation, then we would present. This project was, if I remember correctly, 30% of our grade and was given in the place of a final exam. I was partnered with Kevin and a girl I was friends with who I'll call Kate.

The following Monday we were taken to one of the school's computer labs and got to work on our projects. I should note here that Kevin was absent on Monday, for reasons I would find out later that week. Kate and I had decided to cover the launch of Sputnik, and so got to work researching and making the presentation. Tuesday rolls around and things are going smoothly. Kevin is once again nowhere to be seen. Kate and I work well together and got a lot done in the two days we'd worked so far; the project was basically done - it just needed touch-ups and tweaking on Wednesday and it should be good to go.

Finally Kevin shows up to class on Wednesday. Kate and I explained what the project was again and showed him what we'd put together. I want to point out that our presentation was professional and visually interesting without being distracting: simple transitions, pictures relevant to the topic when needed, etc. 

Kevin decides that he doesn't like it. "It's too boring," he had said, or something to that effect. He then proceeds to start changing things: adding off-the-wall transitions like he was an eight-year-old just discovering them, I recall this the most, and using a frame from the movie WALL-E where the character has Sputnik on his face - despite the fact that Sputnik burned up in the atmosphere less than three months after launch (we had this in the presentation).

I'm a non-confrontational person, and I believe Kate was too, so Kevin was able to bulldoze over us for these decisions. However, it did eventually get to a point where we both were like, "No, we aren't changing anything else," and forced him to stop. The presentation was ruined, in my eyes anyway, and I was so nervous about our teacher giving us poor marks on our project that I legitimately almost started crying before class the next day - Thursday - when we would be presenting. I was hyperventilating and everything, I was that stressed out over this presentation. The teacher noticed this and sent me into the hall so I could calm down. We ended up getting like a 92 or something, but *man* I did not need that kind of stress.

Now as the title suggests, Kevin had an incident with Viagra. According to him, someone else in the school had dared him to take a Viagra pill for $20, and over the weekend he'd actually done it. He himself described it as, "the most painful four hours of my life." I can't confirm this last bit, but from what I heard Kevin only got $2 from the guy who dared him, as he didn't have anything more on him and said he'd get it to him later; as far as I know, Kevin never got the other $18. Why he would take a Viagra pill at all, let along for only $20, I'll never know.I work for a small trucking company with maybe 15 trucks total. About a year ago, we hired Kevin. He bragged about his driver's experience and seemed to be fairly proficient. However, he struggled with a few things. Mainly finding trailers in the yard. I once had to get out of my truck and point to the trailer number with my flashlight that was on the corner of the trailer in big black numbers. He also struggled with navigation which isn't a good thing if you're a professional driver.

Well, one night Kevin had to bring a 53 foot trailer down to a very large warehouse to pick up a load of furniture and then come back to the hub. Kevin took a wrong turn and ignored the multiple and clear signage warning that the road was impassable for semi trucks. Kevin drove down the gravel road, and expertly navigated tight corners for at least 2 miles. Kevin then tried to take the curve that did him in, the one that is impossible for a semi truck to clear and got stuck in the ditch. Kevin had to call for an after hours tow truck and then of course was too scared to help the tow truck navigate his rig back onto the main road. They had to call a second tow truck out there to get into the drivers seat to help back the rig up. 

The tow bill was well over 5k and Kevin was let go and I never found out if he was hired somewhere else. The worst part of this? It was my day off and Kevin was in my truck that night. 

Pro tip: when the signs say that a road is impassable for trucks, they mean it!So this happened last year, when covid was going strong on my country. It's my first year of university, I've actually managed to get a few friends already thanks to extracurricular activities, despite going to university in a different city and not knowing anyone. Among these friends is Kevin. And he is a germophobe. Now, I went to highschool with another guy who also was a germophobe, so I think I'm quite familiar with the routine - excessive hand washing, constantly desinfecting his desk, aversion to physical touch (skin on skin, mostly), and so on and so forth. But Kevin is different, he both doesn't do this, and he's selective about what activates his phobia. So, what is this getting at? Well, finals for the first semester come around, we're all at in the room doing the exam, and Kevin arrives. 30 minutes late, holding a coffe, sporting flip flops, without anything to write with, and asks the professor for a pen and the exam papers. The professor is visibily annoyed by his tardiness and lack of writing material, but still gives him a (desinfected) pen and the exam papers, which he proceeds to RIP APART in order to wrap around the pen, and then asks for one more set of exam papers. By this point we're not believing what we're seeing, but we quickly chalked it up to him being a germophobe... except that, during lunch after the exam, he pretty much tried to hug every girl in this newly formed friend group (much to their disconfort), despite us being in the midst of a pandemic caused by a virus that is transmitted, among other ways, through physical contact.

I have a few other shorter stories about him that I could compile into a full post should anyone want, or I could place them in the comments, it's the same to me.

Edit: forgot about the existence of "wrap around"I work at a warehouse. In our workplace, it's a bunch of rowdy men who mess with each other all the time. But ever since we hired this kevin, it was a combination or entertaining and many face palms. Off the bat, he said that he is a combination of a car guy, player, martial artist and business man. He said he owned over 20 cars, planning to make projects out of all of them, owned car lots and hosted events with big name people, sponsored by big car brands, studied martial arts in China for 15 years when he was younger, and had many hook ups with various women. We already smelled bullshit from far away but we might as well get entertained by him. Also note, he only made $12/h. Apparently he only got his job because, "always have time to make money". 

Where to start? So he said he studied martial arts in China and I asked him which province did he study. (I loved watching kung fu movies when I was younger and know bits and pieces of the culture). He said Hong Kong, which is not really in China and that arent that known for martial arts there. I also asked him what style he knew and he said Muay Thai. That style is known in Thailand. I didnt bother to ask him more details after that. 

Next he said he owns many cars and car lots and often sells cars. I was actually looking for one and he showed me a photo of a Toytota mr2. I wasnt into cars like that and asked him to bring it over to work. He said sure. Next shift when we worked, I asked him where it is. He said he needed to change the lug nuts, which only takes 10 minutes to change if you have the commercial power tool. I told him this and he didnt say much but said, "I got a lot of things going on, i am getting evicted from my apartment". I was puzzled and said, "evicted? Just sell all your cars and business. Dont you need to feed your family?" He got pissed and said, "you dont know what im going through, I dont need to explain shit". I dropped it but couldnt help but laugh. I cant even tell if he's actually getting evicted but it's hard to feel sympathy. 

Heres my favorite. So some employees drive heavy loads and required to take a physical for a DOT certification. Most of us have one and Kevin for some reason wants to look cool in the bigger trucks we drive. Our managers assign us to a physical and we have the option to go during work ours or our own time. Kevin said he went on his own time to go to LAX airport to take the physical. Yes.... he actually said he went to the LAX airport. We were all stunned to reprocess what the hell he said. The manager even said to him, "I never set up a physical for you" and Kevin said, "I made one for myself". We couldnt believe our ears and snickered. We asked, "well did you take your physical?" and he said, "yeah and got examined". We all started laughing so hard and said, "Kevin, we think you just got raped. Did they make you cough when they were feeling your balls?". I shit you not this is what happened. Kevin got speechless and didnt know what to say. He eventually did a no call no show months later and didnt hear anything from him again. This happened maybe 6 or 7 years ago but I remember it was like yesterday because I laughed so hard on the things he sayI got to know about this subreddit from rslash. First of all I am from Sri Lanka and excuse my English as I am still struggling with it. So this Kevin is from my university. For context we study software engineering. I also want to clarify that this story have lot of tech related words. So bear with me.

Kevin tries to insert a HDMI cable into a USB port in his laptop during a presentation because he thought it was the right port. When he broke the port because he pushed it so hard he had to pay 35,000 LKR (173 in USD) for a new motherboard. Kevin decided that he knows better than IT department and tried to fix the common room's network hub. His fix is to disconnect all the cables and reconnect them. He disconnect all of the cables and didn't knew how to connect all back correctly. He managed to connect them all wrong and got a earful from the IT Department and Deen. His reason to fix the hub because he can't download games with the connection. Our IT had put blockers for most sites and he thought it was all network hub fault. Kevin thought to charge his laptop with my laptop's charger because the port looks same. He had a notebook type laptop and mine is a Acer Predator which took more watts than his. He fried his motherboard again. Kevin removed key caps from his keyboard so he could clean it properly. He had to bring an additional usb keyboard with him because for few months until he got money to replace his laptop's keyboard. He fully formatted his C drive to install windows because his laptop was slow. He managed to install windows but forgot to remove bitlocker from his other partitions before he fully formatted the C drive. He didn't had a backup key. Kevin had I phone and tried to jailbreak it only to get it in to a boot loop. Thankfully a friend helped him to fix it. Kevin tried to remove the old temperd glass on his phone by breaking it with a hammer, cracking the screen too. He brought a 2TB pen drive only on AliExpress only to find out 2TB is the brand name. The Pen Drive was 8GB.

In our 2nd year, during the covid rise and island wide lockdowns in Sri Lanka we had to participate all lectures from home. Most of us decided to build PCs. Kevin also wanted to build a PC. Without asking he online ordered all the stuff. He ordered a AMD Ryzen 7 3800x processor. He got a Asus Rog Strix H470-I motherboard for it because he likes RGB lighting. That motherboard is for Intel 10th/11th Gen processors. Thankfully the shop agreed to exchange it for a matching one. He brought a RTX 2080ti. He spend more than 500,000 LKR for the whole PC. He brought a low quality, Chinese 850w power supply from ebay. It lasted 2 months. He got another power supply from the same brand again through ebay. Fried it within weeks. His parents got mad and decided not to lend more money for another power supply. He sold RTX 2080ti card. Got a lesser graphic card with a Corsair power supply.

Kevin decided to ask out his crush he saw on the very first day of the university on that day. She said no. He got obsessed. He decided to stalk her. She got sacred and told her boyfriend. BF beats Kevin up near her house. He decided he will die for true love. Kevin slapped our Student Union president when he tried to convince Kevin to let it go because the girl's BF is from another university. Got beaten up by our guys too. Nevertheless he still stalk the girl.

He did lot more but this this is already long enough. I hope you enjoyed.For the past two years I've been sharing an apartment with two other girls, one of which I've lived with for a long time and am good friends with, the other, well, she's something.

At first I thought she was being a little shit on purpose, or just had it out for me, but it turns out she's actually just really dumb.

Within the first week she tried to throw out my baking sheet because it was dirty and she didn't [still doesn't] know how to do dishes. Apparently she grew up throwing them away because she doesn't know how to clean?

She keeps trying to date and has asked me questions such as "do you think its a red flag if he says he'll kill our cat if he sees it?" By our cat she means my cat. And yes, I do think It's a red flag.

She has also asked me if we live in a bad neighborhood. We do. She said she thought it was safe because of all the cops at our apartment complex. I then had to explain that there were cops at our complex because people were having to call the cops. And also we had to call three times one night because of an attempted break in?

Currently we are driving back from picking her up. Why were we picking her up you ask? Because she got off at the wrong bus stop. Actually she got on the wrong bus entirely. We've lived here for 2 years.I knew this Kevina during my freshman year of my undergraduate degree. I came from a small town and thought I had encountered my share of ignorant, but Kevina took the cake.

* Kevina was a typically sheltered Christian and had all the hang-ups that came with that. She was sure that the spells in Harry Potter were real and would work if you said them out loud, so refused to read the books. But was quite content to watch the movies and let actors say the spells because she "wasn't the one saying them."
* While watching "Mr and Mrs. Smith," she said she hated Angelina Jolie because she was "a home wrecker." No word on how she felt about Brad Pitt's role in that.
* Dropped out of comparative religion course on the first day because she "wasn't ready for that right now." ("That" being awareness of other religions.)
* When we went to the dance club, she would stand on the side of the dance floor and waggle her finger at people dancing to Katy Perry's "I Kissed a Girl."
* This girl had never written an essay during her whole public school career. It took three people to help her through her first draft.
* One night, we all went out to the park to watch a meteor shower. The rest of us were pointing out constellations, and she was looking for the sun because she knew the sun was a star.
* She shared with us the story of her first boyfriend, a guy who apparently faked his own death to avoid dating her. Whether this was true or he just used her extremely gullible nature to his advantage, we'll never know.

After university, I lost touch with her, but continued to hear tales from mutual friends. This Kevina never changed in the following years.

* She was a bridesmaid in a friend's wedding. Her major concern was that the bride's dress was a beautiful champagne colour rather than white because "people would't think the bride was pure." (The bride was also one of those 'no sex before marriage' types and made sure everyone knew that.)
* After the wedding reception, she started collecting the table centrepieces so she could reuse them for her own wedding. She wasn't even in a relationship at this point.
* When she did finally meet someone, she invited him to a party with all her old uni friends. She claimed he was The One, but she didn't actually know his last name.

But for the grace of god goes Kevina.So, I made a post recently about my 40 year old uncle being the Family Kevin (and tumor), and some of you wanted to know more about him. You also asked if he has a job or children: he currently has one of his first jobs right now and has no children. Some of you also said that you don't think he's a Kevin but more of a general asshole, which, yes he *is* an asshole but he's also a Kevin at the same time. SO, without further ado, fuckle your seatbelts for more on Uncle Kev: 

* Has 0 concept of time. Kevin will ALWAYS be SUPER late to something no matter what, so if you need him to be somewhere on time, you have constantly circle him like a shark and make sure he's actually getting ready. You can't just tell him he has to be somewhere in the morning the night before (because it's in one ear and out the other), oh no, you have to bang on his bedroom door, make sure he's awake and make sure he's doing everything to get ready. THEN when it's time to go, you have to constantly yell at him to hurry up. 
   * "Have you tried lying about the time?" No, and that's because it wouldn't matter. You'd still have to do this just to get his ass out the door. 
* Thinks cleaning is just pouring water on things and sloppily wiping it up with paper towel. We're honestly not sure why he does this, and no matter how many times we've told him "there's disinfectant spray, you're just making a mess and wasting paper towel and water" he like...can't compute. Like, you know how you can look in someone's eyes and you just KNOW that no neurons fired? YEAH. It severely pissed off my younger brother, because he's in charge of keeping the kitchen clean (which is something he really likes to do) and Uncle Kev will galumph in after it's sparkling clean, pour water on the counters/tables/stove, and then poorly wipe it up. 
* He doesn't sleep at night because of all the copious amounts of coffee he drinks throughout the day and then sleeps all day. He often gets headaches because of this, but he was convinced that my grandparents (who he was living with up until they passed away suddenly) were the cause. They smoked outside the house and he thought the smoke was seeping into the house through the cracks and giving him migraines. He'd throw tantrums every time my grandparents would smoke outside and even did it when they weren't smoking at all. He still didn't put two and two together. 
* When he takes a shower, the bathroom is DESTROYED. He just CAN'T step in the shower, wash, and then get out. It has to be a fucking EVENT that you can hear from outside the door, sounding as though he's an alien who's trying to learn how a bathroom works. We don't know what the actual fuck he does in there, but he can't take a shower without: 
   * Water EVERYWHERE 
   * The toilet flushing MULTIPLE TIMES 
   * The entire bathroom SMELLING LIKE SHIT
* He doesn't understand how watching TV works. He will talk over the entire thing and then ask you a billion questions about what's happening. No, it hasn't clicked in his mind that maybe you *shut up and watch the episode??* And this is EVERY TIME, dude just CAN'T watch. He has to talk over it about anything that comes to mind and then when the episode is over, it's up to you to tell him everything that happened. You'd think he'd wait a minute between episodes to ask, but he doesn't. He just talks through the whole thing, then the beginning of the next episode is you explaining what happened in the last, then he talks through the rest of it. 
* Got it in his mind that him not ever being around myself and my siblings for YEARS because he couldn't be arsed didn't matter and that he still had an authority over us simply because he was older. He talked shit about each of us to each other, thinking that our trust in him was due to him being older, and honestly didn't believe that we would talk to each other about it. And we did. And he's STILL CONFUSED as to why we're upset. 
   * Further on this, because he's older, he just assumes that he's now all knowing and thought he could add to or teach my older brother about his own major (which is a very complicated science). And yeah, Uncle Kev went to college...but took mostly philosophy classes and could barely write his final paper to graduate.

This is all I remember about good ol' Uncle Kev. If anything else comes up, trust and believe, y'all will be the first to know.My sister used to go to school with a Kevin, and growing up we just never managed to get rid of him. One day he came knocking saying he had a puncture on his bicycle and asked if I could fix it.

"Sorry Kevin, we don't have bikes so have no need for a puncture repair kit"

"Ok, but can't you do something?"

"Like what?"

"Can't you fix it somehow?"

"How can I fix it with no repair kit?"

"I don't know, do something?"

"Such as? I could always see if my mum can drive you into town to the bike shop?"

"I don't have the money to pay someone. Can you do something?"

"KEVIN! I CAN'T FIX YOUR PUNCTURE WITHOUT A PUNCTURE REPAIR KIT!"

"Yeah I know that but surely you can do something?"

"(Mentally face palming) The only thing I can do is get you a lift to town"

"But how can I pay them with no money?! Can't you help?"

This went round like this for five minutes!

"Kevin, until you get a puncture repair kit or some money, we're done here" and I closed the door on him.

He was a good guy, just fricking stupid!I got a short one from a Kevin that I talked to in school. We are in Asia, which will be important later.

We were discussing stock photos and Kevin showed me one that he thought looked good on his smartphone. He then went into a spiel about how the lighting looks American and too good to eat.

Confused, I asked how did he identify the nationality of the lighting in the photo. His conclusion?

The camera **looks** like 8K resolution (it was only 1080x720), and our Asian country does not have such technology. Second, the picture looks clear and orange, the perfect combo. Hence, American.

Couldn't tell if he was memeing so I left it at that and promptly excused myself. I swear he wasn't always this like this.I've had a Kevin roommate in his 30s, and even if we generally came along and he was able to manage his life just fine, there were quite a few Kevin things he said or did.

&#x200B;

1. When I moved in, I moved into his old bedroom, and he switched into the other room. In his old room, there was a roll-up window blind. First thing I did was to attach a string so I could reach it when it was rolled up. He said "that's smart, I had to climb onto the radiator for 5 years to get it".

&#x200B;

2) Our water kettle broke, and he went out to get a new one.

He texts me "I bought a cordless kettle, but this is a scam! There is actually no cord, how should this even work! It's still packed on the kitchen counter, but I will return it tonight."

So I come home, curious what this is about, I open the box, I open the kettle, and inside the kettle I find the base station where you put the "cordless" kettle while its heating.

&#x200B;

3) He didn't want to ask his tax advisor for advise, because "this would come out eventually and the boss of the tax advisor's firm would rat me out to the tax authorities."

&#x200B;

4) His (manual) car had an issue, so it would stall when idling at stops and would not start back up right away, which was really inconvenient. So instead of completely stopping at a red light, he would drive back and forth and back and forth... on the spot.

&#x200B;

5) His way to clean the toilet was to sit down in front of it, dip some toilet paper into the toilet water and use it to wipe down the seat and the bowl.

&#x200B;

6) When he was supposed to clean the kitchen, bathroom and hallway, he would take one of these flat mops on a stick, get it wet and push it through the entire space in one run. No rinsing, no back and forth, all in one smooth trajectory. From there, he would push the mop, on its stick, into the closet, where it sat, dirty and wet, until the next time.

When there still were wet spots on the floor, he would use a tea towel, wipe the floor, then wipe the kitchen counter with the same towel. I complained that this was unsanitary, and he said "but I just mopped the kitchen floor".

&#x200B;

7) Last one, Kevin had trouble with his printer's ink running out constantly, so he went to get a new one. He came back proud, because he purchased a printer "where he could recharge the ink over the internet" (actually a subscription for overprized ink).I resell collectibles on eBay, new and old. I try and be fair about my prices based on the current market value, for example if it's going for $65 I will price it at $55 and then ever offer to sell for $50 just to close the sale.   


What I won't do is take a loss on something just because someone wants it that bad and that's where the Kevin in our story comes in.   


I post a recently released figure, it's going market price is about $45 plus or including shipping, Shipping tends to be about $7 in most areas of the US. I paid $22.99 for the figure and I figured $35 should be fair with shipping included and after fees I will just get about a 10% finders fee.

&#x200B;

I get an offer from Kevin for $20, I replied "Sorry but why would I sell the figure for $20 when I'm also paying for shipping and then all the fees, I would be at a total loss" here is how the rest of the conversation goes.  


Kevin:  Cause that’s what’s the figure’s retail price is stop trying to scalp and ripped people off..!

Me:  That’s not the retail price and if you don’t like the price don’t buy it or try and rip me off.

Kevin:  Yea okay whatever you say

Me:  Well go find it, Target, GameStop, Big Bad Toy Store, and so on have it listed for $22.99 to $24.99 plush tax and shipping. You find it for $20 buy two cause it doesn’t happen. Best of luck

Kevin:  Oh I definitely will.. because you’re gonna be selling him for a cheaper price eventually like everyone else on eBay and local sites because the price always drops once he’s arriving at local stores.. I guarantee damn I will find him for cheaper 14$$ mark my words.. I purchase these figures all the time I know how this shit works always every time I just gotta be patient it’s only a matter of time.. you better hope you sell yours soon or you’ll be in the same boat.. good luck 🍀👍🏾 ur gonna need it..

Me:  Good for you, play the waiting game all you want. I don’t ever get stuck with these figures cause I sell under average price at the time. But do yourself a favor, get something to wash off that salty attitude. You’re not buying but you’re pissed off that I won’t lose money to make you happy. Have a good day.

Kevin:  No I’m good.. I’m gonna get the figure’s one way or another.. and I’m not salty I was just giving you some friendly advice.. but you can take it or leave it.. I don’t blame you for trying to make a profit on these figures.. it’s what you’re supposed to be doing.. I knew you wasn’t going to sell him to me for that price but I thought it was worth a shot cause u never know..?!? But I’m done no more msg.. please goodbye 👋 be blessed 😇 I wish you the best on your sell..$$

&#x200B;

So in the end Kevin decides to play it coy, I'm sure he figured out he was wrong about the price or the SALTY comment knocked some sense into him.This collection of stories takes place from 2013-2015, when crypto was catching on but still not really mainstream. The Kevin in this story was my boss, who ran a large mining pool, as well as a datacenter full of ASICs, and a small team of people.



1. Kevin started the pool by paying 15% above standard PPS payout as a way to entice people to join the pool, thinking it would ultimately attract enough miners to the pool to sway the network in our favor and make it work out. Even if you don't understand the specifics of Bitcoin, it's pretty obvious to anyone that you can't pay out 15% above normal returns in the long term. Somewhere something is missing. Ultimately the end of this was a bunch of pissed off miners owed money they would never get.



2. As if things weren't already doomed, we had an instance where the pool wallet was "hacked" and we lost some coins. Turns out if you don't put a password on a crypto wallet, it's not hard to access it's funds. But Kevin "didn't know about wallets." Mind you at this point actual millions had been invested in ASICs and data center space as well as employees, travel, etc. The logic being that since Kevin had some moderate success in email marketing, he would do great at Bitcoin mining and running a pool.



3. Kevin stored all his passwords for all the wallets, backend servers, etc. in a keeper on his phone. The phone however, did not have a password. Kevin took said phone on a trip to China. His plan was to just show up and find a chip maker that would make ASIC chips for us based on his specs. He somehow decided it would be a good idea to have a rep from one of the less reputable, more questionable ASIC makers to host him and take him around. When he got back, a few days later he told us all he had lost his phone. Did not bother to cut it off, change any passwords, etc. So once again, massive funds go missing from the pool wallet and it's not a hack because they have the friggin credentials.



4. We reached a point where the original ASICs were obsolete and needed to be replaced. There were several options. The cheapest option was one we'll call White Spear, because they were known to overheat and catch on fire. Not rumored, known. Vids of early units were everywhere. So in spite of the majority of the team advising against this, Kevin "couldn't resist a good deal." He also listened to the one member of the team also worthy of the title Kevin (Kevin2 had made travel arrangements for the entire team to have a booth at a conference and made arrangements for the conference booth himself. He somehow booked his own ticket for a week later and missed the event). In spite of that, Kevin still listened to Kevin2 on the subject of the ASICs.



As best as I can recall, they were powering up the 3rd unit when the first one caught on fire, and so forth. They stopped around 10 units, leaving the other 200+ on the shipping pallets. The company we had purchased them from stopped returning any calls, leaving us to negotiate with AmEx since we had used a Black Card to buy them.


The problem is that the vendor we purchased from never paid White Spear, so as far as White Spear was concerned they were considered stolen and we had them.


The best part is that the guy who stole the phone in China and took all the coins from us was from White Spear.


I get that you need to understand a bit about crypto for this to make sense. But if you do you can see why this little collection definitely belongs in Stories About Kevin.This guy went to grad school with me. He was OK for the first few years I knew him, but then began listening to conspiracy theorists like Alex Jones. This made the worst aspects of his personality come out.

* Kevin is a hardcore misogynist. On one occasion, he was arguing with a female friend in my Facebook comments about how women don't have any actual medical need for for birth control pills. When my friend saiid that women sometimes need to take birth control for other medical reasons, he told her she was a silly girl and didn't know what she was talking about. When she (correctly) began tearing him a new one, he blocked her and messaged me about how irrational she was being.
* Kevin decided Alex Jones wasn't enough and began following a Catholic fortune teller. This fortune teller made a prophecy that Barack Obama wouldn't peacefully transition power to Trump in 2016. When it became apparent that the fortune teller's prophecy was incorrect, Kevin refused to admit this was the case and sent us videos of people protesting several blocks away from the inauguration.
* I am an immigrant. One day, me and some friends had an extra ticket to a baseball game and invited Kevin. At the end of the national anthem, Kevin yelled "Build the Wall!" as he stood next to me. When I confronted him, Kevin said he was just play acting as a jingoistic American.
* Kevin claimed that he had proof that the Sun revolves around the Earth and that there's no way the Theory of Relativity is possible. When I sent him scientific papers proving him wrong, he said that only "high priests of science" could understand that stuff.
* Kevin claimed that ventilators were what killed people who were diagnosed with Covid. He said that when we stopped putting so many people on ventilators, Covid deaths went way down.
* My cousin's wife died of Covid. I told Kevin I didn't want to hear anything about his conspiracy theories regarding Covid at the same time I told him my cousin's wife had passed away. He sent me a conspiracy theory article 2 hours later. When I called him out on it, he refused to apologize, going only so far as saying that he might not have chosen the best time to send the article.
* Kevin was in a fantasy sports league with me and my friends. We'd bust each other's chops and make jokes about each other. He'd say all types of crazy things to all of us, but if someone said anything even remotely negative about him, he'd throw a literal tantrum. This is a man who is 48.
* Finally, we all decided to cut ties with Kevin on January 6, 2021. As we watched the riot, one of our friends decided to ask Kevin whether he thought the rioters were acting in a way consistent with democracy. He then sent us a YouTube video of one of the Easter Island statues with a voice over saying we shouldn't believe everything in the media.

It's been great having Kevin out of my life. I never realized what a toxic drain he was. I highly recommend that you get rid of the Kevin in your life ASAP.Kevina. My poor, innocent friend Kevina. I sometimes can't tell where to begin with this girl.

Kevina and I became friends because little me had befriended a DIFFERENT girl, also named Kevina (who is usually not much of a Kevin. Much.). Kevina discovered this and sought us out, deciding that because both girls were named Kevina, they were destined to be best friends. And because I was already best friends with Kevina-not-Kevina (who I'll differentiate as Sharky from here on in, because I'm already confusing myself), I got yanked along for the ride. I, in fact, still am on the ride.

Almost ten years later.

I've known Kevina for almost *a decade* now and she still somehow manages to shock me with her pure...Kevin energy. So, in my dear Kevina's honor, here are some of her best Kevina moments to date.

1. Kevina, Sharky and I were goofing around at my house one day. Kevina and I, for whatever reason our preteen brains dreamed up, decide to get into the dog's crates. I had a dog on my lap, Kevina was just sitting in the crate. My mother pulled into the driveway and because human girls really aren't supposed to be in dog crates, I immediately pull the latch open and hop out to greet her. NOTE- this was not a crate with a complicated door or latch. Just a simple metal bar-slides-in-the-other-bar type deal. Kevina, for whatever reason, couldn't get out. Instead, I had to explain to my mother why Kevina was sitting in the dog crate, screaming for Sharky to come let her out.
2. Kevina doesn't understand video games. Sharky and I both love playing video games together, and it's come in handy over quarantine. Kevina also loves playing games with us. However, Kevina can't *for the life of her*understand that any game except for Roblox. We've tried to get her to play the *simplest* games. Kevina couldn't play Minecraft because she kept forgetting which character was hers and constantly needed saving (note-we were playing Creative Mode). Kevina couldn't play Mario Kart because...well, Kevina just couldn't play Mario Kart. Sharky (who can best my ass at most games even on a bad day) would have to finish her race and take Kevina's controller, just so we could move on to the next race. Kevina *just barely* understood Animal Crossing, and we still had to rescue her a few times (she got into a house and couldn't figure out how to get out). We've long since given up trying. At this point, the Kevina crew and I just play a lot of Roblox.
3. Which leads into our next Kevina moment. Sharky and I are guilty of playing a lot of pranks, both on Kevina and each other. At some point over quarantine (when Kevina, Sharky and I were playing a *lot* of Roblox, just as a way to spend time together), I stumbled on a TikTok reading something along the lines of "Breaking news! Roblox will shut down on February 30th!" Thinking it was funny, I shared it to our little group chat. I didn't witness it personally, but according to Sharky, Kevina was absolutely devastated. Kevina also believed me until March.
4. Kevina oftentimes makes up new meanings for words without telling anyone what the meanings are. She spent a few minutes today over the phone giggling over herself saying 'fish sticks'. Her favorite thing to tell Sharky recently is "I disgrace you!" whenever Sharky does something she doesn't like. When Sharky asked her what she meant, Kevina shrugged and replied "I don't know."
5. Kevina is no longer allowed to participate in group projects with me, for the sake of both our sanities. This is because at some point, during a world history project with me and another friend, Eve, we ran out of time during class. Thus, Kevina was left unsupervised to finish her part of the project- one slide's worth of notes on the Colombian war for independence . Eve texts me the next morning, *enraged*. I log on to see that Kevina had written a complete mess of a paragraph with absolutely no sources in sight. Upon some investigating, I discovered that Kevina had written about the Colombian Civil War, a person from the District of Columbia, and cited a source about drug trafficking in Colombia. So the wrong war, wrong country, wrong topic and *wrong century*. Kevina first claimed that she fell asleep while writing, then that Eve was supposed to do the Colombia slide. Needless to say, Eve and I were not amused. Kevina was promptly kicked off of the project and I haven't done another with her since.
6. And finally, the most Kevina thing she's ever said. Kevina is an only child of fairly well-off English parents. I mention this because Kevina is used to traveling (she goes to Europe at least once a year and actually once got mad at Sharky because Sharky admitted she'd never been). So during quarantine, no one was especially surprised when Kevina called us up and told us that since their trip to France was canceled, they'd be visiting family in Arizona (where they wouldn't have to fly). Sharky and I just smiled and congratulated Kevina, going on with our day. At some point, we were on the phone and playing Roblox (as usual) and Kevina starts telling us about her upcoming trip. I'm biting my tongue and listening when Kevina says, "Ugh. The thing is, I always get so dehydrated when we go to Arizona."

 I (who also gets dehydrated easily) actually could sympathize with this. I nodded along and said something along the lines of "Oh, yeah. I get that. It's *so* hot and it's so easy to not drink enough water, even here. (CO)". Kevina nods enthusiastically. "Yes! But also, they don't allow glasses by the pool!"

 I pause. Sharky, apparently thinking along the same lines, asks Kevina what she means. "Well, they don't let us bring glasses of water down to the pool. And I don't *like* tap water!"

 We were just about as confused as anyone reading this is. Sharky asked Kevina why she didn't just bring a water bottle. Kevina reiterated that she didn't like tap water. I reminded Kevina that she could drink water places *other* than the pool. Kevina replied that the whole reason they were *going* was to be by the pool. Apparently, the pools at hotels near us weren't satisfying enough. As near as I can figure, the hotel wouldn't let guests bring their own beverages down by the pool and Kevina objected to the drinking fountains. When asked why, Kevina replied that "Tap water tastes gross!" I asked her what she thought the water from her sink was. She replies "Better water!" I'm assuming she meant filtered water (I also have a filtered water tap). I asked Kevina to clarify one more time. "So, just to get this straight. You always get dehydrated in Arizona...not because it's hot or dry, but because your hotel won't let you bring glasses down to the pool?" Kevina nods enthusiastically.

 Sharky and I really didn't know how to respond to any of this. Sharky kept trying to coax logic out of Kevina. I, being the petty and dehydrated brat that I am, promptly went to my own sink and filled my water bottle up with the evil tap water. I then came back to my phone and chugged the entire bottle in front of Kevina, who made gagging and retching sounds the entire time. Kevina apparently had an excellent time in Arizona, and Sharky and I never asked how she worked around the problem. But we do occasionally tease Kevina about it today, and she finds it almost as funny as we do.

So that's the story of my best friend, Kevina. She is, without question, the walking embodiment of the dumb blonde stereotype. She's also one of the sweetest, most die-hard loyal friends I've ever had in my life. I wouldn't trade her for the world. If you made it this far, thanks for reading! Maybe I'll show Kevina and Sharky this post. They'd probably find it funny :)Oh boy, where do I even begin with this twat. I met Kevin in middle school and he was a flat earther and would not shut up about it. He had a huge superiority complex and believed that he was the most intelligent person in the world, and would boast about it every chance he got. Kevin was also a crybaby that would literally throw a tantrum when he didn’t get his way, and his mom supported every bit of it.

Onto the stories.

1. On the first day of 7th grade we all had to introduce ourselves to the class. When it was Kevin’s turn he said he was the most intelligent person in the world. We thought he was joking so we laughed. But Kevin got annoyed and said he was being dead serious. He then said he was a flat earther. You could feel the entire class cringe. Kevin was about to say something but the teacher cut him off and went to the next student.
2. In LA class, we had a project where we had to choose a topic that we would make a slideshow presentation on and explain it to the class. When Kevin presented it was about flat earth. Everybody saw that coming. The presentation was full of sketchy sources, cringe worthy explanations, and simply bashing people who believed in round earth. His goal with the presentation was to try to convince the class that the earth is flat. Here are some quotes (My memory is foggy so these won’t be exact but the meaning behind them is the same):

“If gravity is strong enough to pull down buildings, then how are bugs and insects not stuck to the ground?”

“If the earth is round then how can there be flat surfaces?”

“You round earthers are so gullible. If only you would do as much research as me!”

He ended his presentation saying we need to open our eyes and push back on government deception. By the end the teacher looked exhausted. The class wasn’t really paying much attention and Kevin just stood there like he was expecting something (maybe he was expecting an applause?) The teacher told him to sit down and that was the end of that.

3. We had a science project where we had to make a model of a cell. The groups were decided at random. I ended up with one of my friends and Kevin. Kevin started drawing a diagram of the model and wasn’t listening to us. Kevin then showed us the diagram, which was just an oval with a smaller red oval in it. The outer layer was labeled “cell” and the red part was labeled “DNA”. We told him this was very inaccurate but he said that we were wrong. Kevin wouldn’t listen to us and said that he was the smartest so we should just do what he says.

We realized Kevin was not going to budge so me and my friend started making our own plan for the model. Kevin snatched the paper and tore it up. He called us r\*\*\*\*\*s and we told him he wasn’t as smart as he thinks he is. Kevin then literally threw a tantrum. He started crying and stomping his feet. The teacher came to see what was going on and we told her what happened, and some kids around us backed us up. The teacher tried to take Kevin out of the class, but he was throwing such a loud and destructive tantrum that he practically had to be dragged out of the class. Half an hour later class was over and we headed off to our next class. On the way we ran into the teacher, the principal, Kevin, and someone we would soon find out to be his mom outside of the office.

The mom was screaming that her son did not deserve any punishment. Kevin saw us and pointed at us to his mom and said that we were the ones that “bullied” him. The mom screamed that this school was full of r\*\*\*\*\*s for not punishing the people that hurt her baby. The principal told us to just head to our class and so we did. Kevin wasn’t in class for the next week so he probably got suspended. We did the project without him.

4. Last story. Remember that LA project? Well one my classmates did a presentation on geology that didn’t feature a flat earth, so obviously that triggered Kevin. Since then, Kevin has been constantly pestering that classmate (we will call him CM for simplicity) to convince him of flat earth and to “revoke” his presentation. Kevin wasn’t making any progress so he switched to insulting CM. Kevin would call him a r\*\*\*\*\*ed government shill. CM just ignored him but then Kevin put a paper on CM’s locker saying that CM liked to suck Obama’s d\*\*\* (Obama was president at the time.)

Later that day in the cafeteria, Kevin came up to CM. CM started yelling at him for putting that paper on his locker. Kevin just laughed and said that CM was on the wrong side of history, and he hoped CM could find the truth soon. Kevin then said:

“The anti-government revolution will come at most in the next 5 years. I’ve tried to get you to open your eyes but you keep refusing. I hope you’re happy with your decision, because once you are the minority don’t come crawling back to me.”

I was laughing so hard I almost fell off my chair. Kevin got angry that I was laughing so he grabbed CM’s lunch tray and started hitting me with it. I pushed him away from me and he fell on his butt. Kevin started crying. The lunch monitor came to see what was going on and CM told him what happened and other kids around the table backed him up. Pretty much the same fiasco that happened during the science project, he threw such a huge tantrum he practically had to be dragged out of the cafeteria. A couple minutes before lunch period was about to end the mom came into the cafeteria with Kevin in tow. She shouted that whoever “assaulted” her son deserved to rot in hell. The principal and the lunch monitor came running behind her and told her to leave. She and Kevin left. I never saw Kevin again so he was probably expelled or his mom removed him from the school.

Sometimes I wonder how Kevin is today. Did he grow up and become a decent human being? What was his reaction when he found out that the anti-government revolution did not start 5 years later? Did he graduate high school? I do hope the kid has grew out of his idiotic ways, but considering how his mom is I don’t think that is very likely.

Edit: Sorry about the inconsistent formatting I've tried to fix it.

Edit 2: This story along with every other story I posted on this account are fake.My uncle on my mom's side of the family, I realized after reading the posts here, is the Family Kevin. He is a 40 year-old do-nothing blob of disappointment, fat, and lies. The kicker is that he often thinks he's smarter than everyone else. To answer the question if he has mental issues (because learning disabilities run in my family, I have them): we don't know because he refuses to get tested and is thoroughly convinced that nothing is wrong with him and that it's everyone else with the problem. But in the same breath says he should be excused for a boatload of things because he has "a little dyscalcula." (yes that's how he says it). 

Here are examples of his Kevinness (fuckle up folks, this ones long): 

* Washes dishes with his bare hands no matter how many times he's told to use the sponge and then wonders why the dishes aren't clean enough. Gets grossed out when getting a cup he washed and it's not completely clean, wonders who the hell isn't cleaning the dishes properly.
* Could barely get a job and most of the jobs he did manage to get turned out to be total scams. Not just scams, but EXTREMELY OBVIOUS that they were scams. Very much a "too good to be true" situation. Like, even high school bullies who turn into MLM moms would see these jobs and turn them away.
* Tried to prove to us that he didn't need a job because he has an app on his phone that, apparently, pays him money for working out?? (It doesn't, also total scam). 
* One of his favourite activities is proving that he is smart by giving out medical advice...that is *wrong.* For example, he had the whole house in a panic because my younger brother was bleeding! Oh no! From where you ask!? His nose! It was a fucking minor nosebleed and we thought my younger brother was bleeding out and needed an ambulance. We had technicians over working on our circuit board and even *they* were concerned. He then instructed my brother to pinch his nose and hold his head back as far as possible and that this was VERY serious, which is again NO DON'T DO THAT YOU ARE SWALLOWING BLOOD AND/OR COULD GET IT IN YOUR LUNGS (which can result in vomiting)! My mom was so done, he was running around like a chicken with its head cut off while she gave my brother a cold towel and told him to hold is head forward. 
   * Now, you may think "well, he should be quite relieved to learn that what he knows is wrong and that everything is fine" but OH NO. He throws a temper tantrum when you tell him he's not right. He actually refused to talk to me for several days when I told him he was wrong about nosebleeds, that they weren't serious as long as the bleeding stopped after ten or fifteen minutes, the cause could literally just be that the air in here is too dry, and that you never hold your head back. His response, "Well, I had them a lot as I kid, I would know." then harrumphed to his room.
   * He also thought he could cure my mother's fibromyalgia by trying to coerce her into taking this concoction of vitamins. He just couldn't understand that nerve pain issues aren't solved with milk of magnesia. 
* Another way he likes to prove that he's knowledgeable is through conspiracy theories about history. He is the guy that believes ancient Egypt was run by aliens. He is the guy that thinks the holocaust was probably not real or as bad as it was. He is the guy that worships the Romans and tells grandiose tales of them that didn't happen. He believes that all the "embarrassing" things about evolution (like the species of human evolving from primates) only belong to white people and that white people are the way they are because they're incestuous monkeys unlike all other races. If you show him evidence that says otherwise, you are lectured about his time in college.
* He loves the title "comicbook nerd who was bullied for it but now its cool" but makes it painfully obvious that he never reads (or probably has never read) any of the comic books. If you ask him about any DC character, he will go into a fantastical story that was never written. How I know? Well, I'm not the most avid reader (I have pretty basic knowledge) but my brother is an avid reader and every time he asks "when did that happen?" or point-blank says "that never happened", my uncle will just shut down and say "yes it did" even when you prove to him that it didn't
* He's confused and dismayed as to why he got kicked out of a family member's home, thinks she was being unfair especially since he got a job. This is because this family member is at-risk for covid, so much so that she can't get the vaccine because it would just be too risky. When Kevin was figuring himself out and applying for jobs, she told him several times that he couldn't get a job at a covid testing facility because the risk of her getting covid was too great. A covid testing facility was the very first job he applied to and worked at in secret. He then came clean and couldn't figure out why he got thrown out. 
* Thinks that women have their own version of testicles, they're just tucked inside our bodies, but if you punch the spot where they are, you can stun a woman for a few minutes. (I had to punch a wall and scream after typing this, excuse me)
* Almost didn't graduate from college because he didn't understand why writing a final essay was necessary and didn't want to do it. Claimed his "dyscalcula" is preventing him from even seeing the keyboard. Because my grandparents sank so much money into him, they basically had to beg my mom and dad to write it for him. They did. He graduated. He then went on to do nothing with the degree.
* I caught him snooping in my mom's room while she was out, told him he couldn't rifle through her things for medication she didn't have (tried to say he was looking for hydroxycut, my mom doesn't take it and that he had permission to snoop through her room when he knows we all overheard her yelling at him to stay out of her bedroom). To keep the anger to a minimum, I told him that he'd have to ask her and wait for her to come back but for now, he can't look through her stuff. His very next move was to try to convince the family that I was a drug addict just like his older sister, a woman he has no memories of (she passed away when he was 2 or 3, was never home to boot) and she had no issues with drugs. 
* Saw my mom's really nice iPad and started complaining about his tablet, that he knew how to use and never had issues with, was not working. Asked my mom for a free trial by using her iPad for a while to see if he liked it. She told him no. He is upset and confused as to why this didn't work and called her selfish. Immediately went back to using his "broken" tablet with no issues...right in front of her.
* He has to shove things in your cornea if he wants to show you something because if he has bad eye sight, so do you. Thinks you jerking back is funny and that he intimidated you...sir, you are fat, wear a greying culdesac, and shorter than ME (I'm 5'3, the shortest person in the family), who are you intimidating???
* Laundry! Laundry is simple, right? RIGHT!? Now, I understand people who were neglected by their parents who don't know how, but Uncle Kev is a different story. So, he doesn't understand that laundry has to be done pretty regularly, especially with items you use a lot. He doesn't wash anything until it smells so bad that you smell it through the walls. THEN when he finally decides to wash his sheets/clothes, it's a JOURNEY. In the laundry room in our building, the directions for how to use ALL the machines are on the machines, written in easy to read font and with very simple sentences. He not only needs the directions constantly, but three people to show him exactly how to do it, asks a million questions...every SINGLE TIME. 
* Doesn't at all think he's overweight. He says it's muscle. Tries to say it has to be muscle and that he's burning fat because he "never eats" and I believe he had to have weight loss surgery. If this is the case, then WHY are you looking for weight-loss supplements and WHY do you eat several plates of unhealthy food in the middle of the night to the point that we never have leftovers or snacks? WHY are your eating habits ten-times worse than the fucking party sub guy?
* Drinks copious amounts of coffee with all the cream and sugar. Doesn't understand why he can't sleep and why his stomach always hurts. 

This is all I can think of about Uncle Kev for now, probably more that I missed. All I can say is that thank god him trying to be a veterinarian didn't work out. He does not live with my family anymore, he's currently in a crusty hotel somewhere because his Kevinness makes him unable to live with anyone without driving them crazy.I worked with this guy who was 22, sales and extremely eager to succeed in life. He wore large stud earrings and bracelets with cubic zirconia, because “they are almost like diamonds”. He ha a belt witch spelled THOMMY HILFIGER and a “gold” watch larger than any sized I’ve seen. Though enthusiastic, he wasn’t very bright with a touch of casual ignorance racism ans  even though his father was Mexican he was, as he phrased it himself, “white passing”. I spent 8 months with him (I’m at least 20 years his age), trying to open his mind. Important to ad is that I am myself an immigrant from a Scandinavian country. Here is my stories:


- A lady said she was from the UK and Kevin managed to forget this since he a few hours later tried to figure out where London was located. His first guess was “is it like next to Paris?”. I’m a bit unsure if he actually knows the difference between UK and England, but I just didn’t had enough spoons to ask… the reason he went down this rabbit hole was because “omg did you see how fucking beautiful she was and are they all that beautiful over there?!”.

- He’s thinks Bolivia is in Europe “who expects anyone to remember all the countries in the world anyway”. On the other hand, he doesn’t know Denmark is actually a country either.

- “People with diabetes can’t be firefighters because if they get hurt, like on their axe or a huge rip over their back, then they will develop gangrene and die”. Then he spent an hour arguing with me how dangerous diabetes is. Now, to be fair, this is the US and diabetes is definitely not handle very well. I am though sure that even people with diabetes can be firefighters in the US.

- I explained that I wasn’t so sure about taking my husband names because why should I? And Kevin got extremely upset “I will never marry someone who doesn’t take my last name because that’s how it is. Unless she makes six figures then I do it of course!” So apparently… Misogyny is not as important as money.

- my boss had to had surgery and Kevin cut off her just to ask about “What type of sedation do they use for surgeries? Venom?”

- “It’s always the man who pays for dates and if they are like two gay ladies, then the one who is most manly, will pay.” Note that our boss was actually lesbian so we of course poked him about his pompous “men always pay” and that’s when he explained that it’s apparently the more “butch” lady who pays if they are lesbian.

- “I feel sorry for blind people because they can’t work with anything because they are disabled and once you’re disable you’re not allowed to work”. Kevin had never before encountered the possibility that disabled people do indeed work.

- After I explained that my dog has allergies and need to see the vet because he’s been shaking his ears, Kevib immediately asks if my dog is allergic to …peanuts.

- Kevin’s geography knowledge was not very good and he guessed if Venezuela is in Europe.

- When I (an immigrant) talked about The Donner’s Party, Kevin (born in Southern California) didn’t believe me that that it happened in California and was convinced that it was “somewhere in the Himalayas”. We googled it. He was of course wrong. Which I knew but at this point I tried training him in searching for sources instead of rely on hearsay.

- When describing the movie Alive taking place in the Andees (South America), Kevin is confused because it wasn’t either the Rocky Mountains, Sierra Nevada …or the Himalayas. He couldn’t neither wrap his head around the fact that the Andees aren’t covered in rainforest, even if they are in Latinamerica.

- Kevin has several times trying to convince me how ghost are real by “showing me real cctv fotage” on YouTube and he won’t accept that they may have been manipulated. I mean, don’t take my word for it but YouTube videos?! 

- Kevin claims that the pyramids are alien because no one knows how they are built and I explained that they aren’t alien and that we actually have a good idea of how they are built. I also happen to have a degree in  archeology but since Kevin doesn’t believe like stuff, I decided to show him how they were made by using a YouTube video …since we apparently have established that to be a proper scientific media source… he did not believe me.

- Kevin hardcore beliefs in god and to prove me wrong he googled and find the first  article about a 4-5 year old kid dying in the operation and was brought back to life and told everyone he saw Jesus. My coworkers main argument was “4-5 year olds can’t make up that type of lies so it has to be truth”. “This is fact, right there” pointing at the article” so you can’t argue against it!”. Also, hell exist and when we die we “go to sleep and our soul will leave our body because that’s the only things can be true”. He does though acknowledge other religions and whatever people believe in, is where they will end up …except atheists because not believing doesn’t count for not ending up somewhere and “we will see who’s speaking the truth when you die”.

- Kevin thinks Portugal is close to Japan.

- Kevin doesn’t know that Native Americans was once incorrectly named “Indians” because Columbus thought he was in India. But he knows that that’s a bad word and won’t use it since “that’s a fighting word dude”. Note that he’s a full born and raised American  and I’m the immigrant.

- He’s not against gay people but he explained to me how having “gays in the army won’t be a good idea because they are more feminine”. He didn’t quite explained how that is and I honestly didn’t wanna ask since he’s just too uneducated… When I explained that the army probably already has a ton of gay people without him knowing, he looked a bit puzzled “yeah maybe”.

- He believes HIV will immediately be transmitted via a kiss on the forehead. 

- He finally asked me how we celebrate Thanksgiving in my home country and after the longest 30 min, I realized that he assumed all “white” people has colonized their lands so it’s therefore natural that we also celebrates some sort of thanksgiving too. I had to explain to him that no one lived there before and we were first and no, we did not in fact conquered anyone to settle there because before us, since there was kilometers of thick ice covering this area 10 000 years ago.

- “Diabetic cutting toenails have to be careful because if the cut wrong they can get an infection, sepsis and die.” Kevin was very obsessed with people immediately dying by diabetes

- Person enter my work to ask for assistance with their problem but leaves shortly after. My coworker and I discussed why he left so soon, and I suggest that he might not have understood us based of his thick accent which made it obvious that English wasn’t his first language and this may have act as a barrier to understand what we could provide him. Cue shocked gasp from coworker “White people can’t have accents”.
While talking to me.
An “white” immigrant.
With an accent.Cast: Me= Me, K= Kevin

On mobile, so sorry for formatting.

So, I have been debating telling this story about my Kevin Neighbor from when I was a young teen. This is just a small story.  I met this Kevin when I was about 13 and this particular even happened when I was 15. Kevin is about two years younger than me. This boy was the kind of kid who believed anything you told him and no, I didn't take advantage of his Kevin-ness. We were talking and I was just trying to be nice since he had no friends on the street. This was when he dropped this bombshell and his convoluted conspiracy theory about Goldfish. The animals, not the snack.Thatsmilesback.

K: "Did you know that Goldfish are smarter than a Supercomputer?!

Me: "Uh, K... They are NOT smarter than Supercomputers. Trust me."

K: "No, they ARE smarter than Supercomputers! I know they are!"

Me: "No, K. They forget what they did three seconds after doing so. It's how come they are so easy to overfeed."

K: "No! They do that on purpose to hide the fact they are so smart! They don't want to reveal their secrets!"

I resist trying to facepalm and figured this was why he had no friends. Then what he said next made me worried, not for him to hurt himself, but because of what it implied.

K: "I will prove it! I will get my parents to get me a Goldfish and I will teach it to speak so that it can reveal it's secrets!"

K then stormed off and headed home, determined to get a goldfish and teach it to speak. He never spoke about his project again, and avoided speaking of it if asked. To this day, I still have no idea how this project panned out, but I feel he never managed to teach a Goldfish to speak to him. I hope y'all enjoyed this small story about my Kevin! If anyone wants to use this anywhere else, I don't mind. Even though I doubt anyone will even find it interesting.

Edited to fix some mistakes.My brother is a Kevin in many ways. He is especially Kevin-ish with food. On a visit to our grandparents, he insisted that pancakes were best with French dressing instead of syrup. Grandpa was "out of touch" to think that anyone still used syrup. Bro then drowned his pancakes in French dressing. Grandpa made him eat it. After a few bites, Bro was begging not to have to eat that mess. 

When he was 16, he got a job in a diner. He was NOT a cook. One day he swore that western omelets are made with pickle relish. "It looks like green pepper but it is always pickle relish no matter where you go for one." By that time (I was 14), I pretty much refused to eat anything Bro cooked. He was "nice" and fixed dinner for the entire family that night. Because I questioned his expertise in cooking, he made us each a western omelet using pickle relish. He didn't tell our parents what he did, just said they were western omelets. Both parents spit out the first bite and asked him WTF????? He called them low class Westernized peasants for not liking his cooking. He made a huge stink about us refusing to eat what he cooked. Because he was incredibly rude during his tirade at our parents, he did not get any of the pizza we ordered. 

When he was 20, he came home from the Army. He wanted to cook breakfast for us. I was hesitant about eating anything he cooked, but I figured I could be nice and at least try. Surely he got better to keep from poisoning himself? Nope. He made breakfast. The toast was good. The sausage wasn't fully cooked because "that is the best way and of course it won't make you sick". The scrambled eggs looked weird, They were gray. And they were gritty. He explained that his new recipe for scrambled eggs made them so much better! Instead of milk, he used coffee. And some of the grounds for "texture". It was just so awful. Our parents couldn't believe he wanted us to eat that.  Of course he had a tantrum because we were being "rude, low class and horrible" for not eating the food he put in front of us. That he slaved over for a whole half hour. It took quite a long time for either of my parents to want to eat anything he cooked.These short stories pertain to a friend of my family whilst I was growing up, and is from around the year 2000. 


So for context, Kevin was an AFO (authorised firearms officer) in the UK. As gun control in the UK is much more stringent that in some other places (i.e. the USA), it is not the norm for police officers to be trained to use firearms. In fact, they have to go through a series of interviews, psychological and physical fitness tests, and must undergo annual refresher training and testing. With this in mind, it is somewhat remarkable how Kevin ever ended up being certified to carry a firearm.


**So for the first story:**


As Kevin was an AFO, he was regularly assigned to patrol near the local military base whilst military exercises were being undertaken. The reason for this was to ensure that no civilians accidentally managed to get onto base and be put at risk during live fire exercises. There weren’t always fences to mark the edge of the base as it lay next to a large beach (several miles long) with rolling sand dunes. 


During such an event, the police received a call to say that a ‘group of young men are racing their bikes around the sand dunes, please remove them from the area.’. So Kevin drives to the beach and finds two young boys (no older than 10) riding along the beach. He takes action by putting on his sirens, and racing along the beach in his 4x4 chasing these boys. It doesn’t take long to catch them, and he arrests them and throws them into the back of his vehicle. In addition to this, he arrested their mother for trying to intervene in these arrests.


When he returned to the station, it turns out that he had driven to the wrong beach (nowhere near the base), and had arrested three members of a family enjoying a holiday outing. The young men on bikes who he was meant to apprehend had inadvertently entered into the base leading to the exercise (involving hundreds of troops, APCs and tanks) had to be suspended. For this he received a formal warning, an apology was issued to the family, and Kevin became the laughing stock of the station.


**The second story:**


So following on from the first story, Kevin’s annual training and testing for his firearm certification were brought forward due to his warning. 


Kevin was a big fan of the old wild west films. I think that in a way he saw himself as some sort of town sheriff since he was issued with his pistol. So at the certification, he was due to undertake a firearms test at the firing range. During the assessment, Kevin decided to emulate the famous trope which is endemic Hollywood movies - blowing the barrel of the gun after shooting it.


So after firing each round, Kevin was blowing the barrel. Why no one intervened is anyone’s guess. But the inevitable happened, where Kevin accidentally reversed his cadence. So instead of shooting, and then blowing the barrel, he pointed at the target, blew air out of his mouth, then pointed upwards just in front of his face, and fired the pistol directly upwards. Amazingly he hit the only object in the room which wasn’t bulletproof (the fire alarm sensor was above him), which led to the entire building being evacuated. 


After this moment of lunacy, his firearms certification was removed from him for life, and he was temporarily suspended due to his actions (after receiving a second warning in as many weeks). 


**The third story:**


Would you believe it, but Kevin was happily married. Whilst on his temporary suspension (as mentioned previously), he and his wife chose to go on a romantic retreat to Tenerife. I mean, what could go wrong?


A few nights into their stay, Kevin and his wife were invited to drink in a small bar off the main strip. After suitable ‘lubrication’, the barman asked Kevin if he wanted to enter into a competition to win a 2 week all expenses paid Mediterranean cruise. Kevin couldn’t say no to this, so entered this competition. An hour or so later, the barman informs Kevin that ‘he has had a call’ telling him that Kevin had won the competition. The catch was, that to secure his place, Kevin had to pay a ‘booking fee’ to secure his spot. 


For most people, this would throw up so many red flags, it is unbelievable, so surely Kevin, an experienced police officer with 20 years under his belt would not fall for this. Kevin isn’t most people of course, and before the night was out, he was been defrauded out of his, and his wife’s entire life savings.


To top things off, when he returned to the UK, Kevin asked to have his story put into the local newspaper. I don’t know why he did this, as it made the entire county know that he had been stupid enough to fall for a blatant con when on holiday.


**Finale:**


There is no real happy ending here. Not long afterwards, Kevin developed alcoholism, and lost his job with the police due to being intoxicated on the job. He also lost his driving license for being caught drink driving by one of his old colleagues. He is still with his long suffering wife, but is on the shortest leash imaginable. To say that his marriage is on the rocks is an understatement.This was a few years ago at a backyard gathering. We are all hanging out playing some games, corn hole, etc. and we are getting annoyed by bugs. Kevin wisely brought this bug spray called "Woods Off". Except, by the name of the brand he thought you were supposed to spray the bug spray AT THE WOODS and not on your clothes. We try to tell him that's absurd, but he proceeds to do so. It was a good laugh, but Kevin was out of bug spray by the end of the day.This was in 2012-2013, a long-ass time ago, and we were in grade 10.

Now, I’m not sure, but it is possible that this dude had ADHD, but if he did, he sure as hell never took any medication.

There were 1000 people or so at the school. Kevin thought he would get rich quick by asking every single one of them for a dollar.

We were doing an exercise about surviving on a deserted island. This dude’s brilliant idea? Drink straight from the ocean!

We had an auditorium and he would routinely go above the stage crew area where no one was supposed to go, and yell “I found Narnia!”

There was a lice inspection at the school. He walked into the classroom and asked “So, how many people have lice?”

He didn’t understand the concept of borrowing something. If you gave him a pencil, he would think of it as permanently his.

He would routinely tell us about the Xbox games he had bought. His mom was one of those Asian tiger parents and there was no Xbox at his house.

He told me Stalingrad was a fictional city that did not exist. He did not change his stance even after I showed him old maps, and pointed out that my great-grandfather was a Red Army soldier and died there. I asked him if my great-grandfather was fictional. He said, “I guess so.”

His yearbook quote was “I like it”. I don’t want to know.

This is all the stuff I can remember right now, I will add more if I remember more.This Kevin is a family member of mine. I will be keeping his name and family position a secret for privacy matters. This Kevin lives in the south and can’t read. I know he can’t read because he made a joke to me about him not being able to read, then got annoyed that I didn’t laugh. One day it was an extremely hot summer day and Kevin was using the weed wacker. Hi took off his shirt. When he was walking weeds he decided to wack the poison ivy. It went all over his face, arms, and chest. His told us that the reason he did that was because he knew poison ivy is a weed and should be wacked. I know that he gets injured a lot while working, but this is the only story I know all the information to.   I don’t like sharing personal information on the internet but this story had to be shared. I hope everyone has a happy New Years Kevin too.Alright so, I'm an insurance agent and I was tied of working with the agency I was with so I went to start to run an agency with another company. In order to do so, I had to act as a secondary agent for someone who had purchased an agency for six weeks as some sort of ritual to be sure I understood all their systems. Well, I got saddled with a new agent who had never worked in insurance in his life but his parents each ran very successful agencies with the company so via nepotism he got to skip the vetting process. It quickly became obvious that that was a mistake. Here's a list of just some of the fun things I got to endure with this particular Kevin being my boss.

- Kevin is deeply studying his business card for several minutes as though he's deep in thought. I am him what he's doing. He says, "Can you help me figure out what this word is? I can't sound it out." It was 'Insurance' and later that day he got into an argument over the fact that everyone spelled 'round' wrong because you couldn't have two sound letters (vowels?) Next to each other.

-He was putting the decals on his window with his name on it. He couldn't get the air bubbles out so he decided to use a hammer to try to pop them. He cracked his plate glass window and asked if we could hide the cracks for him.

-When his first client came in (the agency was inherited so there was already a book of business) he offered him a $50 gift card to stay with us as we were beat in price by a competitor(Highly illegal). He then proceeded to run the customer's card for an additional $50 and gave him the gift cards that he purchased. He then purchased several more $50 gift cards with the gentleman's card and offered them to other people who would come in for insurance. 

-He purchased security cameras, not knowing that they had to be plugged in and nailed them randomly around the rooms. He nailed straight through the body of the camera and did not use any of the included mounts. 

-He hired a girl in a wheelchair and asked if she was born with the wheelchair and if it hurt her mom when she was born with the chair. 

-He ripped up all the hard wood flooring in his office and got upset that there wasn't carpet underneath. 

-He tried to delete the 'Do Not Call' list so he could call those people. When that didn't work, he deleted the operating system on his computer. We were unable to conduct business for three days as a result.

-He set off the sprinkler system ruining all of our equipment three times in three weeks by microwaving aluminum foil. Each time he told the wheelchair girl, "Can you take the blame this time? I don't want the fire fighters to know it was me."

-He would regularly close his blinds and turn off his lights, then within ten minutes ask if I knew how to unblock sites on his computer.

-He drove into the pillar in front of the tae Kwon do place next door severely damaging his car and leaving paint all over the pillar. He moved his car one spot over and when the tae Kwon do guy addressed the issue he denied the whole thing. This happened twice. 

-The ethics committee of the parent company came to investigate/shut him down and he locked them out and tried to sneak out the back door setting off the alarm getting the police out for unethical business practices. When they actually got to address him he said, "You're not the boss of me. My name is on the building."

There were definitely more instances but these were definitely the most telling instances that came to mind. I tried to survive as long as I could but after three weeks I went to work with another agency.I dated this Kevina for a while and after we split up we lived together as friends for ten years. She was very dear to me, and often kind to me, but I can't help thinking her world view was so different to reality it was like she was trying to navigate in New York with her map upside-down, and it's a map of London. That's rather unfair. She never literally did that. But she did do all these things:

Whilst we were dating she didn't think she needed to use contraception because the chance of conceiving is only 1 in 20 so it can't ever happen. I always insisted on it, because I felt I was too young to be a parent, but I was happy to help out with her children after she got pregnant instantly with the first boyfriend she had after me, and with the next one.

She was a pagan and she thought she could use Tarot cards with her friends to predict her future. She also thought she could just do them over and over, all day, until she got the future she wanted where she dated an American film star.

She also thought, like Terry Pratchett's guards, that if an event had only a one in a million chance of happening then it was almost a certainty. She was obsessed for years with her film star. To preserve his anonymity let's call him Johnny Depp. That's not his real name. She saved up for a trip to America to meet him, because the cards and other occult signs had told her they were "soul mates". What are the chances? Must be one in a million! She was delighted to discover that the first guy she hitched a lift with in Los Angeles was a friend of Johnny Depp! What are the chances? One in a million, surely! Sadly, Johnny Depp didn't pick up when the guy called him (he's a busy man) and when this guy hit on her she had to have sex with him as he was still her best chance to meet Johnny Depp. I thought, and you may think, that she'd been taken advantage of, but she didn't regret it. It was all part of the adventure. I kind of admire that about her.

I realize as I'm typing this that I could come across as a bit of an incel/redpillock/etc, jealous of her seeing these other men. That's not a good colour on me, is it? But I always had my own romances going on, and I was supportive of hers, although I sometimes urged caution, as in the next example:

This guy was interested in her, and I didn't think she should go with him because he was in a relationship. Plus, his girlfriend had wanted to be in an open relationship but he'd vetoed that, whilst still thinking he should be able to have sex with other women. That didn't sit right with me. It seemed caddish. He was quite a character. He was a very manly man's man, for example he insisted on mansplaining the concept of centre of gravity and sword pommels to me despite me repeatedly telling him I have had training with swords and this isn't new information to me. He was proud of his combat ability too. He told me he could take any number of punches to the face. We had an impromptu game of strip Trivial Pursuit with him once and found out he wore a thong. I liked that about him. Also he said he was up for the idea of bisexuality but when he imagined himself doing it he just didn't get excited, which I thought was open-minded for a straight guy at the time. Anyway, Kevina wanted to go with him, as far as I could see, just for the lols. I'd recommended keeping it on the down-low, to avoid drama, and she told me, "What's the point in having sex with him if I can't tell anyone about it?" She delighted in telling us how he had taken his shirt off and said, "Look at my chest hair. Do you want to touch it?" Sadly, the relationship didn't work out because he said something mean about Johnny Depp and she tried to light him on fire. Which he was most offended by, as he claimed he had a phobia about being set on fire. As if everyone else is okay with being set on fire?

Kevina was chaotic with her belongings. She didn't believe in cupboards, so all her stuff was just all over the floor at all times, on the stairs and in the bath. Brace yourself for this one: she could never find her gloves because when she got in she would take them off and drop them in different rooms. What kind of person doesn't keep both their gloves in the same place?

For years I filled in her housing benefit forms so she could get her rent paid. She wouldn't do it herself because. "I shouldn't have to fill in a form just to have somewhere to live." I'd go with her to the benefits office to make sure they didn't mess her about. Once I gave her the forms as we were leaving the house, we walked three miles to the benefits office, and then she realized she'd put the forms down somewhere before we left.

I am a bit of a health and safety nut. Kevina and her friends used to call me "Emergency Man" because I would always be worrying about accidents. For example, I objected to the way Kevina balanced her burning joss sticks. A joss stick doesn't have a pommel, and its centre of gravity changes as it burns. She thought it was quite safe stuck in the net curtain, but I worried it was a fire risk, not just because of the balance issue, but also WHY IS IT IN A NET CURTAIN? They are notoriously flammable! She said I shouldn't have made a big deal of it as she was "only in the next room."

Her kids would get nits. That's not uncommon or blameworthy. But they would keep on getting them. I always had to have my hair shaved. Each time I'd insist we go to the chemist, we'd get the treatment, she'd take them into the bathroom to apply it, and then have to do it again a couple of weeks later. Eventually I found out that this was because she only washed the hair of one of her children each time, because it was "such a faff."

She got into what I saw as an unrealistic diet, believing she could just live on universal energy and not eat anything. She had a book about it. She said I was cruel for pointing out that the picture of the author on the cover made it look like it was a book of schemes to defeat He-Man, although she did admit that the author had since died.

I've got so many more examples, but they veer off from her being a Kevin to her just being a bit careless and wild. She would definitely say I am the Kevin, and In fairness she could offer just as many examples of things I had done:

She sneered at how I was content just to be in a relationship with a "mediocrity".

She was annoyed I wouldn't bet my house on a poker game like she suggested. "We could have had two houses!"

She said I got burgled because I built a portcullis to keep my PC safe, which is what "attracted the burglar". As I have explained before in another Reddit post, the portcullis is only visible from inside the house. She thought I had imagined the burglar so hard I had made them real.

Obviously I've chosen those examples so she still looks like the ridiculous one. What she'd really say about me was that I only hung around with pagan ladies for the nudity. She's got a point. I mean, it wasn't for intelligent conversation with rational people. Every time I write about a pagan friend there will be a pagan in the comments telling me they are not all like that, and it gets funnier every time. I know there are some charming, kind, sensible pagan people. Do forgive me for assuming, from my time spent among pagans, that the Venn diagram of people who believe in the healing power of herbal teas, homeopathy, the gambler's fallacy, astrology, the world as a goddess, unicorns, a horned god of the woods...is a circle. Like if you believe one magical thing you have to believe all of them? Can't just one magical thing be true? I mean, I once took a chance on wizards being real but I never believed in Reiki.

I thought this would be amusing but I do feel mean for writing it. I am looking at her foolishness in the past with the wisdom I only have from age. She will have grown wise and aged away from her own idiocy as I have. I'm not in touch with her now. We fell out ten years ago over something disrespectful she said about World of Warcraft.

Finally, the other maths issue: if anyone wants to give their reason why an odd number cannot be exactly divisible by four I can write her rebuttals in the comments. She had an answer for every proof I tried to assert. Go on. It'll be fun. You might learn something. Like in a Socratic dialogue. Well, it's more like a stress test for your sanity.

Edit: I have had so much fun chatting about issues arising from this post, but please no more maths comments. I set it up so I could just keep replying, "But what if it was an even bigger number?" which is what my friend thought was an absolutely sufficient proof that her feelings about numbers were right. In the end isn't it an epistemological question? We trust that our brains "know" what is right, just as she trusts hers. Who is to say which is right? Us? Doesn't that seem biased?  

Kevin in this story how did he ruin Christmas, well let’s start that Kevin is having a midlife crisis he is well off, his kids are becoming adults and he is starting to gain some weight from living comfy.

Every year we have Christmas as their house though its over hours drive and its a pot luck style where each family brings their own food. the real competition is baking seeing which aunt or mothers baking gets eaten the most at the event who "wins" best desert, its nothing official but between them they know and show their love to the family through delicious food. 

Well, this year Kevin decided he would provide desert, and told all the family not to bring any desert as he had bought enough for everybody from a renowned bakery. This comes as a shock as its traditional in the family to start baking well before Christmas to have time to make all those cakes and cookies etc. So we leave deserts at home load up the food and drive there. 

The dinner goes great buffet style everybody is having a good time, they have to add another tables we have so much and its nice to spend time with family again and see everybody. well everybody eats their fill, even take some too go boxes while the women took pride saying wow looked like they loved my dish its nearly all gone. 

   
 

then it was desert time, people start asking to help put out the dishes, well Kevin walking in with a single Christmas log (for those not aware its a cake that about 1ft long), and a few boxes of pastry which he promptly cut in to pieces, then served him self 3 pieces. well people lined up and as you could see as the line progressed people seemed uneasy to take more than 1 piece as it looked like their would not be not enough for everybody. they later brought out some old grocery store frozen cake that kind of sat there after a few people took some. 

well in the end some people politely exclaimed how they were full and didn’t really need a piece. overall a awkward end to the night as some watched others enjoy their piece of desert. 

This morning my aunts been on the phone all morning gossiping about that Kevin’s wife had a melt down after people left, about wtf he was thinking telling people to leave their desserts at home and he ruined Christmas bet he won’t be making that mistake again.My cousin is only 12 but I can already tell she's going to be a full-grown Kevina in a few years. She does okay in school but the stuff she says demonstrates she has zero common sense. Here's some examples that I can remember off the top of my head; 

\- She says humans and dinosaurs were around at the same time in history. (Note: Kevina says she's an Athiest but also thinks the bible is literal truth?)

\-Kevina's been warned repeatedly about stranger danger yet her we caught her the other day about to share her full name and school on Roblox. My aunt started yelling at her but Kevina argued that the person she was going to give her personal information to "wasn't a pervert" because "only kids play Adopt Me!"

\- Kevina tried to prick her eye with a safety pin "to see if it would hurt."

\- Kevina and I went trick or treating together with our friends and the rest of the family. When we were done, we left our candy in the living room to get water/pizza. When we came back, we found out that Kevina threw away all our plain M&Ms and jolly ranchers because she doesn't like Jolly ranchers and thought that she was being helpful.

\-I was babysitting Kevina and her little sister while her parents were out having dinner. We were all bored, so I suggested we could make a movie using my Ipad and they and their toys could be the actors/actresses. They both thought it was great idea and we filmed for thirty minutes, but then Kevina told us to stop because she just remembered that "We're on private property; It's illegal to film and take pictures on private property!" (Bruh)

\-Kevina had a goldfish that she poured into the family's saltwater aquarium "so it would have more room." Kevina didn't realize the difference between freshwater and saltwater. The poor goldfish died and Kevina tried to lie to her mom about putting the goldfish in the saltwater aquarium. Kevina isn't allowed to feed/care for the pets without her mom's supervision anymore.

\-Kevina tried to eat a TNT pop-it by throwing it in her mouth. She missed and hurt her lip, then tried to eat another pop it.

That's everything I can remember right now.Context: my dad has an obsession with being warm and super hot water. And I mean SUPER HOT. You can turn the shower faucet on cold and water will still be too hot. Like when I come to visit, I never know how to shower, wash my hands, or anything involving water.Don’t get me wrong I love hot showers and warm water but it’s to the point where my mom told him that if someone gets burnt that they could sue him.  And here’s one example of where it came to bite him in the ass. 

Last weekend my dad worked out and wanted a hot bath in my his bathtub. It’s one of those bathtubs that are kinda like a hot tube it’s super deep, spacious and has the jacuzzi jets. He started the water and the water was not hot enough for him, so like the crazy person he is he went downstairs to water heater and turned it up higher. He took himself back upstairs, got in and enjoyed himself. The windows and doors to the bathroom were closed so the steam built up and he got dizzy. He got out let the water drain and went on with his day. 
While eating dinner, the dining room is over looking the family room, he saw a shit ton of water on the floor. He freaked out and ran over there to figure out where it was coming from. The ceiling was cracked in three places and the ceiling, couch, fireplace and floor was covered in water. 
Turns out that the water melted whatever was holding the the tub up underneath. So when the tub melted, it went straight under the tub which is built into the floor. The water drained into the hole and melted it’s way through the ceiling. 
And he still has the water up super hot-_- I just got home to visit for Christmas and burned my hands while washing them.

Edit: So what from  what I'm reading in the comments about how the ceiling probably didn't melt and from further looking at all the damage: Something in the tub did crack from the heat, it is like to big splits along the faucet. The ceiling didn't melt but it did crack open from the water damage in four not three places. In all my dad has to replace the tub, the hard wood floor, and has to get the ceiling/fireplace fixed.  I had a friend who was a pagan, who sometimes brought home to our sofa examples of pagan manhood. I don’t intend to be disrespectful to anyone’s religion, and to be fair she only introduced me to two pagan men who claimed to be the reincarnations of historical figures.

  The first puzzling thing was that there was an overlap in who they claimed to be reincarnations of. They both had Jim Morrison down in their lists. Even more puzzlingly, one of them had been born before Jim Morrison died. I am not an expert in metempsychosis (or psychosis), so maybe I am just revealing my ignorance of reincarnation by assuming it follows linear time? If this esoteric subject interests you then please do keep reading, because I am leading up to a practical magical demonstration of how time is not in fact linear!

One of these Kevins needed help from his fellow pagans with a time travel project. A time travel project! He needed them to help him perform a ritual to send his astral body back in time to give his earlier self relationship advice. Which would admittedly be a useful thing to be able to do. But is such a thing possible? Now, you're a hardened, Reddit sceptic. I know (from how slightly implausible stories of my own life have been received) that you are unwilling to believe anything a little out of the ordinary. And I would be right there with you in this case. Except that Kevin provided EVIDENCE of his claim! Well that puts it in a completely different light, doesn't it, you doubting Thomases? Not so sure now, are we? Oh, you still want to hear the evidence? Ah, okay. His evidence was that last year he had met his time travelling future self and been given good advice by him. So now he just needed his pagan pals to help with the time travelling ritual to complete the circle and make sure it did already happen. Which it already had did was going to.

 It's like Back to the Future but instead of a scientist and a car there's a bonfire in a field and a near fatal dose of ketamine, which Kevin insisted he needed to detach his mind from our physical reality. Did he, really, though? He seemed quite far along in that process already. Maybe I shouldn't judge. I am not an expert in horse tranquilizers or time travel.

 What advice would you give your earlier self? Personally, in this instance, I would have passed back advice relevant to the time travelling ritual itself, such as, "Perhaps take a smidge less ketamine," or, "Don't stand quite so close to the ritual bonfire."

If I was telling you this story face to face I would pause there for dramatic effect. Just so you can imagine possible consequences. Burnt shoes? Flaming trousers?

No, it was a little worse than that. During the ritual he passed out, fell head first into the bonfire, and his friends had to drag him out by his feet. Days later, when he was coherent again, he claimed that it had been a resounding success.

 But success comes at a price. Galileo lived under house arrest for heresy. Marie Curie was buried in a lead coffin. Kevin had to wear a bobble hat until his hair grew back.


Addendum: I checked my diary because I like to be absolutely honest with you, and it's not quite how I told it. One pagan Kevin said he was the reincarnation of Aleister Crowley and Jim Morrison, whereas the other, older, pagan Kevin claimed to be the reincarnation of Aleister Crowley but had Jim Morrison as his spirit guide. So I shouldn't have mocked him. Also, who are we to say they were wrong? You wouldn't tell the Dalai Lama that believing he's the reincarnation of a historical figure is attention-seeking teenage nonsense and he needs to grow up.So my friend Jason sets me up on a date with this guy Kevin.  I'd been unlucky dating, so he shows me a picture.  I think he's somewhat nice looking, so I agree on the date.  He calls me the day before and we have a conversation.  He seemed nice enough, though he did go on and on about his career as a 5th grade teacher for longer than I'd asked, and he hardly asked me any questions aside from what kind of restaurants I liked.  I named several, but at one point, which I guess he'd taken a little too literally, I mentioned that I liked spicy food.

So he's supposed to pick me up at 6:30.  It's 6:41, and without so much as a courtesy text letting me know he'd be running a bit late, he comes speeding down my street and literally slams his brakes once he reaches my driveway, skidding several feet and leaving tire marks which remained out front for about a year.  He sees me standing at the door, and as I exit my house and begin walking in his direction he suddenly slams on the horn.  I wave frantically to get him to stop, but he continues until I reach the door.  

I hear the lock click and get in.  I say hello and hang onto his stare for just a moment.  He remains silent and looks me up and down as I'm pulling the seatbelt across my lap.  I sit back, exhale, and notice he's staring somewhat "intently" (creepily) into my eyes.  I think he was trying to be "sexy", but he lacked the swag to attempt this "ladies' man" stunt.  Feeling a little uneasy that we were still sitting in front of my house, I break the ice with "you ready?", politely smiling.  "Nice shoes.  They look expensive", he says, despite my shoes being shrouded in darkness underneath the glove compartment.

So we're driving along, and I immediately begin to sense his lack of confidence, which I kind of felt bad about.  I understand the pressure on guys when they take a new girl out.  He's asking me what kind of music I like, feverishly clicking through stations anticipating my response.  I decide to test him.  I want to see if he has the  backbone to stop at a station HE prefers rather than pandering to my preference, so I casually throw out "country".  Disappointingly, he starts desperately turning the dial until he gets to the country station, and then quite literally BLASTS it when he reaches the station. 

At this point I know that unless he's some sort of magician, there's nothing he could do to save himself from the flaming dumpster fire that this date has turned into, so I just mechanically begin going through the motions.  The drive was an exercise in futility.  There's no icebreaker or even awkward conversation.  At this point I'm mostly convinced that he's just inexperienced and timid rather than weird.  He's driving erratically and glancing over at me nervously over and over.  I'm afraid he's going to run a red light and we're both going to die.

We get to the restaurant finally - Selam Ethiopian Kitchen.  I shit you not.  If you're ever in the Chicago metro area, look it up.  Guess he really took to heart the whole "spicy food" thing.  "Ethiopian?", I ask.  "Is it good???".  "Awe, yeah.  I love it".  "Okay".  My bullshit barometer is through the roof, but I set aside a sliver of hope that maybe he knows what he's doing.  We sit on some pillows on a floor.  I'm wearing a bit of a skimpy dress, so I'm instantly uncomfortable.  He leans back and begins flexing his chest through his button down cloth shirt, unbuttoning the top button and commenting "it's getting hot in here" while suggestively shooting me the most gracelessly cumbersome bedroom eyes I've ever received.

"I was right...", he begins in a weirdly "whispery" voice, followed by the uselessly redundant comment "...your shoes do look expensive".  I actually giggled and covered my mouth, giving a knee - jerk apology for basically laughing in his face.  The waiter comes over and hands us menus, asking us what we'd like to drink.  There's a short pause, I presumed to be chivalrous, allowing me to order first, but as soon as I begin speaking Kevin holds up his hand, and says "eh...the lady will have a water with lemon, and a glass of Chateau St. Pierre".  I interrupt with "actually can I just have a Diet Coke?".  Kevin then interrupts me once more, looks at the waiter, and comments "I insist".  The waiter gives me an awkward glance which I reciprocate, and looks back and Kevin, and politely asks "so...what am I bringing?".  Kevin's overconfident masquerade instantly melts away and he says "Diet Coke".

At this point I just want out.  I'm not a difficult girl to take on a date.  I've had many dates where a guy doesn't display the utmost degree of confidence, and understanding the pressure they're under, have granted them a break, and many times, even a second date.  But this was an utter trainwreck.  I start to generate surface - level small talk in hopes that he might start asking me questions, actually wanting to get to know me a little, but instead he starts going on and on about his "kids" (students), calling them "bastards", callously referring to one as a "shit head" (yes, he used that term on a date), and even brags about other female teachers who, to quote him, "would kill to be in (my) position right now".  At this point I'm trying achingly hard to hold back laughter.

The food eventually comes and we begin eating.  He orders a plethora of appetizers, which he voraciously begins inhaling, very impolitely.  I'm convinced he's asking me useless questions like "where did you grow up?" and "what is your job history?" (is this a fucking job interview?) just so he could shove food into his mouth.  He's dumping copious amounts of hot sauce on his food while reminding me that he "loves spicy food", though before the main course comes, I notice that he's dripping with sweat.  I ask him if he's okay.  He's chugging water like Aron Ralston after five days in the canyon and repeatedly calling the waiter over for piles of napkins to dry off with.  His arm pit sweat is branching out toward his ribs. And then I get an ill feeling when his stomach starts grumbling and he's sitting forward straining his neck so hard his carotid artery looks like it's going to burst and start showering me in his blood.

By now I'm in such disbelief that I feel like I'm watching a movie.  "Are you sure you can eat more of this stuff?", I ask him, genuinely getting concerned.  "Oh...", he begins before holding his fist to his mouth and burping.  "I always react this way to Ethiopian, but I love it".  I begin to recoil, thinking he's going to projectile vomit rice over my shoulder while pleading silently with God that the date end as soon as possible.  Because I knew nothing about African food, I had absolutely no clue what he'd ordered.  So the waiter shows up with this tray of half a dozen plates.  He sits two in front of me.  I ordered some chicken dish with vegetables.  And then he removes several of Kevin's appetizer dishes and sits down four plates piled to the fucking ceiling with meat and rice and whatever.

I try to continue the conversation, but realizing he only likes to talk about himself, I ask him some mundane question about his dating history, to which he replies, in between more rapid burping, "wouldn't YOU like to know...".  I decide to abandon all polite decency at this point since he's made the decision to act like a complete dick wad, trying to play the "mysterious" card with the wherewithal of a thirteen year old, and I say "okay.  Well I guess this date has hit a wall".  I suppose I did him a favor ending the date before it had actually ended.  "I'll be back", he mutters, jumping to his feet and pretending to take a call (despite his phone not ringing), and he walks off to the men's room.  And he's gone...for fifteen minutes. 

 I start to wonder if I can catch an Uber or maybe even leave with a random, possibly murderous stranger before he comes sauntering out with the phone still up to his face, the entire front of his shirt so sopping wet that whatever patches of dry spots left appear like a cluster of tiny islands on a world map.  The rest is the ocean.  He sits back down and starts unbuttoning to halfway down his shift.  I can see his soaked wife beater underneath.  I'm frantically texting friends at this point, begging to get picked up, and I actually score.  My friend Melody agrees to hurry down now. I want whatever traces of excretion that are on his fingers from whatever the hell went on in that bathroom to stay where they are, and seeing as he awkwardly placed his hand on the small of my back (and partially on my ass) when I entered, I assumed this to be a certainty.  "Yeah, yeah...okay, I HAVE to go", he nearly yells into the phone.  

"Ugh...", he burps.  "Fucking principal is on my ass.  Sorry I was gone so long".  Treating the date now as a source of entertainment, I indulge him.  "What was THAT all about????", I question, sending a text to my friend to hurry.  Mind you, this was the very first time I'd touched my phone all night.  This asshole just got up and left me alone for almost twenty minutes, and he then has the balls to say "I'm giving you five seconds to stop looking at your phone or you're paying for dinner".  "That's it...", I say angrily, throwing my hands up.  "I'm leaving.  Please don't follow me".  "Calm down", he says.  And the last thing that came out of his mouth, spectacularly, was "so...do you like Italian food?".  I jump up, drop down a $10 for the tip (which I would have at least insisted on anyway), and graciously left him to stew in his own perspiration.

As I'm leaving, the waiter catches my eye, smiles somberly, and laughingly whispers "I'm so sorry".  I wished he'd have taken me out.  I waited in the freezing cold on a random street corner on Broadway in the city of Chicago for ten minutes until I finally get picked up.  I exhale, and let the anger and anxiety wash over me.  I text Jason, who set us up, and told him it was a disaster.  His response - "haha... damn, I'm sorry.  I hoped for once he wouldn't be like that".  "For once".  Jesus.  It didn't end there.  Kevin began sending a barrage of angry texts calling me a "whore", "bitch", and bizarrely, "Indian - giver" (I'm still trying to figure out what that even means).

Later that night, Jason sends me a text.  Mind you, I've blocked Kevin.  I open the text and it's a screenshot.  Kevin went on his own Facebook wall and posted "(my full name) gives shitty blowjobs".  I immediately begin freaking out, when Jason sends me another, reading "don't worry.  I told him he could lose his teaching license for it", telling me Kevin had taken it down.  I searched this guy just to be sure, and it turns out he did, in fact, delete it.  Still, a piece of me died that night.  My hope in humanity is several degrees lower than it was before, and will remain that way forever until I hear that this guy has been struck by lightning and extinguished from the face of the earth.

Maybe a year later, I brought Kevin up at a party where Jason was, discussing bad dates around a fire.  Jason, after my story, expelled one interesting little anecdote about Kevin which evidently took place after me.  He'd been set up on another date.  I have no idea who the girl was or how it occurred, but she ended up going home with him.  Apparently they pulled up in front of his house, and Kevin said "hold on, I need to just clean up a little.  Gimme a second".  He shut the car off and left the girl inside in the freezing cold for a half hour while he cleaned his filthy house.  She said that when she entered his house, it was "absolutely disgusting".  When I asked what happened next, Jason said "I don't know, but after she got home, she called me crying".

Not even Kevin has ever disclosed the details of that night.  My guess is...well, now that I think about it, that's a guess I'd rather not take.

The EndI used to work for a major beverage company. Kevin was the backroom manager for a major grocery outlet. We delivered twice per week to Kevin's store.  

The loading bay for intake is supposed to open precisely at 6am. There is lots of competition in the mornings between drivers to get first dibs in dropping load off, then moving on to the next drop.

My job was to move product out to the floor and organize whatever is leftover into the backroom.

Kevin is constantly late for drop days. Sometimes so late that drivers exit their vehicles to chew out the store manager or give Kevin a piece of their mind when he does arrive.

This is the worst Kevin moment i ever saw though.  On this particular day Kevin is over an hour late. As usual, he makes no acknowledgement about his tardiness. 

My driver is first up, and already backed into the bay  waiting for Kevin to open the receiving door. It is a holiday, so the truck is packed to the brim for a larger than usual load.

When Kevin sees that it will take awhile to process the load, he decides it would be better to process one of the smaller bread vendors through the side door ramp first.  Of course, this only makes the situation worse as there are several other vehicles waiting in line for the bay my driver is parked in.

My driver doesn't give two shits what Kevin wants to do, and has me start helping him move the load into the backroom.

Kevin tells us to stop cuz it will clog up the floor while he is working with the ither vendor. My driver tells him that's his problem and continues unloading. 

Normally Kevin is supposed to scan product as it is being unloaded to confirm receipt, but that obviously is not happening. Normally the driver waits, but my driver has had enough and gives me the invoice, then departs for the next load.

I can't start to move product until Kevin confirms receipt of items on the invoice. But now the beer guy has backed into the bay and he is also moving his drop onto the floor. Kevin also tells him to stop and he gets the same response as my driver.

Kevin finally decides he better attend to my delivery, and literally stops scanning the bread vendors items. Now the bread guy is pissed. There are now 3 vendors with product waiting to be unloaded.

Bay 2 is only used by the store's own trucks delivering their products. Some of this stuff needs to be scanned in, but a lot of it doesn't. This truck has now arrived, and employees are heading into the back room to throw freight.

Except all our crap is in the way because Kevin was late and decided he didn't want to process in the order of deliveries. Now the employees are mad at the vendors because the product is in the way, and of course the vendors are mad at Kevin.

Finally the store manager arrives to assist scanning the product, and he really lets Kevin have it. Kevin informs the manager that he is overdue for his break, and leaves the backroom. I thought the manager was seriously contemplating murder.

The manager tells him he is gonna write Kevin up and Kevin just 🤷‍♂️ and keeps walking.

I worked that store for over 2 years. Kevin never got fired, nor did Kevin's behavior ever change much. 


TLDR Kevin doesn't care about his job or how his actions at work have a domino effect on anyone else.I’m a Shift Manager for a retail drug store chain. I have this one employee, who I’ll call Kevin, makes me wonder how he is still alive. This Kevin is a 60 something year old man who works as a cashier. From what I heard he is divorced and has a daughter but lives alone. Aside from what I mention here, he seems like someone of average intelligence. 

For starters, Kevin is a flat earther. He’s constantly ranting about how the earth is flat and his numerous explanations why. He also says that the store is haunted and the ghost of the store is constantly molesting him. He once claimed that the ghost followed him home and raped him. He said something about sleeping with cotton balls plugging certain holes to prevent it from happening again. 

What makes me call this man Kevin is him not understanding his work hours. Several times a year Kevin complains that we shorted him some pay. He specifically shows that he is scheduled from 3 to 11 but was only paid 7 1/2 hours. Every time we explain that for half an hour he’s on lunch and you don’t get paid during lunch. 

Kevin complains how money is tight for him yet refuses to work extra time when offered because “it will put him in the next tax bracket.” (Those are his exact words) Several times he has asked if he can start half an hour early. Most of the time we say yes, however he still must stay until his scheduled time. This is when he starts complaining that if he does the tax bracket thing. If the cashier that is coming to replace him is late he demands a manager relieve him so the IRS can’t come after him. 

I’ve only worked with Kevin for 2 years but I’ve heard from others that he’s always been this way. I’ve learned to just tolerate him and avoid conversations that will start one of his rants.You can’t make this stuff up, folks. You just can’t. Customer comes in with their rental with damages on the top of the box truck, the driver side door crushed, broken side windows as well as the windshield. Customer had to be towed out of a McDonald’s because “the accelerator got stuck”.  

Ma’am, how did you accomplish this feat? “

“Well, I was hungry and I wanted a burger. So, I do what I always do here at Macdonald’s, I used the drive thru.”

Didn’t you see the overhead clearance sign?

“What overhead clearance sign?”

The one that says you can’t take a truck this big in the drive thru?

“Oh, that’s what that means?”

Yes ma’am. That what it means. Did you get the insurance for the rental truck?

“ no. My auto insurance covers that.”

Well I’m sorry to inform you sweetheart, your regular auto insurance absolutely does not cover these rental trucks.  But I have one other question, how did you tear the front of the truck up like this?

“That’s why I called, after I heard that scraping noise, the accelerator got stuck and I ran into the side of the building g right there. See all the broken glass?”

The accelerator got stuck?

“Yes. It got stuck and the brakes don’t work either.”This just happened. A story the semester in the making. 

Our first suspicion of Kevin was that he had, somehow, cheated his way up to this course. He just seemed perpetually confused, and strangely antagonistic of the professor. The weirdest example of this was when he asked what an ion was (in a third year class?), and was informed that it referred to any positively or negatively charged particle. It would have been strange enough to ask, but his reply of "Either? That doesn't sound right" sealed him in as a well known character in the class of 19 people. 

The real tipping point in our perception of him during a lecture where the professor mentioned practical uses for a neutron beam, and Kevin asked if a beam could be made out of some other neutral material. When asked "Like what?", he replied "An atom with all of its electrons removed." When we pointed out that the protons would make that abomination extremely positively charged, he just replied with "So what if we removed those too?" and then was baffled when we informed him that would just be neutrons. 

That's high school level chemistry. Not knowing it was so incredibly strange that I felt like something was off, so I asked him if he'd like to grab lunch. He accepted, we chatted, and I finally began to get a sense of his origin story. 

See, Kevin wasn't a junior/senior electrical engineer like the rest of us. Kevin was, in fact, three notable things: A business major, a sophomore, and a hardcore Catholic. All three of those are essential to understanding his scenario. 

What had begun all of this was actually a conflict with Kevin and his roommate. Kevin frequently had his fundamental belief in Absolute Good, Absolute Bad, and Absolute Anything pushed back on by his roommate, who was in STEM. Said roommate kept invoking quantum mechanics as his proof against Absolute Knowledge. Kevin had gotten tired of having something that he didn't understand thrown at his beliefs, so he decided to take a quantum course to settle things once and for all. 

Despite not having any of the pre-reqs. 

He'd actually tried to take quantum for physicists first, but the school's physics department wouldn't let him. It's actually pretty strictly regulated, because it is a mandatory class for physics majors. However, because quantum is not mandatory for electrical engineers, there aren't really any built in requirements for the class. It's just assumed that nobody would actually try to take it until their third year because doing so would the be the mental equivalent to slamming your nuts in the door. Just, pure suffering for no good reason. 

Apparently, the counselors had tried to talk him out of it, but if Kevin was one thing, it was stubborn. He'd actually had to sign some papers basically saying "I was warned that this is incredibly stupid, but I refused to listen" in order to take the class. 

He was actually pretty nice, if currently unaware of how bad he'd just fucked up. I paid for the lunch, wished him the best in the class, and reported back to the discord me and about eight other people in the class had been using. We'd all been curious about this guy's story, but now that I had the truth, I could share it with the world. 

Feelings were mixed. Some people thought he was going to drop out any minute now. Others thought that he wouldn't, be also that convincing him to drop now, while he still could, was the only ethical thing. Others figured that a policy of non-interference was best. The counselors couldn't dissuade him, and if we tried to do the same, he'd probably just think it was STEM elitism trying to guard its little clubhouse. He'd figure out how hard things were, or he'd fail. Either way, it would help him learn more about the world. 

We wound up taking the approach of non-interference. If nothing else, understanding his origins gave us more patience when he asked bizarre questions. He wasn't trying to waste our time, he was just trying to cram three years of pre-reqs into a one semester course. He did get a little bit combative sometimes, and we could tell that he was really wracking his brain to try and find some sort of contradiction or error that he could use to bring the whole thing down, but he never could. 

First test came by, and he bombed it. Completely unprepared. He'd taken Calculus, but he didn't know how to do integrals yet. Worse, he was far past the drop date. I imagine most people in his shoes would've stopped struggling. They'd realize they were fucked and just let themselves fail, at least salvaging their other classes grades in the process. Why waste resources on an unwinnable battle?

Kevin's don't ask questions like that. If they're stupid enough to try it, they're stupid enough to finish it. God bless them. 

He invited me to lunch after the test and said that the class was more fascinating than he'd ever imagined, but he didn't know if he'd be able to pass it. He asked if I could help, and I said maybe. I brought the request to the discord, and from the eight people I got three volunteers who admired this dork's tenacity. He was in over his head, miles over his head, but his fighting spirit was fucking glorious and we were willing to bust our asses to see if we could get this guy to pass the class. 

Some of the stuff was just extra homework we gave to the guy. We told him he needed to learn integrals, stat. We sent him some copies of basic software that can be used to teach the basics of linear circuit equations, and he practiced that game like it was HALO. Just, hours sunk into it. Absolutely godlike. 

He was still scrabbling for air at just the surface level of the class, but he'd gone from abysmal failure to lingering on the boundary between life and death. Other people in the class started to learn about Kevin's origin story, and our little circle of four volunteer tutors grew to six. Every day, he had someone trying to help him either catch up in some way, or finish that week's homework. He'd gone from being seen as a nuisance that wasted class time to the underdog mascot. 

He was getting twelve hours of personal tutoring a week, on top of three hours of classes, on top of six hours of office hours, on top of the coursework. I don't think it's an exaggeration to say that this kid was doing 40 hours a week just trying to pass this one single class. 

Second test comes around and he gets a 60. He's ecstatic. We're ecstatic. Kid's too young to take out drinking so we just order a pizza and cheer like he just won gold at the Olympics. 

After that second test, things hit another tipping point. With so much catch-up under his belt, he was able to focus a lot more on the actual material for the class. A borderline cinematic moment happened when I was trying to get ahead on the homework so that I could put more hours in on my senior project. Nobody else had finished it yet because it wasn't due for another week, nobody else knew how to do it, and when I went to the professor's office hours, Kevin was there. The professor was trying to help me, but I was still struggling. After leaving the office, I got a text from Kevin asking me to hop onto zoom. 

Kevin had finished it earlier, because Kevin starts all of his homework the moment its assigned in order to make sure that he can get it done. He'd finished it the day before, and was able to walk me through it. 

From student, to teacher. I'm not exaggerating when I say that he probably saved me eight hours on that assignment. Glorious fucking moment. 

Final comes around. As soon as we're done, we six ask Kevin how he did. He's nervous, there's so much new material for him in this class that his retention hasn't been great. Us six are also a little stressed: We're going to pass the class, but the final was *hard.*

We wait. 

We wait. 

We wait. 

Table with final scores, and overall scores is posted, curve included. From our class of 19 people, 4 withdrew within the deadline, 4 failed, 1 got a C, 8 got B's, and 2 got A's. We can see that the curve for a C is set at 59.2% overall. 

We call Kevin. He's crying. End score, 59.2%. Teacher curved the C just to him. 

It's a week into winter break so we can't gather the forces around for a party like last time, but we're all losing our shit. Kevin's losing his shit. He can't believe how stupid he was to try this course, he can't believe that six people busted their ass just to make sure he didn't die, and he can't believe that the professor basically just passed him out of effort alone. 

He says it's the stupidest thing he's ever done, and while I doubt that, it *was* outrageously stupid. And yet, I've never been so invested in a fellow student before. I'm prouder of Kevin's C than I am of my own B. I've been walking on sunshine since I got the news. 

God bless you Kevin, you fucking idiot. Don't take the class the next time the counselors say not to. Now go out there and kick some ass. You've got a lot of people cheering for you.

TL;DR, Kevin takes a Quantum Class with no pre-reqs in order to try and own his roommate in a religious debate they keep having. The curriculum eats him alive but people are impressed with his struggle and take him under their wing. He winds up basically as the class mascot, people bust their ass trying to help him pass the class, and in the end the teacher winds up curving the class juuuuust enough to get this kid a C.While at my house, I went to feed my parakeet while she and I were eating tuna sandwiches. She said we should offer the bird some tuna, just to see if it was a cannibal.
When I laughed and questioned what she meant, she clarified that she knew what cannibalism meant but actually thought tuna was a bird. She was grossed out after because she didn't like eating fish.

We were watching CSI (the original because I'm old). I was a big fan so she was asking me questions about it as she had only seen it a handful of times with her mom.

Her burning question was that she wanted to know how they had time to be CSI's AND actors. I laughed. She laughed. I thought it was a joke. And then she was like "but really, I know the show is fake but is it also a documentary? Or do they just work part time at both jobs?"

I haven't talked to her in ten years but she popped up on my fb as we remained friends on it. And it looks like she's doing as is to be expectedThis one dude was watching a Kurzgesagt video and had the most absurd questions for me. Here are a few:

"Why doesn't the sun light all four sides of the earth?"

He thinks the sun revolves around the earth and not the other way around.

"Where does the sun go during the night?"

"What do people in the south look like?" uh, like people?

"Isn't driving on snow like driving on the road?"

He claims to eat the rind of the watermelon and actually prefers it.

He thought "water is fuel for weather" was a metaphor

He didn't know what sexism is

I guess i can't really blame him too much, though. I asked a few of his friends and they said he was homeschooled, so really it's more so his parents' idiocy than his.Here is another post about a Kevenia I knew and who, for better or worse, was also the first roommate I ever had. Here is the [original post](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/r2yev4/my_first_ever_roommate_kevina/) for those interested.

To fully understand this story I must properly introduce you all to Kevina's boyfriend, Stoner McGee. Kevina and Stoner McGee met during the first month or so of our sophomore year of college. They started dating and soon enough Stoner McGee became a permanent fixture in our apartment. Stoner McGee dealt weed and was somewhat of a Kevin himself. An illustration of his specific brand of Kevin-ness is how he conducted his "business". At some point in his weed dealing career, someone must have explained the concept of laundering money to him. However, I don't think he really understood that the point of laundering the money was to put some distance between your money and the drugs it came from. The reason I say this is rather than having a fake side hustle or investing in something non-conspicuous, he chose to flip what he called glassware, what the DEA would call marijuana paraphernalia, and what most people would call bongs. A side note: I have never seen such ridiculous bongs as the ones Stoner McGee purchased. There was one that was as tall as a 3-year-old child, there was one that looked like Alien but with giant tits, there was one where you smoked out of a wrinkly, bald old man head puking up a rainbow, there was one that was shaped like Oscar the Grouch holding a bottle of malt liquor, the list could go on. Anyways, the reason why Stoner McGee had enough money to buy (and then re-sell) all of these was that he was not only selling weed to other university students but was also shipping pounds of weed to people in different states. As you may have predicted, something goes awry in this scheme and that is where our story begins.

Kevina comes home in a frazzled whirlwind one evening. She gets out a giant suitcase from her closet and begins hastily stuffing it full of clothes. As she is dragging her suitcase from her room into the hallway, I stop her and ask her what's going on. She explains that Stoner McGee had shipped weed to someone in another state, but the person never paid. When he contacted the person about it they told him that the police had confiscated it. Kevina and Stoner McGee, who do not question or in any way try to confirm this story, decide that their only option is to flee to.... Canada. After a long and exhausting conversation trying to explain why, on so many levels, it was not a good idea to flee to Canada, Kevina was still dead set on going. No matter how hard I tried, I could not convince her that there was less than a 1% chance that the story Stoner McGee was fed was true and that they were not on America's Most Wanted list. Even if it was somehow true, she did not seem to see a problem in the fact that she and Stoner McGee have only been together 3 months (she "really didn't see them breaking up any time soon" so that was a non-issue in her mind), that if she went through with it she would never be able to see her family again, and that Canada, unlike Mexico, will extradite you if the US government asks. So, with her bag packed she runs down the stairs to meet Stoner McGee to begin their new life North of the Border.

Kevina and Stoner McGee never get to Canada. At some point in their journey, Stoner McGee's parents get in touch with him and he spills the beans on the whole situation. His parents decide to hire a lawyer whose $400 an hour advice basically amounted to: "Sorry, kid. You got ripped off".I ran into a Kevina in the wild. 

I was at a firehouse subs grabbing dinner. A teenage couple ahead of me steps up to order. The dude orders and the cashier asks kevina what she wants. And she goes “can I like order bread with like stuff on it?” And that cashier looks her dead in the eye and says “yes we do sell sandwiches here”. She ends up ordering turkey with lettuce and mustard. When I go to order the cashier and I make eye contact and silently acknowledge that that just happened.So, you may be familiar with [my experience with a Kevin during my biology degree](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qp880x/my_kevin_classmate_in_college_labs/) 

But this time I bring you a different kevin, still in the same degree tho

Important context: For the botanics subject we have to do a herb collection which consists of taking leaves and flowers then pressing them and presenting them with a label with their name and all that. For such matters you must first take your samples to a teacher so they can be identified by them as an expert

Important context 2: In the island where I'm from (Tenerife) there's an extremely rare flower that only grows in the top of the mountain and less than a hundred exist in the world so it's beyond threatened to the point you can go to jail for damaging one. Every single inhabitant here knows about that.

Well, then comes the day, we had a botanics practice, which were used for students to bring samples for identification. At the start of the day we were, ya know, doing the deals, you got too many of one plant and swap it for one you don't have. Then comes Kevin, saying he had an ultra rare plant he had never seen and he would swap it for 5 other samples. As he opens up his folder all of us fall silent and turn an ivory shade of pale, there it was, a full Teide violet. We tried to convince Kevin not to bring it to class and dispose of it quietly, he did not listen, said we were jealous cause his plant would be worth an A+ by itself.

Then comes the botanics period. Teacher starts doing the rounds on our tables untill she sees it. The shriek she let out still rings in my ears 6 years later. She started lashing violently at Kevin saying she sould be calling the police and he was an idiot. Of course he failed not just that assignment but the whole subject and was forced to retake it the following year

For anyone who still doesn't get how grave this was, imagine going to china and shooting a panda bear in the face then posting the pic on instagram with a smile. That's just how stupid it looked.So my former coworker is a Kevin. 

We both worked at a small biotech company as research scientists. There are many mysteries about Kevin, and most of them we have not solved. 

Kevin has made [several unsuccessful attempts to kill us](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qo50ig/kevin_the_scientist_trying_to_kill_us/), and this is a story of how he tried to make all of our jobs obsolete.

Perhaps I should preface the story by saying that Kevin does very little work. He might go into the lab once that week if the moon is aligned with Venus and Mars is in retrograde. Otherwise, he sits at his desk all day, but doesn't respond to emails or requests for scientific inputs.

What we did eventually learn was that the reason why Kevin contributed little to discussions was because it took him forever to figure out a response. I suppose by the time he had a response, we would have wrapped up the discussion DAYS prior.

Once in a while, Kevin would still grace us with his belated responses, and this was one of such inopportune times... (Sorry for the long preamble).

We had a very urgent call from our manager to design a study. The email said to respond by the end of the following day. By the deadline, our team (sans Kevin) had hammer out the scope of the study and specific details that we needed to know.

This was an extremely high priority project, so the team got to work ASAP and started performing the tests.

TWO WEEKS LATER, Kevin sends out a long email detailing why each of the study objective that we have laid out is pointless, and that we had better off contracting the entire study to a contract research organization. 

At this point, the team is already in full swing, with everyone is devoting full time to the project. So convincing the higher-ups to contract out the whole project would make our jobs obsolete. 

(As well, you couldn't actually contract this work out at the time. There was no commercial service available that was validated for what we wanted to do.)

The best part is that Kevin had emailed the ENTIRE company, including everyone on the board of directors, the c-suite, all the consultants. Unsurprisingly this sounded alarms with the higher-ups, who started to question the value of the whole department when they could just "easily" contract the work out instead.

Fortunately, our manager put an end to the madness and restored faith in us handling the project, and we all still had jobs. Phew!

Newest update: most people in the department had recently left due to problems with senior management (r/antiwork stories), leaving Kevin as the sole remaining scientist! Really curious how things will go from here on.So, this is from a few years ago, but it's extremely fresh in my mind.

It was middle school science class, and we were using/setting up Bunsen Burners for some science thing or another, I don't remember exactly.  Anyways, I had this class with a Kevin who I didn't know was one of those kinds of Kevins.

Then, through the random chatter of the classroom, I hear it.  His voice, loud and clear: "Fire isn't hot"

So yeah... kinda drifted away from being their friend after that...Prompted by another story I just read on here. 

Kevin was my neighbors friend I loved talking to him because he stories were so stupid. Kevin is well into adulthood. He was given a 1st Gen Toyota 4runner with a manual transmission that was rust free.  For those who dont know they are being hard to find and have a huge following.  I am not sure why as he couldn't really explain other than "Make it Bad Ass" he spray painted it camo colors. Including the wheels, tires, and back glass windows. It turned out horrible and looked really stupid. Everyone made fun of him about it. So he called a junk yard and got 200 for it. The truck ran and was fine other than the pain. Probably worth $5000 before the paint. He didnt have another car. He had no way of getting to work so he walked or had his mom drive him until he could save up for another car. 

I think it was his uncle or brother who gave him the truck was really mad about the whole thing. Kevin couldnt understand why, it was his truck. He said he was doing them a favor by taking it from them.back in high school we had a no eating rule during class, but it was modified to no eating but fruits are okey. so ppl started to munch on apples, bananas, oranges and the like. one day kevina started to eat a huge apple in biology class. it was kinda loud and she was sitting in the front role so student behind and around her were just watching, even the teacher was looking at her occasionally, but kavina was oblivious. kevina only eat the top layer of the apple. she would carefully only scrap off the peal with her teeth and eat as little as the fruit part as possible. naturally everyone was shocked and asked her why? kevina said the peal part is the fruit and the parts under the peal is the apple core, and who would ever eat the apple core? cue debate about anatomy of apple, what is peal, what is fruit, what is core. nothing can convince her ofc. until the teacher called a stop telling us not to judge how ppl choose to eat. kevina was vindicated and eat apple peal off of  apples for the rest of the semester.

i still judge her till this very day and will not stop.I have known Kevin for about 6 years and in that time, I feel that his Kevin-ness has only gotten worse. I haven’t hung out with him much the past year or two due to his irresponsibility, and also rumors of much worse things he’s done. Here are some of the highlights from our friendship.

- Kevin spray-painted his entire truck neon green because he didn’t want to pay a professional to detail it. He did not do a good job. There was spray paint covering his headlights and all over the wheels.

- Kevin once gleefully told me that he had found a loophole to “beat the system.” I was intrigued. He said that when he drag races, he puts a different license plate number over his license plate so that cops won’t know who he is. When I told him this was a bad idea because it is a felony, he was shocked to learn this information.

- When Kevin lost his virginity, he confided in us that he was worried about his girlfriend. When asked why, he said “her thing had... hair on it. Is that normal? Do you think she might have a disease?” Kevin was 17 years old when he learned that women do, in fact, have pubic hair.

- For this next story, I would have loved to be a fly on the wall. When we were in high school, we had a school-wide assembly to address the consequences of sexting/sharing nudes. There was one assembly for freshmen and sophomores, and one for juniors and seniors. Kevin was two grades below me, so unfortunately, I had to hear this story second-hand. One of the main topics of the assembly was the legality of nude photos. The police officer doing the presentation warned that sending and receiving nudes of yourself/others while underage is illegal (obviously). At the end of the assembly, there was a Q&A section. Kevin stood up and asked, in front of his entire grade and the grade below him, “Officer ___, what if I took a picture of a girl’s camel toe? Is that illegal? I don’t want to get in trouble.” I wish I could have been there to witness this moment of legendary Kevin-ness, but alas, I had to hear the story from one of my friends who was in his grade.

- I once had the misfortune of being a backseat passenger in Kevin’s car. He had containers of gasoline sloshing around in the backseat. The lid was loose and it nearly spilled on me. Keep in mind, Kevin was a heavy smoker. He had been driving around smoking cigarettes with large quantities of gasoline around him. He seemed shocked when I told him how dangerous this was.A person in my class tried to convince me that I was addicted to drugs because I breathed air and air was a “drug” apparently he found this out because a guy named masturbating goat asked does air get us high in r/shower thoughts and this convinced him. Thought this would fit hereGood morning reddit! And welcome to my strangest case of shit-talk I ever had to post. Bare with me!

So to set the stage, I'm in a type of fraternity (and no it's not my full personality I also enjoy anime, cooking, etc.) that is linked to a tight-knit community with other fraternities and sororities. Practically everyone knows someone and there's always a chain of friendship that leads to another person on the other side of this really small world. There is also this event called a formals. It's a formal dinner and ceremony in which potential members are congratulated for finishing whatever pledge process they had, are bestowed with full active privileges, receive many gifts, and followed by an afterparty. Today we will be talking about pledge Kevin and his various antics.

Kevin is a pledging for fraternity 2, along with my little brother's friend A. My little brother and A has warned me about Kevin's behavior and how he has been on his own active bros' nerves for a very long time. I had to see it to believe it, for I believe in always giving people a chance, and that's why first impressions exist.

The first time I met Kevin was at my girlfriend's sorority's fundraiser. We made small talk and traded vapes. As I smoked out of his, he let me know not to "hit it too long". I'm taken aback a bit because I'd hate to be a freeloader, so I hand it back and apologize. Not a minute later, I witness him ripping a blinker on my friend V's weed pen (when you smoke it in one hit so long, that the device begins blinking). Now I understand noone is ever entitled to each other's property, but what I couldn't wrap my head around was the instant hypocrisy I just saw. That night, my girlfriend, V, and I went home with a mild topic but we wrote that down as a one-off thing and just thought we were never going to see him again.

Boy were we wrong. 2 weeks later, my girlfriend has her formals in which she brings me as her date and two of her sorority sisters bring V and Kevin, respectively. Suffice to say, Kevin was not only an hour LATE but also got so drunk he ended up on a couch in the lobby of the venue by the time dinner service starts. Now I know greek life gets a bad rep for being on their worst behavior, and after witnessing this, I can confidently say Kevin was a participant and perpetrator of this stereotype.

Flash forward to the afterparty, everyone's having fun drinking and participating in all sorts of extracurriculars (that was an innuendo).  It is notable that this party was at an Airbnb, closed-invite to Greek affiliated members and non-affiliated DATES ONLY. Me and my girlfriend have a room reserved for us, which we share with my bros, her sisters, and VERY CLOSE MUTUALS to enjoy more private conversations and a certain particularly white, flaky extracurricular. Kevin immediately barges in like he's the man of the room and begins to ABSOLUTELY LEECH back to back servings from my bros. I mean it's a party and if you come correct, you may just be blessed with our generosity but damn we just met him. He-who-knows-no-boundaries-or-manners was jumping from person to person every 5 minutes practically begging until someone finally cut him off. When my girl went to the restroom and returned, he basically tried to gatekeep her from entering a room full of people closer to her than him.

But that was just the beginning. Other instances included him not tending to his date whatsoever. At a formals, those who are being congratulated drink the most and it is basically a man's duty, NOT JUST IN FRATERNITIES, to take care of his date. However, while he was running off trying to find the next person to fiend drugs from, his date was being monitored by Kevin's own pledge brother and my girlfriend. Kevin also invited a completely random person, despite being told very clearly that this was a closed-invite party. I couldn't help but feel sympathy for the unexpected guest in question while my girl ripped Kevin a new one in front of the entire room, for even he had better manners in a house where he didn't belong. We let him stay.

Bonus: I'm the type of guy at the party going around encouraging others to drink. Disclaimer, when it comes down to it, I'll back off if I have to especially if I find out my target is driving. My favorite card to use is "Oh you're representing (insert organization's acronym here)? Better drink to it then". In the case of Kevin and his pledge bros, they must say that they are a pledge of "The Great \*full organization's name here\*". So I went up to Kevin (again, just being friendly and hoping to give him one more chance at comradery) and in a joking tone, inserted the entire phrase into my peer-pressuring bit when his pledge bro pulls me aside. I think to myself "Great. I probably just offended someone." but to my surprise, the guy that pulled me aside asked me not to drink with Kevin specifically for the reason that Kevin gets belligerently aggressive and touchy when under the influence. So I back off, reflecting on how that is the most embarrassing reason I ever had to hear from his OWN bros not to encourage someone not to drink.

Don't be like Kevin everyone. Whether you are part of a community with a shaky reputation or simply going out to have some fun, HOLD YOURSELVES AND YOUR FRIENDS ACCOUNTABLE! If you gotta ask yourself if you're being too comfortable with another person's stuff, you probably are. If you gotta ask yourself how your date is doing, go fucking check up on her. Read the goddamn room. Thank you for listening and have a nice day :)So, a little background, I am the next youngest of a big family, as such, this means that most of my siblings are much older than I. For instance, my eldest brother is 22 years my senior and my youngest brother (the older sibling who's closest to my age) is 6 years older. This brings me to Kevin: Kevin has been on this planet a good 17 years longer than I have. 17 years, that's almost a whole two decades! Nearly 20 years has this man had to become wiser, more knowledgeable and better suited to tackle the ever evolving, slippery and jagged slope that is society and social interaction. But has he? Well, you wouldn't be reading this if, by some divine miracle, that were the case. I have a few stories, so buckle up.

Story #1: This Summer, I went with some relatives to visit Kevin, who lives out-of-state, and go camping in a truly lovely little state park. It was a fun, family trip for both me and my teenage niece, because we practically share a birthday and we both *love* camping and outdoor activities. While we were staying at his house, it happened to be my birthday, and so my niece, who isn't the most experienced of bakers, decided to make me a birthday cake. It was really sweet of her, but the cake didn't exactly come out all that well.... Well, to be precise, while it *did* come out of the tin, it turned out to be a pineapple *inside out* cake. So she left it on the counter while she tried to figure out how to save it and, this is the most important part, ***told everyone in the house, except for me, not to eat the cake bits on the counter in the kitchen.*** This included Kevin. Multiple times. I was not told, because she wanted it to be a surprise.

But did Kevin listen? Of course not! His sins were discovered when she went back into the kitchen, armed with the knowledge she so desperately sought and ready to fix her mistake, only to find a nearly empty plate on the counter and Kevin, sitting at the table, with a chunk of cake in his hand. Turns out, not only had *he* eaten most of the cake, but he had been passing it out to the *kids.* I got none of it. Not a bite, not even a morsel of my own birthday cake.

&#x200B;

Story #2: Kevin likes to rag on people he thinks are "too fat", especially girls, and tell them how to "get healthy" (according to him). Now, one of my older sisters (we'll call her Mina) has a hormonal disorder called PCOS (PolyCystic Ovary Syndrome), which basically means that she has more male hormones in her body than she should and her ovaries will occasionally develop cysts. As a side-effect of her condition, she has a tendency to gain weight and be unable to lose it. 

One 4th of July, Kevin starts in on Mina about how she needs to lose weight and how eating only boiled chicken breast, plain rice and broccoli or weed/mushrooms will cure everything from being overweight to depression and allergies. So, Mina tells him "No, you don't understand, I have a *medical condition.* I literally *can't* lose weight that easily!" to which Kevin responds; "Yeah, 'medical condition', I have the same thing, and you were probably diagnosed by a *woman* doctor." Said in the most condescending and passive-aggressive tone you can think of and topped off with a smug sh\*t-eating grin. Mina stared at him, mouth agape, for a solid 20 seconds before laughing so hard she almost slid   
underneath the picnic table. It was at this moment, somewhere deep in that lizard brain of his, that Kevin realized; *he f\*\*ked up.* 

He demanded to know what was so funny, and from in between great shocks of rolling laughter, came my sister's response: "So tell me, Kevin, how many cysts have *YOUR* ovaries had lately?!?!" 

&#x200B;

Story #3: This Thanksgiving, I brought my boyfriend of 2 years to a sister's house to celebrate with us and finally meet most of my siblings. Kevin was also there. He said nothing about coming over, just kinda showed up on his motorcycle. Now my boyfriend (who I'll call "Jordan") was actually really excited about this. Why? Because I told him stories and he was excited to see this man in-action. 

Some time passes and Jordan starts getting grilled by my family. One thing you should know about Jordan, is that he is very quiet and super awkward around people he doesn't know. He's a very introspective and observant introvert (INTJ, for all you 16 personality weirdos), who was suddenly thrown into a sea of loud Irishmen and Italians. So, needless to say, he was feeling a bit overwhelmed and got really quiet. Then he got to talk to Kevin.

Kevin had determined that Jordan was *autistic*. How, you might ask? Because Jordan was being quiet in a house full of strangers. The two of them start talking about something or other and pretty soon Kevin drops this little nugget of special: (to Jordan) "You know, you're pretty okay, although it's pretty clear, you're autistic as f\*\*k." 

Jordan and I stared at each other for a little bit, trying with all our combined might to keep a straight face. We let him ramble on for a minute, before I gave him a polite smile and told him that no, Jordan is in *no way* autistic, with Jordan himself backing me up. Kevin didn't listen. In fact, he spent the next *THREE DAYS* telling me that I was wrong and trying to prove it to me.

I'll end this here, as it's getting a bit long, but let me know if you want to hear more of my Kevin stories! (I have *several*)This is from years ago but this story has repeated itself in some way over and over again in Uncle Kevin's life.

Kevin buys a used Wrangler. This is a great car for a family who doesnt have much money and this is their only car. His logic is he can use it for off roading and going to work. But again this is his and my Aunts only car.

Kevin is over for a family BBQ bragging about his Jeep and how powerful it is and all that. Someone proposes a burn out contest. Kevin doubles down and says he can do a 4 wheel burnout. Kevin then on dry pavement and a Jeep with 100K+ miles puts it in 4wheel drive. Redlines it and drops the clutch. As we could all have guessed it snapped at least one driveshaft. I think it may have broke both because he needed to have it towed home.

A month after getting it fixed he got is stuck in the woods and almost got fired from work for missing so many days. My Dad ended up giving my aunt a car so they could survive and not end up living with us again.One day I asked Kevin to hang a shelf to place my toy horse figurine collection for display. Kevin came in my room like a white knight, ready and eager for the task. Kevin finished the shelf but even at a ripe age of 11, I knew something was “off”..

Kevin placed the first toy horse on the shelf and it immediately slid down onto the floor. He tried a different horse figurine with the same result. Kevin decided the legs of the toy horses were made improperly. 

When in reality, he didn’t use a wall level to measure. The shelf was just off balance. 

I briefly worked with a Kevina. During the worst of the pandemic, work had installed a second help desk for social distancing. This was Kevina’s desk during her shift. When lockdown eased, the desk was no longer needed and we went back to using the central desk that is basically the focal point of the building. *Many* emails were sent about this.

Kevina arrives for her first shift, post-change, and finds the desk is missing. So, she takes a chair…and places it where the desk *used* to be…and sits down. We all side-eye her to see how long this will go on for, until a new coworker arrives and was able to genuinely ask, ‘Kevina, *why* are you sat at on a chair in the middle of the room?’ Kevina explains she’s supposed to be on the desk, but she can’t find it. Coworker points, with gentle pity, at the desk about 10ft away and suggests that she ask someone if she gets lost again at work.

My cat sometimes tries to sit where objects or furniture used to be. I hypothesize Kevina is actually a cat living in a human body? She was also notorious for being entirely incapable of self-directed work - if not explicitly told to complete a task, she would go to distant corners of the office and nap ~~in a patch of sunlight~~This story takes place a few years back during my sophomore year of college when I lived in my first ever apartment with my first ever roommates. Being 19 and having never truly lived on our own before, many rookie mistakes were made that year when it came to being an adult. However, the level and severity of the mistakes made by my roommate Kevina were mind-boggling even by those standards.

My favorite story of Kevina, and the one that I think so perfectly encapsulates her Kevina-ness, happened during the first few weeks we lived together. I was making myself some lunch when Kevina came into the kitchen just to talk. We chitchat for a while before Kevina stops and stares at the food I'm making. She looks at me with a big smile and says "Oh my god!! That is *such* a good idea!". Not knowing what she's referring to, I give her a look and ask her what she means. "You know, putting lettuce, tomato, and avocado in a bowl together!". Kevina did not know what a salad was until that very moment.

My second favorite Kevina moment was when she decided to audition for The Voice. Kevina would sing constantly in our apartment. Please believe that this statement is not hyperbole: I have never heard a worse singer than Kevina. She had no sense of pitch, rhythm, range, or, apparently, the concept of auto-tune. She would choose to sing songs that were autotuned into oblivion and would consistently try to replicate sounds that clearly were generated by a computer. Despite all of this, Kevina thought she was a great singer and decided to seek her fame and fortune by auditioning for the TV show The Voice. So, she and her boyfriend Stoner McGee packed up their belongings and drove the 14+ hours to LA. After making the full 14+ hour drive Kevina arrives at the studio only to find out that the auditions had been held several weeks prior. She had heard that they were holding auditions "soon", but did not think to check the actual dates before driving to LA.

That's all for now on my first ever roommate, Kevina. If people are interested I can make another post as I have plenty of Kevina stories up my sleeve.I went to college with this Kevina and bear with me because I'm going to start off explaining how smart she is then get to the good stuff. 

Kevina is very 'book smart' she graduated double major with honors and a 4.0 GPA. We both studied Marine Biology so we had many classes together. 

In one of our classes early on my good friend was the TA. She exclaimed how easy her job was that semester due to Kevina.  I asked what she meant and apparently Kevina came to EVERY tutor session and would answer all her peers questions and teach them while my friend just unlocked the door and sat in the back all while getting paid. 

She also would re-write every worksheet/assignment we got to add more details and organization before turning it in.
 Example: Lable this diagram of a cell with the names of organelles.
 She would find a better diagram (or draw it herself) and label that with extra parts not on the original and answer her own added questions that weren't on the sheet.

 I heard her planning with her fiance to open tutoring Saturday morning session (without the TA because heck no) and then she sighed and said. "We have a hard enough time getting people to come to the Friday night session, everyone here has their priorities backwards!" 

All quirky yes but Kevin no, so here's what you've been waiting for. 

Our first week at campus she posted a photo of her kissing one of the toads that were all over campus. She had some cute caption about looking for her prince. She was out sick  for about a week after and kept warning people against kissing the toads because they'll make you sick. Although she did find a guy shortly after. They got engaged after about a month of knowing each other. 

Her fiance was a Biology major so he was somewhat intertwined in our course work. We all took Genetics together and had to do a presentation on a genetic disorder. He chose female pattern baldness and went on for 15 minutes about how women are just as prone to baldness but are too weak to handle it unlike men. I'm surprised the teacher didn't stop him as his conclusion was pretty much that women were lesser than men and inferior in every way. She kissed him when he finished and sat next to her. 

He was from the Philippines and was on a study visa. His entire family was still living in the Philippines. So I asked her how they planned on doing holidays. I suggested Thanksgiving in the states with her family since it's an American holiday and Christmas there with his. She looked utterly confused then disgusted and asked. "Why on earth would I ever go to the Philippines??"

She was blonde and claimed that she didn't need to shave her legs because you can't see it on blondes. (Personal choice I don't really care) However she had the thickest leg hair I've ever seen it was VERY noticeable. Other students made fun of her for it while she continued to claim no one could see it because it was blonde. It serious looked like a layer of wool. 

She would always try to talk to me as we left class and sometimes when I was in the cafeteria. I once set a timer when she started talking with the intention of stopping it when I said something in return. It went for 15 minutes before I had to leave for another class having never said a single word in return as she just talked at me. I wasn't hostile or ignoring her she just talked over anything I tried to say and I got sick of it and stopped trying to reply. 

I said she was a Marine Bio major. Our school had a program with a traditional Hawaiian canoe. Every 2 years students would get picked to be the crew and they would take it out to sea. In order to be the crew you had to take a certain classes in sailing and Hawaiian culture which she had done. You also had to be able to tread water for 30 minutes. Kevina came to me (the head lifeguard at the pool) very concerned and asked me to teach her how to swim so she could apply to be crew. I agreed but she could never make time for it amidst her academics. 

Finally one day I asked her why she chose Marine Biology as her major. She got giddy and pulled out her phone. She showed me beautiful pictures of professional mermaids (yes a real profession). Some were at kids parties or amusement parks while others were swimming with whales or turtles for companies to take pictures. (Really cool photos) I actually had heard of one of these women who swims with humpback whales she is a freediver who can hold her breath for 5 minutes and no surprise an excellent swimmer. She wears a very long and heavy prosthetic tail and takes really amazing photos. 

Well that's what Kevina plans to do with her degree. I asked her about the swimming and she said that her credentials will be so impressive they'll have to overlook her not being able to swim. (Just like the canoe application didnt) Kevina went on to explain that swimming with a tail was easier than swimming without one and how they are basically big flotation devices. 

Kevina is working harder than anyone I know to double major in Hawaiian studies and Marine Biology to do a job that requires no degree, only a skill set that she doesn't have and doesn't have time to work toward because of school. 

I'm sure there's more I'm forgetting at the moment but you understand the strangeness of this girl and how smart and hardworking she is but also how clueless. 

TL:DR Kevina cannot swim so she studies Marine Biology to fulfill her dream of being a professional mermaid through her credentials that no one could turn down.Okay. I’ve been looking around this subreddit for a while and have no idea why I didn’t post about my own actual Kevin, who hilariously, was called Kevin.

This kid did flat out hilarious things. He was not a dumb kid by any means- He was just lazy, and came to creative measures to expose this laziness. One time - This kid had his computer taken off him (He was playing games in class) and so this kid straight up jumped to his feet snd took the computer (Like it was nothing). While he wasn’t *too* dumb in the academic level - he did/said some of the most fundamentally retarded things on the planet. One time at a Water Park, when a friend of his was thirsty- He un ironically said “Bro derth water over dere everywhere why not just drink it dumb fuck”. Another time - when his glasses were dirty - He ranted on about how he could “Thee Atomth bro”. 

Anyway - This is off topic. The real kicker was in “Literacy Support”. This was apparently- a class to support english. In reality- It was teaching us how to SPELL words such as “Be” and “At”. As a joke, a friend of mine (D) and Kevin wrote “Bee” (as in the animal) just to piss the teacher off. LOL. This is the one time he is loved. The teacher comes around to Kev to see how he’s doing. Obviously - He’s playing games. The teacher tells him to do his work so HE. BLOWS. UP. He calls a teacher a dumb bitch. Yells that he “Did dis shit in prep u dumbfuck”. And went on to ranting about how it was just a waste of time. The teacher tries to give him “Harder” work by making the class spell “Because” and “Mosque”. Kevin (Who at this point has gotten to the point where he has the clever idea of putting paper on his head to prevent his hair - Which were as short as his braincells - from “mixing up” with the headphones) straight up said “Fuck dis shit” and straight up left.If you’ve read my previous stories about kevina the Husky you’ll know I work at a pet store. But for those that haven’t read them, I work as a kennel tech in a pet store that primarily sells dogs, which means I take care of the dogs every need including feeding, bathing, weighing and temping them, making sure they are healthy, cleaning their kennels and taking care of any sick dogs. Basically there is no way to avoid interacting or staying away from the dogs and at the worst of times there can be up to 100 dogs in the kennel at a time, but apparently Kevina never got that memo cause she applied and was hired as a kennel tech, I can’t say if she was a true Kevina or if this was just a massive lapse in judgment but I think this fits this sub. 

Kevina: is the new employee
Me: me
SL: is shift lead
KT: is the only other kennel tech working that day

So we’ve been having a serious problem at the store where we are hemorrhaging employees, to the point we have more kennel techs in training than we do experienced kennel techs who have been working for more then a month so we’re basically hiring anyone that applies at this point which as this story shows isn’t a good thing. The day started off normally with me coming to the store and seeing a new employee who we will call Kevin who I’ve never met before, waiting at the front door and she’s wearing the kennel tech uniform which is a good sign since most of the new employees haven’t gotten theirs yet so it shows some initiative, she was very quiet and didn’t seem very social while we wait for SL to open the door and let us and KT in. Everything is normal for the next 3 hours as we finish opening procedures, that is until right before the store opens and my SL steps out to get a bite to eat and a moment later Kevina approaches me.

Kevina: where did SL go?

Me: she just stepped out for a second she should be back soon, why is something wrong?

Kevina: yeah I’m not feeling too good

Me: are you okay?

Kevina: no my dog allergies are acting up

It takes me a moment to comprehend what she just said and just stare at her blankly

Me: you’re allergic to dogs, why would you apply here if your allergic to dogs?

Kevina: well I like working with animals and I didn’t think it would be that bad

Dumbfounded I decide I really didn’t know how to deal with this situation I went to go find SL who was eating in another part of the store with the inventory manager 

Me: uhm SL we have a situation Kevina isn’t feeling too well

SL: what’s wrong is she sick?

Me: no her dog allergies are acting up…

SL and the inventory manager look at me with the same dumbfounded expression

SL:… why did she even apply her if she has dog allergies?

Me: she told me she didn’t think it would be that bad

So SL decided to talk to Kevina and figure out what she wanted to do from here, as it turns out Kevina had no way home due to her bf having her car and not having Lyft or Uber to get home. SL offered to buy some ointment for her from the supermarket next door but Kevina declined and left the store, we didn’t hear from her after that so I’m guessing she called someone for a ride.

I’m not sure why or how she got the job since one of the interview questions was if you have any allergies to animals but I don’t think we will be seeing her again.Our company works alongside a similar company. We work upstairs and they work downstairs.

My coworker will often go down there and bug the other company all the time.

He complains that it is too bright up where we work so that's why he goes downstairs to "Take a break." (NOTE: The downstairs lobby has MORE lights and its a completely white room so the lights feel brighter down there.) 

They are doing renovations on our floor and just recently painted a few of the walls white. I came in to relieve Kevin and as he was walking away he goes: "Oh hey they painted these walls over here."   
I was thinking: 'Kevin you have been here for 8 hours and you just now noticed the walls?'   
What I actually said: "Yeah I think they want to change the color to fit the lobby better."

We used to have camera's that showed us the parking lot. We ended up getting moved up a floor and they had to disconnect the cameras from our computer. After a few weeks of no cameras he commented: "Why do we still have no cameras. All they have to do is plug them back into the computer."   
In my head I think: 'No Kevin the have to completely reroute wires from the floor we were on to the floor we are on now. It's not as easy as it sounds. Not to mention we are only at a temp desk till they finish the lobby. So if they were to connect us back up then they would have to disconnect us in a few weeks to reroute it to our new spot.'  
I just shrugged at him. Reason I didn't say anything to him. He was told this. At least 4 times. By multiple people.

We once had a homeless man walking around the outside of the building. Kevin found out about this and went down to bother the other company. The other company had already called their boss about it and the boss said, "It's not illegal to walk around outside while being homeless." The other company didn't do anything. Kevin complained at them and said they just HAD to do something. The other company told Kevin what their boss said and Kevin said: "NO! You have to override what your boss said and call the cops." The other company just waved Kevin away and ignored him. (Needless to say Kevin got chewed out by our boss.)

Kevin has a habit of leaving half empty open liquid bottles on the desk after many talks about him cleaning up after himself and being told he can't have open bottles on the counter. He complained to me the other day.  
Kevin: Joe got mad at me the other day because I left some open bottles out on the desk. I don't see what the big deal is.  
What I was thinking: 'You are leaving OPEN bottles that you placed your mouth all over on a PUBLIC desk while COVID is still a thing and you AREN'T yet fully vaxxed and you don't see a problem with it.'  
What I said: "Damn Kevin I'm sorry.  
Kevin: Yea it sucks. Joe's just being picky.  
I internally rolled my eyes.

Our boss happened to get COVID from her young son. She is fully vaxxed. She came into work one day not knowing she had COVID yet. Spent a little under 30 minutes in the office then went home for not feeling good. Kevin hadn't even seen her that day and barley saw her the week prior. (NOTE: None of us knew she had COVID till she came back 2 weeks later.) He decides to complain to me.  
Kevin: Do you think we all have COVID cause Boss has COVID?   
Me: No Kevin I don't think we have COVID. I don't think she has COVID.  
Kevin: Boss is sick though so she probably has COVID. Should we go get tested?  
Me: If that will make you feel better go for it. I won't go get tested till corporate tells us to.  
He ends up just leaving after that mumbling to himself. 

Kevin once asked me a question. (Don't remember what it was.) In the middle of answering that question he walks out the door and leaves. We never spoke of that day since.

I have a lot of vacation time saved up. I told Kevin about this once in passing.   
Kevin: You have to use that time up man. I'll beat you up if you don't use it.   
Me laughing uncomfortably: Yeah I will use it up soon.  
I ended up taking a few days off for Halloween.  
When I came back Kevin was there to complain.   
Kevin: Man OP I am so glad you are back. I couldn't stand working all those hours. I worked for like 16 hours straight.  
(NOTE: Our company doesn't even like us working more than 12 hours a day.)   
His 16 hours he was talking about... He worked an 8 hour shift. Was off for 8 hours and then came back for another 8 hours.   
Kevin: I did the math and I worked like 70 hours this week alone. I think I have like 24 hours of overtime pay.   
(If the 70 hours were true. He'd have 30 hours of overtime. He's already full time. So 40 hours and he worked a max of 3 extra shifts. So yes he had about 24 hours of overtime, BUT only worked 64 hours.)  
Kevin: Please don't take anymore time off OP! That was too hard on me. (Sadly for him I still have like 80 hours of vacation time left.)

Kevin wants thanksgiving off but can't have it because he 1) Never filled out the proper form and 2) Another co-worker already requested the time off properly. Kevin complained to me.   
Kevin: Man I don't see why I can't have the time off. I talked to Boss about it like a month ago and she said it was okay. (NOTE: Boss actually said: Yeah that's fine but you need to fill out the form. Which is here.)  
Me: I'm sorry but Joe already requested the time off and he found someone to cover for him. You can always take Christmas or new years off. I'd say fill out the form now and start preparing.  
Kevin: Well my family is in town this week and I want to see them. Besides that they are going on a vacation for Christmas and I don't like flying it freaks me out.  
Me: Well that sucks then. 

Kevin has caused so many problems for our company that our boss requested that he be transferred to a different site. Corporate is working on that.   
Kevin thinks our boss hates him and doesn't like working here so he went to corporate to ask for help.   
They suggested a transfer and Kevin now fully believes it was his idea to be transferred out.Long

My(33f) husband (37)is wonderful in so many ways. He is an excellent provider, hard worker, honest to a fault(part of the Kevin problem), will do anything at all to help me and our family. He has his masters degree and is an Eagle Scout. But he is still a Kevin. Here are a few examples… I am embarrassed to mention them.

1. When we got married, we were in a vacation home with his parents and siblings. We were super young (21 and 25) and had packed all of our stuff in his backpack. When We were  about to leave my husband was packing and found my pair of spanx/girdle/whatever you want to call it embarrassing looking beige undergarment I wore under my dress. I had rolled it up and put it in the bottom of his backpack because it was embarrassing. He brings it down to breakfast shows it to everyone and says “mom are you sure these aren’t yours?” And I am looking at him like “what?!?”. And his mom said “no I told you yesterday they weren’t mine.” So apparently after the wedding, I hid the embarrassing underwear in The bottom of his backpack. He thought, “oh, my mom must of put these in here”. He asks his mom that day she says no. Apparently, that is not good enough for him. He then Brings them back to our room and puts them on the bed. I see them later, put them back in the backpack, thinking I must of forgotten to do it earlier. So he pulls them out again and brandishes them at the breakfast table in front of his whole family. I almost died. I guess I should pat myself on the back because he could never picture me wearing something like that? 
2. He has started karate in the past year and is obsessed with it. My little sister and I have started a quote book of him talking about it. I also often record/take pictures of him demonstrating his “forms” and weapons. He has a very Dwight from the office vibe. He will often come into the kitchen while I am cooking dinner and say things like “attack me” or “try to see if you can punch me, I promise I won’t hurt you”. “When I tried for my next belt, you are supposed to demonstrate the new form. I don’t do that, I do every single form back to back.”. His karate teacher recently got a higher degree black belt, and he is now classified as a “master”. My husband has started referring to him in conversation as Master Smith (made up last name). I asked him if he calls Smith that and he said yes. I asked if his teacher asked him to call him “master” and he said no. I told him that it is very odd and gives me a BDSM or slavery vibe, but he refuses to stop. It just weirds me out as he is there with our kids and lots of other kids calling another man master smith while everyone else calls him Mr. Smith , but what do I know? 
3. He is not very good about the kids clothes. Not meaning, “oh, he can’t match stuff” or “that shirt is on backwards “. It is MUCH worse than that. I am a nurse and go to work before the kids get up(7m and 6f). I am home when they get off the bus. My som gets off the bus one day  wearing his little sisters sweat pants that she outgrew. Instead of wearing underpants he had on a pair of basketball shorts underneath the skin tight, pedal pusher sweats(they were obviously “girl”, fitted and flaired, sweater material, stylish). The basketball shorts were Bunched up and sticking out of the top of the stupid sweatpants. It looked very uncomfortable and ridiculous.My son could not care less about getting dressed, he literally grabs the first thing he sees. I take pictures of the boy and confront H with the evidence. His response is “ but what about all the days I got him to school wearing regular clothes?  You never talk about that”
SMH.
4. The icing on the cake and the tipping point for me is last week when he took our daughter to Girl Scouts. I normally go with her but I wasn’t feeling well. Before 
They leave my daughter calls up the stairs “mom, do I need to wear my Girl Scout skirt?” I yell back down “no, just your vest”. Mind you, it Was cold, jacket weather. My husband has Always Been OCD about the kids wearing jackets. She comes home at the end of the night all excited, clutching an award(it was their special thanksgiving night and awards night) and talking all about it. She is wearing her white polo, Girl Scout vest, little blue Beret hat and white stockings. That is it. I ask my daughter where the rest of her clothes are she says “dad said it was ok” I confront my husband, he looks at me confused “ you told her she Could wear that. I asked her to go upstairs and see if her outfit was OK and you said yes. I thought it was a little strange but you said it was ok” I told him “What I meant was, if she was wearing blue jeans from the day, she could keep wearing those, not literally all she has to wear is her Girl Scout vest.”

Couple more Random things I just remembered. One time, he made gravy in the morning not with flour but powdered sugar. Another time, I had Marinated chicken strips and put them in a bowl in the fridge. He asked me if they were ready to eat and I said I don’t know I can’t remember. He heated them up in the microwave, and started eating them. And he had this disgusted look on his face, but kept eating it. I walked over and looked  and it was raw chicken! To this day he has a fear of chicken and rarely will eat it.
I could Go on and on and on, this kind of stuff happens all the time. I love them to death but I Get a shaking my head rolling my eyes headache vibe far too often. Thankfully I can laugh at all the stupid things. And the funny thing is, he knows I think it’s hilarious and he doesn’t care. My Kevin has a full-time job at a university that he has had for eight years. He also does carpentry work on the side for fun and brought in over 30 grand last year. He put it straight into A savings account for our kids college.It may sound like I married an idiot, which I did, but he hides it well for most other people.I feel like I have to stress that because he is my husband and I am talking about how stupid he is on the Internet to strangers. I love him so much and we are very happy.Link to part 3: https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qnenao/my_friend_kevin_pt_3/


It's been a bit but I'm back with the 4th part of me, my friend, my eventual wife and my Kevin lol. This part will mostly focus on our final year of college, post college years and lots of tomfoolery, maybe some shenanigans thrown in.

At the beginning of the year I got a call from Kevin's dad because he couldn't get a hold of Kevin and wasn't picking up. Kevin decided to dunk his phone in beer then microwave it. This is when I told Kevin to stop believing all the shit he reads on the internet. He claimed it was too new for the internet because he had come up with it himself.

I don't even know. That's Kevin.

Kevin got chewed out by his dad for killing yet another phone and ended up having to buy his own.

Kevin had also stopped smoking poster over the summer and told me it was the hardest thing he had to do. Being a smoker I rolled my eyes and reminded him there isn't nicotine in posters. "What about asbestos?" "...I FUCKING HOPE THERE'S NO ASBESTOS IN POSTERS KEVIN!"

Let me back up. Kevin had learned about what asbestos is because we learned the harmful effects of it. Kevin was paranoid of asbestos and asked the professor and various other college employees if asbestos was in the building. I imagine they looked at him how I did. Shock and awe.

He wanted to tear up our drywall to make sure we had no asbestos. Thankfully we talked him out of that one and reminded him that we do in fact want our damage deposit back. Matt told him not to even think of doing it to their suite.

Kevin got really into twilight. Or maybe it was more his new girlfriend got really into it. Thankfully for me Chloe never got into the books or the movies. She's always been more into Harry Potter. Kevin being into twilight in itself wasn't a bad thing. It was how he went about showing off his fandom.

Kevin printed off various letters spelling Team Jacob in the largest font possible at the public library then hung them up in his apartment. His girlfriend informed him he could switch teams or she could make him switch teams lol. As much as we made fun of twilight at times I was happy he had found a (mostly) sane girlfriend.

The rest of the year was mostly uneventful or Chloe will read this later and bring up things I inevitably don't remember and I'll add them as needed lol.

Chloe and I ended up buying a house with help from my parents in a ruralish area. The house was really old and we basically had to have it knocked down because it was cheaper to build what we wanted than try renovating it.

The house took about a year to build and we brought Matt and Kevin over to let them see it with the idea being they'd help us move and I'd pay them in beer and pizza. No complaints.

Kevin managed to get himself stuck in a box somehow and after getting him out he asked if we had crazy glue. Why you ask? To close up the boxes of course. Chloe started laughing her ass off and I was trying really hard not to do the same. 

I'm gonna be vague about the house because I'd rather not give clues where I live and I like our privacy. But the house was and still is our dream home, a good size, fully underground and finished basement, double wide garage, fully fenced backyard and an inground pool.

Kevin almost fell into the empty pool because we moved in early December. We partied our asses off that night. Invited a lot of our college friends over and again, Kevin almost ended up in a snow bank. 

I asked Chloe to marry me that Christmas and shortly after New Years Chloe found out she was pregnant. Kevin being Kevin asked if planning a shotgun wedding was like planning a normal wedding and I smiled and suggested he not ask Chloe that unless he wanted to end up buried underneath our pool.

My buddy Matt, funny enough ended up buying a house further up the road from us. No Kevin doesn't live with him but I'll get to that.

In Kevin's dumbest decision ever decided he wanted to make a bonfire in a field near our house. We didn't know who owned it if anyone but we've had a few fires since and no ones come over to tell us we're trespassing or anything. Our neighbors think we're weirdos but that's only because we don't have cows, pigs or chickens like they do.

Anyway, Kevin put various pieces of old wood in a pile and well, Kevin made a bonfire all right. He also managed to somehow blow himself up sort of. I forget how exactly but Kevin of course decided gasoline was a must. 

That lesson cut his dumbasseswithlighters career short not because he died but because he never did it again. He might still be a dumbass at times but not with a lighter.

We took Kevin to the hospital after Matt came over and had him keep an eye on the fire to make sure it didn't get out of control. There was still snow on the ground but better safe than sorry.

Other than Kevin's eyebrows being singed along with some minor burns, cuts and bruises he was fine. 

On a side note. Kevin's girlfriend (the twilight one) asked him if he ever wants kids. He dead serious said to her. "If you want kids I'm sorry but we'll have to adopt. I'm circumcised." I have no fucking words besides LMFAO

It was a good thing I wasn't there for that.

Chloe and I got married New Years Eve and Kevin, the genius he was proceeded to asked me if he could shotgun a beer in front of me. I pointed out we only had bottles and had to explain that short of breaking the bottle which no he wouldn't be doing inside or on the property he couldn't shotgun a beer.

In my next part I'll tell you about our other ski trip, Kevin's attempt to outsmart a two year old and various other stuff.I am convinced that I work with a Kevin. Let me paint you a picture of this man. Note he is older than me and I have no idea how he has survived this long in life. 

Recently this new guy started working with me. Thankfully I don't have to spend too much time with him during the day but the small time that I do have to deal with him I have to hear him constantly complain.

When he first started working there he was told and agreed to work the hours that he does. 8 hours Monday-Thursday and Friday and Sunday 4 hours each. So in total 40 hours a week. He was happy about working 40 hours at first. About 2 weeks into working with us he begs our boss to let him have Friday and Saturday off because he can't stand working so much. (Note: He works a 12 hour shift at a different location on Saturdays "For fun.") 

When he tired and failed to get his hours reduced he would complain to me about working so much and that he didn't think it was fair that I worked less than him.   
My hours: Monday-Thursday 8 hours a day and Sunday 8 hours a day. So 40 hours. Same as him.   
His logic: "Well I did the calculations of you hours and it only came out to 32 hours a week."

Our work has an app where our schedules are posted and what hours we are working. One day our boss asked Kevin if he could come in 1 hour early because a coworker had called out sick. Kevin agreed. His schedule on the app was updated.   
The day he needed to come in early... He never showed up. He came in at his regular time. When the boss asked him what was up.   
Kevin: Oh haha. I guess I just forgot. Sorry.  
Next day our boss gets a call from her boss demanding to know why she had changed Kevin's schedule without properly notifying him of the change. My boss did say that she talked to Kevin about the change and that he agreed to it and it was updated in the app.  
Bosses boss: Well I think for the future you should have a paper schedule that he can see.  
We DO have a paper schedule. At our desk. In plain sight that was updated. Pinned to the wall at head level. Next to our desk.

Kevin likes to talk a lot. He once told me that he likes to write. He said that he was writing a few different books. One fiction and one non-fiction. The non-fiction one is about his ex-wife.   
His only comment about the book: I hope she doesn't sue me over the book.  
I don't know what the book is about and I am afraid to see what he wrote that would receive that comment.

At our company we do building patrols and have have cameras in some area's we patrol. I get into work and look over at one of our camera's  
Me: Hey Kevin why is it so dark in this camera view.  
Kevin comes over to look: Oh I don't know. It doesn't look dark to me. (Note almost the entire hallway was pitch black.)  
Me: Well did you do a patrol down there?   
Kevin: Yea and it was fine when I did.   
I shrug it off at that point and he leaves. Later on I go to do my patrol and noticed that the light switch was off in the hallway. I sigh and turn the lights back on. When I get back to the desk I go back through the saved camera footage and saw that about 4pm someone had turned the lights off. Kevin didn't do his patrol till 9pm. Kevin comes in the next day and talks to me about the lights.  
Kevin: After you asked me about the lights last night I went down there to check them out and I still couldn't find anything wrong with them.  
Me: Well someone had turned the lights off at about 4pm.  
Kevin: Oh so it happened during the day. No wonder I couldn't find anything wrong.  
I just sighed and agreed with him. NOTE: He was down there at 9pm. I got there at 11pm. There are also NO windows in that hallway. How could you not notice a pitch black hallway?

I have more stories and I will update when I get more from him.My husband owns a small plumbing business that primarily does labor but also runs a small retail storefront with parts and basic appliances etc. 

Every so often he’ll participate in a jobs-readiness program with the local high school where you take on a student intern for a semester (they get credit and experience in the working world, you get free labor and some positive community exposure.) 

Usually the kids are great, sometimes better than the paid employees. But this semester he got Kevin. A brief sampling of Kevin’s misadventures in the four hours a week he spends clerking in my husband’s storefront: 

—One of his biggest jobs is to answer the phone. On his first day he was instructed to pick up and say “Custom Quality Plumbing, don’t forget to ask about our seasonal maintenance deal specials, how can we help you today?” Instead, he was answering the business phone, “Kevin residence, who’s calling please?” When confronted he explained he forgot the greeting and this is how his mother had taught him to answer phones. 

—On his first day of work my husband did the standard welcome he does for all new employees, he brought in donuts and gathered everyone around to meet the new guy. When asked to say a few words about himself he said he “I chose this job because all the good ones were taken,” and when asked what he knows about plumbing he told a detailed story of a toilet-clogging dump he took a few months ago. 

—One day he was asked to clean the break room kitchen. Someone had happened to bring in bagels. He threw out all the poppyseed bagels because “they had mold on them.” 

—My husband took him to a job site once to get a feel for interacting with customers and basic repairs. Kevin asked the client if he could take home a framed photo of the client’s teenage daughter hanging in the living room.  

—For the first couple weeks Kevin kept stealing lunches from the break room, then denying he had done it when the other employees called him on it (it’s a small business and obvious when someone has your food) then trying to pay them to give him their lunch. 

—The first day he brought his own lunch he brought a pound of raw chuck and complained of an unsuitable work environment when my husband informed him there was nowhere for him to grill it at the store.

—He ate it raw. He got sick and had to go to the hospital. 

—The company was hosting a holiday coat drive and asked Kevin to type up the flyer. Understanding his limits by this point they just instructed him to alter the date on the previous year’s flyer. He managed to mess that up even still, and didn’t notice until he had printed 250 full-color copies of the flyer. He thought if he threw the flyer out no one would know. But he threw it out in the main office trash can.

—Kevin’s definitely never so much as seen drugs in his life but he’s always talking like he’s a original gangster. He approached a large tattooed African American employee at the business (who is actually a church pastor, an addiction counselor, and a volunteer sheriff) and tried to buy drugs from him.

—To impress a girl Kevin volunteered to watch her dogs. While working. I don’t know the circumstances of why she asked a stranger to watch her dogs, but after about fifteen minutes Kevin got tired of waiting for her, and let the dogs loose. She came back looking for him and he pretended as though he’d never net her. Edit — my husband says Kevin walked out of work to chat her up and she asked him to watch them while she went into a “no dogs allowed” store. So he knew where she was when he let them go! But he also says she got them back. 

—Kevin had a decent amount of money saved from birthdays and Christmases (he often liked to “flex” on the other employees that he didn’t need to work, he was just doing this for school, he had all the money he’d ever need) but turns out he didn’t even have it anymore because he lost all of it going long on GameStop at the height on the frenzy. He is irate that he could not sell his stock back at the original price and still on some level believes he was scammed. 

-He has aspirations to be a famous TikToker so would always be setting up these asinine “pranks” like trying to bust in on people while using the toilet, rigging heavy objects to fall on people, or yelling “FIRE” when there is no fire. That was when my husband and the others in charge met to discuss cutting him but decided the entertainment value of his Kevinness was worth sticking it through to the end of the semester. 

—It all made sense when we met Kevin’s mother. Kevina recently came in and confronted my husband as to why Kevin wasn’t being paid for his work. He explained that it was a for-credit program through the high school (thinking Kevin might’ve intentionally misled his mother) but no matter how he explained it, she didn’t get it, and kept insisting he pay Kevin. And kept taking about “points on the back end” as well?

—Kevina knocked over an entire display on her way in and did not acknowledge it, try to clean it, or offer to pay for what was broken. In fact she charged right ahead with making her original demands. 

—Kevin’s dad is not in the picture and he’s been calling my husband and a couple of the other guys at work “dad” semi-jokingly.  When Kevina came in, after making her demands for payment, she asked my husband how he plans to stay in Kevin’s life if this is really only a semester. 

—Kevin turned 18 last month. He celebrated by getting a “Calvin pissing” tattoo over his left peck, with his nipple serving as the penis. We know, because he showed an infection on the site to a young family who’d come in to buy an L pipe. 

I’ll ask my husband if there’s anything I’m missing but that’s the crux of Kevin the Junior Plumber for you.I just don’t even know anymore. What’s the point of the skillet. That skillet hasn’t been cleaned in months. Why does he leave his fried chicken he bought from the store outside the refrigerator. How is he even alive after eating it. I give up.Kevin asks me how to get karma

He asks if he can karma farm

He sees me posting about this

"whos Kevin?"Hello everybody!!! I hope we are doing well this evening and that we are all having our favorite snacks!!!! 

So, my life has changed a lot recently. A lot for the better, a lot for the making me question my life decisions. 

This, is the making me question my life decisions portion.

I have been a student teacher at a high school for almost a whole semester. So far, it has been a fun experience, a lot of fun. You meet Kevins and Kevinas all the time, you know, high schoolers.

However, this one moment with this one student made me realize, they don't teach you everything in college. 

They. Really. Fucking. Don't. 

For legal reasons, I have changed all of the names in this to protect all privacy, and those in this tale are under the age of 18.

The day started like a normal day. I had my normal students, a few Kevins/Kevinas here and there, nothing new. However, I have this one student in the last hour of the day who is on a whole new fucking level. Lately, he has been off my radar, because he has been pretty wrapped in his work. However, recently we just ended a unit, and started a whole new one. So, he was pretty amped up. We will call him Kevin.

So, my desk for the student teaching, is located at the back of the class. Not the front. I like the back, so I can observe. Because my desk is at the very back, I am near Kevin and this girl named Saige. 

By my desk, was a broken student desk. One of those desks with the desk connected to the chair. Well, these desks are kinda crappy, and the screws come undone a lot and you need to tighten them. The desk was messed up and needed to be tightened, so it was on put upside down till somebody could come get it. For some odd reason, students like the broken chairs. They will fight for it. SO, I put it at the very back of the class, by my desk, away from the others. 

Now, Kevin typically does what I tell him to do, but today he was pretty amped up and I just got done introducing the new unit.

Kevin stole the desk and replaced it with his PERFECTLY FUCKING FINE DESK with my back turned. I realized what he did, and took the desk from him. 

Me: Kevin, leave the desk alone, you can hurt yourself with it.

Kevin: it's a desk Ms. Blah(changed my name), how can it hurt me!?

Me: I can think of a lot of different ways dude, leave the desk alone.

Kevin: yeah yeah whatever Ms. Blah!

I turned my back to grab my energy drink and I heard Saige, "kevin, what did she just say!?"

In that moment, I turned around to find Kevin on the back of his perfectly fine desk chair, and  slamming BOTH of his hands down on the broken desk behind him, on one side and then the desk top flying up and face palming him right in face. It was seriously some shit out of Tom and Jerry.

Kevin then fell sideways off his chair and tumbled onto the floor.

I will admit, I was in shock in what just happened. They don't teach you what to do when a kid literally Tom and Jerry's himself in the fucking face! 

Kevin slowly stumbles up and sits back in his desk.

Me:.....Kevin

Kevin: yes?

Me: what did we learn today?

Kevin: like, in general?

Me: no, in this moment?

Kevin: Don't sit on the back of a desk?

Me: you literally smacked the information out of your head just now

Kevin: What information Ms. blah?

Me: about not messing with a broken desk!

Kevin: we have a broken desk?

I sent Kevin to the nurses office to get checked out, the nurse called his mom to have her take him to get checked for a concussion, because it was a loud "SMACK" on his forehead and he has some memory loss from the SMACK

Kevin does not have any concussions from the desk, he is still a Kevin though. 

After this incident, I called my old mentor teacher, at my college we all have these, and he laughed so hard he started coughing and yelled, "THIS IS WHY I AM A TEACHER"Kevina and her 2 daughters just moved to our area from California. This is usually a red flag as we are in RURAL Appalachia. No 4 lane highways, 45 minutes to a Walmart, etc. They moved here to start some sort of farm/cafe thing. Whatever. 

We tried to show them support but everything always felt mediocre. The final straw was stopping by one day to get coffee. First we're informed that the espresso maker isn't working but they can make something like a latte using a French Press...

Almost immediately she also apologized for the smell. For whatever reason Kevina had removed the lid from their septic tank, which was for some reason exposed. Then it was left open for 2 days during a rainstorm, causing it to overflow. The property was literally covered in shit and there was no escaping the smell. That was the last time we set foot on that property.This Kevin is my former stepbrother-in-law. I think that's right. My ex-wife's stepbrother. He was a gem in any number of ways but one story jumped out at me today while listening to a podcast I'm sure a few of you know. 

I was working as a mobile games tester at a small tech company in the pre-smartphone days. Great pay, easy job, fun start-up environment. Kevin was about the same age and a self-proclaimed gamer and PC expert so he asked me to set up an interview with my boss.  The first advice I gave him was not to mention the disaster that was the liquid-cooled gaming rig he'd built himself. 

So the interview arrives. Mind you this was clearly advertised as a permanent position with opportunities to advance. Early on, Kevin was asked where he saw himself in 6 months. He immediately replied that he wasn't sure, he was figuring things out, but he thought this job would be cool while he figured out what he really wanted to do. 

Of course he didn't get the job. I knew why almost as soon as he left his interview because my boss was so shocked by that jackass answer and wanted to share with me. I told him I was fine with Kevin not being my coworker. 

So of course my ex MIL and Kevin's dad come to me as if I have any control over any of this and ask me to see if he can get a second chance. After all Kevin was being honest, and honestly should be rewarded. I made it clear I was not going to stick my neck out when Kevin had so obviously given a dumbass answer.

Fortunately he went on to attend the state police academy then fail out just prior to graduating because of an alcohol-related shoulder injury. That was right about the time my ex and I split up so I have no idea what Kevin is doing now.My former coworker Kevin from a small biotech firm was (and is still) a research scientist. His incompetence with technology sometimes makes one wonder if he had recently time-travelled from the past.

In addition to [his inability to use hyperlinks properly](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qo3z19/kevin\_the\_scientist) and [unsuccessful attempts to kill us all](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qo50ig/kevin\_the\_scientist\_trying\_to\_kill\_us/]), he is also quite helpless with virtual meetings.

A few months into the pandemic, we had switched to virtual meetings at work. The first meeting was bumpy since some of us forgot to install zoom until minutes to the meeting, and of course Kevin was 10 minutes late, because he needed help installing zoom.

You'd think that should be the end of his zoom troubles... but you'd be wrong!

He continued to be late for meetings for some reason. He even missed an external project kick-off meeting because he couldn't find the meeting invite,  assumed that he was uninvited to the meeting and so didn't bother asking anyone.

One time I had a one-on-one meeting with him. I received an email saying that he had signed into the meeting (a few minutes early), but when I signed in, he was not there. Apparently instead of waiting to be admitted into the meeting (as the pop-up window asks), he just closed the window and then went to our manager to ask for the meeting invite (for a meeting that our manager was not part of!)

Anyways, we did find a work-around solution to all of Kevin's meeting problems: an hour before each meeting, another coworker would email the meeting invite to Kevin again. (Side note, she's nicknamed "the Kevin whisperer" as she was the only person who could talk to him... I guess that's another story for another time).

Multiple people had shown Kevin how to use his calendar etc, but he seems to only remember for a day... The Kevin whisperer has recently left the company, which leaves me to wonder how Kevin will ever find his way to his meetings again...So I used to work with a Kevin, who was a research scientist at a biotech start-up. He did VERY little work.

Most days, he just sat at his computer reading. None of us figured out what he was reading, since he rarely shared any useful information with the team and \[his documents are unreadable](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qo3z19/kevin\_the\_scientist) and [does not understand virtual meetings](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qt7vvn/kevin\_the\_scientist\_does\_not\_understand\_virtual/?utm\_source=share&utm\_medium=web2x&context=3).

Anyways, this story involves Kevin actually doing lab work!

Our manager had impressed upon Kevin that his contribution is very much needed and appreciated, so Kevin begrudgingly agreed to perform some lab tests.

The test he was given is quite simple, using standard kits for each step of the experiment. (Side note, a "kit" in lab work is a product that contains all the reagents needed for a lab procedure and a very detailed protocol. I've had students with 1-2 months of lab experience being able to use these kits with no problem.)

For the fellow labrats, Kevin was doing a very standard qPCR from cDNA.

Since I had the most recent experience with this experiment in the lab, Kevin asked me if I could take a look at his experimental design. I agreed. For some reason, his experimental write-up lacked any specifcs (like how much sample to use, what setting to use on the machine etc). I gave hims suggestions on these specifics.

So he did the experiment, and it failed. He then did it again and it failed again!

This might be a good spot to mention that Kevin doesn't like to ask for help... And it is impossible to offer him help either... so he worked away at this on his own.

A week later, he came to me, and said he has solved the issue! He was using the wrong amounts of samples. I looked at his magic numbers, and they were basically the same as what I told him to do! (He was orders of magnitude off before).

So I'm not sure why, but he decided to disregard my recommendations, and then spent a week to arrive at what I had recommended. But I also dont' think he realized that was what he had done...I decided that this was one of the many mysteries of Kevin and did not pressed him for more details...I posted this on r/talesofretail but felt it might fit here. Apologies if it doesn't.

Shout out to my fellow retail workers who have dealt with this particular butt holery on the regular. We must stick together to preserve whatever semblance of sanity we have left.

Like all retail workers, I've dealt with more than my fair share of idiocy, rudeness, "I wanna talk to your manager" cry babies, and just breathtaking audacity some people with their ridiculous god complexes just because they went shopping... You are no god, Brad. You are not special, Karen. You're the same pre-designed embodiment of slowly decomposing natural soil fodder that I am. The only difference is workers like me know the rules better than you pretend to think you do because it is our job to know them. \*ahem\* Rant over.

I'm a cashier where I work, so you can imagine all the crap I deal with on a daily basis. It's not a physically demanding job, but it is extremely taxing mentally. One thing I deal with on a pretty regular basis is customers expecting more of me than I'm able to provide. Not so much because I don't know certain things but I'll be reprimanded if it do.

The other day at work, I had just rung up a customer when I greeted another one who came in. He immediately comes up to me holding something. I'll call him... Cliff. Cliff because he made me want to jump off of one with his attitude.

Anyway, Cliff didn't greet me back and just asked me, "Where can I find another one of these?"

I didn't recognize what he had and asked him what it was. Cliff's head jerked back and looked at me like I asked him a stupid question. "What do you mean you don't know?"

I blinked. "Um, because I've never seen that before? But if you tell me what it is, I can get someone--"

Cliff interrupted me. "I'm asking YOU. It's your job to know this stuff to help customers."

I raised my eyebrows (a natural reaction, I can't help it) slowly corrected him, "No, sir. It's NOT my job to know. MY job is to ring up customers at my register and occasionally look up items missing barcodes. Now, if you tell me WHAT that is (I pointed to the thing in his hand), I can get someone whose job IT IS to know and where to find it."

At first Cliff looked like he was about to give a half-baked rebuttal but thought better of it. He apologized and told me what the thing was. Part of a toilet that he needed to replace. So I called for a plumbing specialist on the work phone and she told me exactly where it was. I repeated to Cliff the aisle she said it was down, Cliff walked off without another word. Not even a thank you.

I muttered, "You're welcome."So I studied a biology degree which you don't instantly associate with dangerous chemicals but it does involve some. I'll have to explain some of the procedures in order for you to get a feel of how wrong situations can turn, if you studied biology, genetics, microbiology or anything related you might already know and you can skip ahead.

**\[explanation 1\]** So for seeding bacteria one of the methods is using an L shaped glass stick, said stick is disinfected by dipping the L part into a jar containing alcohol (about 70-90%) and then burning it so anything on it burns. We also have to work with a bunsen burner right in the middle of the workspace since hot air rises so it creates a kind of shield that prevents biologic contamination. A jar of alcohol and a fire source right in the middle, you can already see where this is going

**\[Kevin story 1\]** So we were disinfecting the L shaped glass sticks and suddenly a burning drop of alcohol falls from mine into my jar, it catches fire instantly and I rush to put the lid on to drown it. My labmate looks at me like I almost killed us.Enter the Kevin of the story. He, like us, was in the middle of disinfecting, and, like me, a droplet falls on his jar and sets it on flame. I'd expect him to react like I did, but he just stares at it, and drops the L stick as if he was a tribe chief dropping a person into a volcano to calm it down. Not only did that not work, the weight tipped the jar and it spilt its content, the whole table was burning and Kevin tried to grab the petri dish as if he was gonna save it from the fire. Somehow Kevin hands catch fire, I dunno why he also rubbed alcohol on his hands (this was 2013, way pre-covid so no reason to be disinfecting your hands like crazy) then he runs aroun the class panicking with his hands outwards as if he was playing tag (fire tag that is). Luckily teacher grabbed the extinguisher and put him out. After all settled I look at my labmate and say "Now you're glad I reacted like I did right?" and he says "you can't compare yourself to Kevin" Pretty true

**\[Explanation 2\]** So in many procedures for extracting DNA and RNA we use, among other chemicals chloroform (Pretty sure everyone knows the effects of chloroform but if breathed for too long it can also be toxic and deadly)

**\[Kevin Story 2\]** So we were extracting DNA from plant leaves and by the time we were at the last steps the class starts feeling a bit dizzy and sleepy (my medication prevented me from being sleepy as it's used to treat narcolepsy) by the time my labmate started to feel heavily sleepy I was very concerned, so I get up and look around (teacher had left us to do this last part alone since it was pretty simple) And I discover that not only our dear Kevin has left the chloroform open inside the fume hood (he was the last to use it), he didn't even bother turning it on, and since by then teacher already had left he couldn't check that no one did that. So I put the lid on the chloroform, turn the fume extractor on and scold Kevin "why the hell did you leave the chloroform open, you could have killed us all!" and he looks at me, dead in the eye, and says "I thought chloroform only worked in movies".No offense Kevin but I hope whichever path of biology you went down has nothing to do with contagious diseases, animal control or health in general cause you'll destroy earth yourselfI work at a popular fast food chicken restaurant. I have been working here for about 4 months now and we have been dealing with a lot of people leaving so we have been hiring a lot more. We recently hired Kevin. Kevin on  their first or second day says they used to work at another fast food chain and was practically a manager. Now Kevin is almost out of training and has worked this particular spot a few times and has been trained in how to do everything here. 

Today we were almost out of bacon and needed to make more. I asked them to do it. They say they don't know how. Okay, this happens. I tell them how to arrange the bacon to put it in the oven. They ask how long they should put it in the oven. I tell them five minutes. Five minutes goes by and the oven goes off. I open it to take the bacon out, and there is no bacon in there. I look and this Kevin put the bacon on top of the oven instead of in.I had a couple requests from the [first post](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qo3z19/kevin_the_scientist/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)
, and having a slow Saturday, so here it is.

In the lab, we sometimes need to make microscope slides of tissues to examine specific proteins and cells in the tissues. The tissues are embedded in paraffin and a contractor makes them into slides for us.

To label the specific proteins and cells, you need to remove the paraffin first. This is done by dipping the slides in an organic solvent called xylene. If you know xylene, you might know where this is going. From Google: 

>Xylene is a colorless, flammable liquid with a sweet odor. Exposure to xylene can irritate the eyes, nose, skin, and throat. Xylene can also cause headaches, dizziness, confusion, loss of muscle coordination, and in high doses, death. Workers may be harmed from exposure to xylene.

This might also be a good place to point out that our lab did not have a chemical fume hood, which one would normally use to prevent exposure to things like xylene. The lab was converted from an office space and lacked the ducting that was needed to install a fume hood.

With that said, we had a really good process in the lab to minimize exposure, and no one had issues before. 

So one day we came into the lab, and it smells off. Sometimes there are weird smells in the lab, and with the HVAC in the building, it could be from other units in the building, so we don't always investigate right away, unless the smell persists.

At some point, we were starting to get a bit light-headed, especially my one coworker (let's call her Victoria), who was feeling particularly dizzy close to fainting.

So we started investigating.

As it turns out, Kevin had started doing this procedure. For some reasons he decided that the xylene needed to be refreshed after every use (it didn't). He did find the designated waste bin for xylene (has a special seal to prevent exposure and the whole bin goes to special chemical waste disposal eventually).

Where he went wrong was he had spilled the xylene, and didn't tell anyone! (There are special protocols in-place for dealing with chemical spills. In order to work in a lab, you need to pass a test and this was part of that test. Kevin had done the test 6 months prior.)

So he spilled this chemical, and just soaked it up with some paper towels and put all the soaked paper towels ON TOP of the waste bin.

Remember Victoria who was feeling the effects most strongly? The waste bin was under her work bench!

It's not the first time Kevin had tried to kill us, but this has been the most elaborate attempt... Or so we say in the team.

......

Other attempts: basically there were a lot of fire alarm tests in our building for some reasons, to the point where we ignore fire alarms until a firetruck actually shows up. Well, a couple times, the alarm turned out to not be tests. 

Since Kevin literally did nothing at work most days (another story), he was usually the one to investigate the alarm situation. We soon realized that he was the wrong person to sent, because when it did turn out to be a real alarm, Kevin would not tell any of us...I am a research scientist in biotech and at my last job I had the pleasure of having a Kevin on my very small team. During my time working there, I had accrued many stories and this is one of them:

In our line of work, we have a lot paper work. Lots of study proposals, study plans, reports etc. All of these need to be shared with the team and execs for approval and/or documentation purposes.

Kevin's write-ups always included at least 3 fonts and 3 fontsizes, and they would randomly change mid-sentence. If you are lucky, there might be multiple colors as well. He did make the line spacing consistent though, and it was always double-spaced, like essay assignments in school.

Aesthetics aside, the most frustrating part is that Kevin would include hyperlinks to documents saved on his computer. All of us had asked him to stop doing that on multiple occasions, and each time Kevin is surprised that the hyperlink doesn't work for us, since it works perfectly fine for him...

Sorry this is not the most science-related story... I just remembered a time when Kevin tried to kill us if people are interested.Link to part 2: https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qmzo1n/my_friend_kevin_pt_2/


I'm really hammering these out since I have nothing really better to do since I've worked from home since even a bit before covid and work always slows down around this time anyway.

This will mostly take place during our third and fourth years of college. To note, Chloe is from England and came here with her family when she was 14. She still somewhat has her accent.

So we left off with Chloe and I moving into a suite a floor above where Kevin used to live and Kevin moved in with my old room mate. His old room mate ended up dropping out due to family issues he was having at the time. 

One major part of this story will be our ski trip to Whistler, BC. It was our first major trip and the four of us spent a year planning this in advance and saved up.

So by this time the apartment had gotten cable internet whereas the year before we had DSL.

Between me, Kevin and college room mate (who I'll call Matt from now on) we had a pretty impressive music collection and we're all metal and rock fans generally with our tastes varying here and there.

Kevin bought an old stereo set, multi-disc changer and all from a flea market and he ended up frankensteining this stereo to his computer somehow because he had a sound card but his speakers for his pc sucked. I still don't know wtf he did but it was impressive. It only ever worked for him though.

Kevin did give up on skateboarding but decided he wanted to build a go kart instead. The apartment building had somewhat of a policy against doing full on auto work in the parking lot for one reason or another. You could change your oil and change your winter tires (which i got very, very good at and did it as a job for two years) but anything else was a no.

Kevin also had a car. An old ford tempo (i forget the year) and he asked me to change his tires over but only to do the back ones. I told him no he couldn't try drag racing in his car and i could change all four or none of them. 

Kevin's stupid go kart consisted of parts from a lawn mower, a computer, a bike and a few other things. It technically ran, but it mostly just poured out thick, black smoke and a lot of heat. Kevin also wanted to get the lawn mower blade working and Matt and I told him no. He wasn't going to make twisted metal a thing. It wouldn't be a thing and we weren't going to help him try to make it a thing.

Kevin began dating a girl named Jessica and she was smart but she was also a total bitch. While yes I and many others veto'd a lot of Kevin's crazy ideas we didn't exactly force him to stop unless it was clearly a threat to our or his safety (the latter was more common tbh).

Jessica shit all over his ideas and while it didn't seem to phase Kevin when she called him stupid I wasn't about to let her treat him like that. Chloe says I was his keeper and while that isn't so true anymore it very much was. Kevin paid me back in beer and lots and lots of laughs. Plus he's built like a hockey player so when we had to move a few times he was a guy you wanted helping.

I walked into his apartment when Matt was at work and found Jessica screaming at him because I guess Kevin put her phone in the dish washer. I told her to back the fuck off and she started talking shit to me so I picked her up and carried her down the stairs and dumped her outside the apartment building and told her to get lost.

Kevin was depressed for a bit. About two hours before he forgot all about her. In all seriousness it was probably longer but none of us brought her up again.

About a week later Kevin's stupid go kart blew up. Kevin wasn't injured amazingly but he looked like he had struck oil. 

Thanksgiving came (yes here in Canada our thanksgiving is in October) We decided to do our own thanksgiving in mine and Chloe's apartment that year because the thanksgiving the university had was honestly pretty slim pickings since most people weren't interested in putting money in and no one wanted to cook a turkey, if they even knew how to.

Kevin chopped vegetables for Chloe while Matt handled the mashed potatoes (so damn good.) I drank beer and got the pies ready. Kevin pointed out he was allergic to apple pie. He isn't. I pointed out he ate the apple pie his mom made last year and got sick because he ate too much of it. "That was apple?" -facepalm-

Kevin really wanted to make a poster run and asked us if we wanted anything. Matt asked him to pick up beer and was prepared to give him money. "I'm only going for posters but I'll get your beer when I get back if you want."

...I don't even know with this one.

Halloween came again and Kevin bought a few boxes of candy. Instead of handing pieces out he decided to share it all with the apartment buildings....by throwing a piece of candy at each door. He did this about five times before all of it was gone.

Matt was used to Kevin's quirks by this time. Even tolerated them and had an idea of Kevin's logic. Matt had a rule though. Never go grocery shopping with Kevin more than once. Once because then you learn why it's a bad idea.

Kevin will throw random shit into the cart and if you ever ask him how much it is he'll give you a completely random number. Garbage bags? Oh 20 bucks. He also grabbed stuff we all knew we or he didn't need. Cat litter? None of us owned a cat.

The Ski trip: 

As stated earlier in my post this trip to Whistler was planned and saved up for a year. Two hotel rooms and we'd stay there for a four day weekend. Whatever money we had left over we'd divide up.

We left the morning our holidays started with me doing most of the driving since I had bought a truck by this time. Chloe hadn't driven standard before (she learned how but her car was automatic) Matt could drive it but he also hadn't ever driven out of Alberta before. Kevin didn't drive at all. He didn't feel comfortable getting his license until he was almost 30. Honestly, that might've been his most unkevin decision ever.

We left at 4 AM after having coffee and making sure we had everything. Kevin was in charge of music and had burned two cds. Unfortunately somehow he had managed to burn only the first five seconds of each song and the fact he had managed to get something like 30 songs on the cd hadn't clued him in. The other cd wouldn't even play at all and none of us are sure why.

We had brought cds thankfully. We arrived mid afternoon and while I had a snowboard and boots, Matt, Kevin and Chloe had to rent gear. I spent most of the afternoon getting Chloe used to skiing while Matt took a bit of a snowboarding refresher from an instructor. Kevin needed full lessons so he wasn't with us most of the first full day.

We went down some easy trails that afternoon and I hit a few jumps, pulled some 180's and a couple other tricks I wouldn't dare trying to do now.

Kevin joined us by lunch the next day and was feeling pretty good about himself so we hit the easy trails again. Kevin decides he wants to hit the powder and Chloe tries talking him out of it but he insists. I smiled. Matt smiled and Chloe just sighed and prayed.

I did not take him down the double black diamond trails. That would be cruel. But I knew a run that was all powder with a very nice almost reverse half pipe type formation of snow in the middle. I'd hit some jumps. Kevin might eat powder but suffer no major injuries and fun would be had.

It almost went that way. I did hit a lot of jumps and Kevin managed to stay in control until he decided he would also hit a jump. He hit that jump fast and went all the way to the top (ten feet up) and made a very good impression of a snow angel as he landed on his back. 

The next day Kevin dropped his pole off the chair lift and that dumb motherfucker would've jumped down after it if I hadn't stopped him.

We had dinner our third and last nights in a pub and Kevin decided to flirt with the waitress all night. She actually did like him I think but then Kevin remembered we were leaving Monday. Kevin actually got her number and racked up a 200 dollar cell phone bill a week later because he called her long distance.

We returned home Monday, had Christmas and Chloe and I started making plans for our futures. We knew we wanted to stay together but had no idea where we wanted to live after university.

Stay tuned for part 4.Kevin is a sleaze bag.  Has been and always will be.  The following account needs no exposition.

Kevin, though nine years into a serious relationship (with a nice girl who once was pretty, but now, after all this time with him, looks emaciated), has an impulsive proclivity to creepily and vividly explain what types of sexual acts he'd perform on his co workers.  Quotes of critical acclaim around our circle include the brilliance of "I don't go down for any bitch", "I'd slam my c*ck sideways inside her a$$, and, my personal favorite, "when they tell you to "fuck off", what they're really saying is 'fuck in'", whatever that means.

Kevin has an interesting body type.  I'm not even sure you could classify him as an endo, meso, or ectomorph, but moreso a hybrid of the three.  He's got a receding hairline on the right and left sides of his head, except for in the center, which, when he grows it out, looks like a blonde mohawk, which he spikes with gel, making him look even more like a sleaze bag. Despite his light blonde hair, he claims to be 100 % Italian.   He's got a big nose, wears glasses, is barrel chested (71 inch bust), has a roughly 60 inch waist, and tiny chicken legs.  As far as his personality goes, he's a bit of a sparkplug.  Meaning that the littlest thing could send him into a psychotic rage.

 He's so top heavy that he often has balance coordination issues, such as tripping over his own feet and running in a zigzag motion for several blocks, unable to stop until he either runs into a wall or parking meter.  But back to the sex.  A few years back, Kevin met and slept with a girl you'd probably classify as a respectable 8.  He bragged that the sex lasted, to quote, "from 5:00 - 5:55 am".  She had an injured rib which evidently he re - broke during "the pounding", and even mentioned that her cat licked his ass during the sex.  I'm not making this up.

He bragged that she said verbatim "you're very enthusiastic".  He told her "you ain't seen nothin' yet", and proceeded to perform cunnilingus.  When I asked what happened next, he just put his head down and indecipherably mumbled, the obvious indicator that it didn't go well.  I'd have loved to be a fly on the wall for that.  Fast forward ten years.  Kevin has since moved to North Carolina, and we haven't spoken often, but one night recently, I received a frantic call from him.

I felt like a 911 operator.  He was hyperventilating and unable to speak.  "Something happened", he stated.  "Something bad...".  "What is it?", I asked inquisitively.  "I...ah....God.  Ah...sorry I'm trying to catch my breath".  "Okay man, just calm down.  Breathe easy, and compose yourself".  "Right".  The tension began to rise.  The suspense fueled by an adrenaline rush of curiosity.  I thought maybe he was in trouble or hurt, until he said it - 

"I have erectile dysfunction...".  I was taken aback.  "Wait, WHAT???".  "My cock.  It won't...fuck.  I'm going to have a break down...".  "Chill, dude.  Relax".  "I'm calling from jail...I got arrested".  I've always secretly hated Kevin, so I was gleaming inside learning about this revelation.  His perceived indignation.  "Why are you in jail????".  As the story goes, Kevin proceeded to explain that his anti - convulsion medication was affecting his erections.  Why is he on such meds?  Mostly because when he trips over his own feet, he doesn't understand the concept of putting your arms out to break the fall, so instead he just faceplants into the pavement.

He told me in vivid, gory detail that he cheated on his girlfriend, but got caught when the other woman showed up on his doorstep.  The other woman had no idea Kevin was in a relationship.  This woman was a teacher at the school he taught in, and after cultivating the truth about his deception, told everyone at school that Kevin couldn't get it up.  It spread through school and the community writ large like a wildfire, so Kevin, out of his animalistic, brutish rage, did the unthinkable.

Actually, that last statements a bit dramatic.  Maybe "unthinkable" isn't the right word.  I'd say "extraordinarily bizarre" is more fitting.  He walked into a school board meeting intentionally late, after everyone had been seated, grabbed the microphone, and said "Are you laughing now?", as he unzipped his pants and exposed himself, not completely, but through the outline in the fabric of his boxers.  "Sup, Kayla", were the last words he said before bolting and being pulled over roughly fifteen minutes later.  Typing this up truly has me embarrassed that I'm even in semi - regular contact with him.

The charge - indecent exposure.  He was fired immediately and arrested.  He spent four months in county jail before being released and returning home.  He's been ostracized out of embarrassment.  Everyone knows the story, even here in Pennsylvania.  He now keeps a low profile, but repeatedly posts quotes on Facebook, emphasizing certain words like "just had a really HARD day", or "Five Dolla'...Five Dolla' FOOT LONG".  It's truly pathetic, but nevertheless something he'll never live down.

He even posted pictures of the girl from his school, and added quotes like "it's not my fault you're too ugly to get a FIVE DOLLA' FOOT LONG!".  I keep reminding him that these quotes are getting old, and really stupid.  Especially the Subway jingle.  His account got suspended indefinitely because the girl threatened a lawsuit for defamation.  Now he's faded back into obscurity.  He lost his teaching license and now works at a steel mill.  His coworkers have dubbed him with the moniker "Soft Serve".  I know this because he told me, oblivious to the fact that I'm only gonna post his BS on Reddit anyway.

This will be his legacy.

The EndPt 1. https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qmit1v/my_friend_kevin_pt_1/

So this will mostly focus on mine and Kevin's college years, along with a guy who ended up becoming my best friend. My college room mate.

It was a simpler time in 2005. I had settled on an engineering degree on advice from my dad and packed my stuff up. Not absolutely everything but enough to fill a duffel bag and a backpack since I'd be taking the greyhound bus to Edmonton. About a 13 hour drive. it would've been shorter by car but  I hadn't wanted to make that trip by myself for the first time.

Kevin was being brought by his parents and at first I had suggested he come with me on the greyhound until I realized he was bringing everything he owned. Everything. I wouldn't have been surprised to find his prized pieces of lint in a jar.

I had bought a cell phone before I left and after arriving in Edmonton and getting my bags I was driven to my apartment that was a few blocks from the campus. I met my room mate and we made small talk while we unpacked. 

Kevin arrived the next morning and met his own room mate. He lived in the building across the street and pointed out if we ever had to, we could signal one another with flash lights. I pointed out my suite didn't face the street and neither did his. "What does that have to do with anything?" I sighed and my room mate just laughed, thinking Kevin wasn't being serious.

I warned my room mate about Kevin. I told him previous incidents and my room mate figured that was high school. College changes people. That might be true. If you're not a Kevin.

So my room mate decided for the next month he'd manage Kevin. Poor guy didn't last a week.

Eight times kevin locked himself out of his apartment when his roomie wasn't home and four of those times my room mate climbed up to his porch to get in and unlock the door. It was probably about 15 feet up. The ground floor balcony is literally on the ground. The other four times Kevin locked his keys in our apartment, claimed a cat stole it (no it was in our apartment again), locked them in his car and lost them in the snow. I attached his key to a chain which was attached to his belt.

Kevin somehow managed to find all his classes but frequently brought the wrong books so he'd have to go back and get the right book anyway.

My room mate was gonna go get gas for car and Kevin asked him if he wanted help siphoning out gas from the cars in the parking lot. My room mate just stared at me and I shrugged. 

The straw that broke the camels back was when Kevin INSISTED final fantasy 12 was going to be an MMORPG also (god I feel old). His reasoning being that 11 was an mmorpg and that was the future. Kevin insisted the game magazines were wrong or misinformed when we showed him articles. My room mate just sighed and said to me. "I'm done man. Being around Kevin 24/7 is too much." I pointed out not even I'm around him 24/7.

Halloween comes and Kevin buys a bunch of halloween candy then sits outside the university handing it out. Missed all his classes that day but everyone got a piece of candy. He took his job seriously too. I jokingly asked him for a second piece and he looked at me like I was a hardened criminal.

Kevin wanted to learn how to cook Meth. Not because he wanted to try it but because he wanted to be able to detect it so he could call the authorities if he smelled meth. I pointed out to Kevin this was a dumb idea and he'd end up getting shot. "Shot with what?" I didn't bother giving him an answer and he told me he hated when I didn't finish my sentences.

Kevin and I went to a party just before Christmas holidays. Kevin got really drunk and climbed onto the balcony of the house on the outskirts of the city and jumped off, face planting/belly flopping into the snow. It was a 3 foot drop at best thanks to how deep the snow was but there was a Kevin shaped print.

I was drunk off my ass too but unlike Kevin I didn't decide to try defying gravity. Instead I slept on the couch. I later found out Kevin was brought inside by a few guys. So he thankfully didn't die of exposure or anything.

Kevin wanted to start smoking but not cigarettes like I did (I had started at that party ironically and quit when I turned 30) Kevin bought rolling papers and put various spices in. Cilantro, oregano, thyme, etc etc. Every now and then he'd buy a few movie posters and roll them as tight as he could. To smoke. I also smoked my cigarettes outside on our balcony.

He thankfully did that shit outside and where no one would see. He came up with his own list of posters he wanted to try and which to stay away from. As if a bad movie would lead to a bad trip and a good movie would lead to a good trip.

Our second year of college Kevin floods his sink, kitchen counter and the drawers because he forgot he was filling the sink to do dishes. Then he does it again a month later because he forgets about the first time he did it.

Kevin also shaves his head to save money on having to get a haircut and his reasoning was it would also be easier to fit a hair net on his head since by this time he was working as a waiter. It was so uneven I thought he got in a fight with a weed wacker torn between killing him or simple humiliation. I ended up taking him to the hair dresser down town and she more or less fixed up his hair.

Kevin fired a bottle rocket at me because he wanted to see me dodge it. I never claimed I could. He did. His reasoning was that if he could dodge one anyone could. So as I walked down the street I see Kevin light his rocket and fire it at me. To be fair I did dodge it but only because he held it the wrong way and hit a car.

Kevin manages to somewhat chill the fuck out and our second year of college goes by without too many incidents. Chloe ended up moving to Edmonton shortly after our second year and we started dating again. We end up getting an apartment together in Kevin's building and Kevin moves in with my old room mate.

Stay tuned for the third part.( [https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qfbapw/shes\_a\_nightmare/](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/qfbapw/shes_a_nightmare/) ) Part One.

&#x200B;

I posted a few days ago about my Kevina at work. But today she might have pulled her last Kevinmove. As in she *royally* fucked up. She pissed off not only the manager trying to fire her, but the manager that defended her through *everything* else she's ever done. The one person in her corner just walked out.

Today was one of two days she had to work this week. She 'has a lot going on'. It was going to be her first day back after three days off. She'd just been warned not to come in late. *Yes, Kevina, two minutes does count.* In fact, we were having a mandatory staff meeting that afternoon to discuss getting to work on time (even though she's literally the only member of staff that shows up late.) You would think it would be the *one* day she would make a point to be on time.

But, no. 7:00 am rolls around. My uber shows up, five minutes after my shift ended (fifteen minutes after she's supposed to already be there.) Nothing. I call the manager. The manager calls her. She won't answer. I had to cancel my uber, and now I'm stuck working until someone shows up. Both managers are racing to get here, but they both live far away. But both are keeping me updated, telling me they're both spamming her phone with no avail.

At 8:20 I finally get to leave. I'm excused for the noon meeting, because I'm leaving late. She's just getting back to the managers as I'm walking out the door. But not only did the managers get there, but so did her replacement. So, after being over an hour late she's a no call no show.

But by some miracle for her, and curse for me, she still has her job. She's reminded of the meeting at noon. She comes in late. *She comes in late.* She comes in late with a full face of makeup, hair done and with an attitude about having to be there at all. She's at the door asking 'if this is over, because I have things to do?'

I don't think she ever planned on showing up. She was set to work from 7-3pm. She was supposed to still be on shift technically. So, for her to have plans at 1pm? A little suspect.

&#x200B;

And, side note. She thinks she'll get off Thanksgiving, Black Friday, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Years Eve, and New Years Day. Not only is it bold to assume she would be given all that time off when there's people with family and children on staff- but also, pretty bold of her to think she'd have a job.

&#x200B;

edit: I forgot to post the lead up to this.

But, she's late. As in, always late. And we got into a spat about her being late. And when the manager confronted her, her response was to send the manager screenshots of the past two weeks. She clocked in on time twice out of ten days. And considering we are supposed to clock in 5 minutes before and be there at the desk at the start of shift. . . she clocked in late every time.

But I do have a post on another sub ranting about all of that and the problem that caused me- if you want to look? That one is less of her being stupid and more of her being completely disrespectful.I'm 34 years old and live in Canada. I've known my friend kevin for about 25 years now. We went to the same schools, the same college. He's done a lot of stupid things but he's a loyal friend and the few times I suffered blow back from his...kevinisms he's paid me back.

Kevin was pretty average in school and at first glance you wouldn't think anything wrong with him. Until he opened his mouth.

On our maps of Canada we labelled all our provinces and territories (sorry Nunavut. this was a bit before your time) then we had to label what the capital city of each was. Pretty standard stuff right? Kevin decided to name the capital cities after capital cities from OTHER parts of the world. London, Paris, Washington.

Kevin had to do a book report. His book report choice was the lion, witch and the wardrobe. Only he had made it pretty clear he hadn't read the book at all. Pretty sure the youngest girl was named Lucy and not Dorothy. Kevin had to redo that assignment.

When we were 13 Kevin got a skateboard for Christmas and his dad built him a ramp. Kevin decides to try it out and break his wrist. Then after that healed he broke his ankle. By the third time his dad decided to turn the skateboard ramp into fire wood.

Grade 10 comes and we had a winter dance coming up. I wasn't gonna go but Kevin insisted because all our other friends were going. I asked him who I should ask to the dance and he suggests a girl named Chloe.

I figured that wasn't the worst suggestion because we knew each other fairly well. I walk over to her and ask her out and Kevin looks at me funny. "Why are you asking if she's going to the dance? Do you like her?"

Chloe and myself both stare at Kevin with a "No shit sherlock" look. Chloe says she'll go with me and tells Kevin she'll find him someone. Oh she found someone. Kevin found his Kevina. I don't know if Chloe underestimated what would happen when a Kevin and his Kevina meet or maybe she underestimated them both.

The night of the dance Kevin manages to knock himself out running into the door while Kevina decides she's going to sneak booze into the dance because she thought that's what you did. Only Kevina told everyone what was in it and had it promptly taken away.

Our senior year Chloe and I were pretty serious but had decided to take a break because we wanted to go to different universities. Yes Chloe and I do end up getting married if you're wondering but not until 2010.

As for Kevin and Kevina they broke up but it was more because Kevin told Kevina he didn't want to be tied down with his whole life ahead of him. Understandable only he was worried Kevina would literally tie him down in her house (maybe she did before. I never asked)

I...in a slightly Kevin moment myself suggested he come with me to Edmonton for university. It would be fun I said. What's the worst that could happen I said.This is a short story but unfortunately real. Kevin, a heavy weed smoker, thought he had figured out how to circumvent the police. Like, in general. 

He explained to me that in the US, that if you live in say North Dakota but a building on your property is owned by someone who lives in New Hampshire, then the New Hampshire police would be the only ones who could execute a warrant and they wouldn't because it was so far away.

All I can say is that I'm glad Kevin shared his theory with me before he tried to put it into practice.Background: I work on aircraft, therefore I deal with some really expensive stuff. Because of this - and because we have to be able to trace absolutely everything we install on an aircraft (be it a split pin or screw costing a few cents, or a jet engine costing seven figures) back to the point of manufacture - the Company I work for has specific procedures to follow, in order to get spare parts from the delivery truck to the aircraft.


One of my colleagues is the antagonist of this story. “Kevin” has been working on aircraft for decades and has worked for our employer for about four years now. Kevin is somewhat difficult to deal with and he has a reputation for making Strange Decisions.

Anyhoo, one morning a couple of months back, I was tasked with installing a part on an aircraft (not expensive by aviation standards, but still worth a few Kilomonies). I could see in The System that the part had been requisitioned and issued out of the stores to the aircraft, so I went to the ‘Parts Awaiting Fitment’ storage shelves to get it. It wasn’t there. I asked the stores guys what had happened, one of them said, “oh, I had it sitting on the bench [a shelf just in front of a window that we slide open when we want to talk to the stores guys] ready to put on the ‘Parts Awaiting Fitment’ shelves and someone grabbed it while I finished booking it out to the aircraft in The System”. So it never actually made it onto the ‘Parts Awaiting Fitment’ shelves. Cue me running around for half an hour fruitlessly looking for the damn part. Then I had a hunch and approached Kevin.

Me: “Hey Kevin, do you know where the [part] for [AircraftRegistration] is?”  
Kevin: “I have it, it’s on my toolbox” [we all have big-arse toolboxes on wheels, fitted with wooden tops that can be used as work benches].  
Me: “WHY??! I’ve just wasted half an hour looking for it! Why do you have it?!”  
Kevin: “I saw it on the bench [at the front of the store] yesterday afternoon while I was at the store and I thought, ‘that shouldn’t be there, it’s not safe, somebody could take it’, so I took it.”  
Me: “Why? It’s got nothing to do with you!”  
Kevin: “I took it for safekeeping.”  
Me: “So, you saw a part sitting in the front of the stores window; you thought, ‘that isn’t safe, someone might take that’, so you took it?”  
Kevin: “Yes”


In the end, I couldn’t get “Kevin” to see that he’d done something wrong; and he actually got upset that I was pissed off with him. Other colleagues I talked to about the episode just chalked it up to Kevin being Kevin.The Kevin from my earlier post who came up with a brilliant legal loophole decided to get goats and build a fence. Kevin2 who was staying with them offered to supervise and advise. 

Side note: Kevin2 was staying with Kevin because he had burned down his home by starting an electrical fire in his glass studio. Studio in this case meaning a prefab shed he wired up himself.

Kevin2 had never built a fence. I didn't even have to ask. I came over to help after being asked to help. I showed up to find Kevin pulling his Jeep SUV into the driveway with 3 goats in the back and Kevin2 proudly pointing to an area of about an acre that had been fenced in with no gate and built with nothing but Tposts.

As soon as I pointed out the obvious problems, Kevin2 got annoyed and walked off to work on other stuff. I quickly became annoyed with the whole thing and decided just to leave. Just in time to see Kevin2 trying to force a trailer hitch on to a ball that was clearly the  wrong size. 

Not everyone is cut out for country life. Anyone who thinks its an easy alternative to city living needs to remember the tale of the 2 Kevins.Kevina was a long-time Oxy addict due to a habit formed during treating a legitimate injury. Decades later the recreational addiction was the driver behind the use and when it got bad enough Kevina decided to get sober, including NA meetings. 

Well it wasn't long before Kevina went back to a friendly doctor to get an Oxy prescription. Which in her mind was fine since it was legal. She then resumed her use and voluntarily shared this info during her NA meeting. 

When she told me this story she was still shocked that they kicked her out of the meeting.My coworker is a female Kevin and I am baffled daily with the way she is. There has yet to be a day where she didn't say something or do something that made me glance around to see if I was being filmed and this was all some elaborate joke. 

I met her about 3 months ago. I work at a newly opened hotel, so the first month was a lot of work. But day one was just the standard 'getting to know' one another and going over the expectations of management. Right away I pegged her as someone I wouldn't ever really be fond of. She felt the need to put in her two cents where ever she could interject. She was a suck up and attention seeking and just overall not the person I'm drawn to.  She's like a parrot, repeating your own words back to you as a question or like it's just a response to what you said. 

While annoying, the problems didn't start popping up until a week in when we were actually able to start setting up the property. Immediately she began to dictate, even though most of her instructions were not what was supposed to be done. 

The first red flag was when I found another coworker who seemed to be going at my same pace and flow, Jenna. Jenna and I were working well together and had a good system going. That's when our Kevin stepped in and offered to help, apparently she'd finished her side of the hall. Sure, no big deal, right? She can put a coffee pot in each room. Everything was going great until we noticed she would wander into the room with the coffee maker, and leave with said coffee maker in her arms. But she would take the time to mark it off the checklists we were using to keep track of what still needed to be put into the rooms. 

The next day Jenna and I decided that we would break off on our own and just make sure one floor was completely done as much as possible (we were still waiting on shipments of things to arrive). We went back over the rooms and started noticing almost nothing was in the rooms. But there were things marked off. We caught our Kevin walking around with a clipboard and pen and when asked what she was doing she said *she* was the one that was going to check the rest of the rooms, because 'Fuck the checklist'. She was going into the room and writing everything that was in the room down. That was what she was doing. Oh well, not our problem. 

After a lunch break another shipment came in- the last one we needed to complete rooms. We notice she left all of her things including her clipboard in the middle of the hallway and was nowhere to be found. Oh well, again. Not our problem. We fix the entirety of the floor (having to go back over what she had done herself yesterday and what she had supposedly went back over that day.)

We found her hours later. (Mind you this was a week before opening and we had already lost a lot of prep time. We were cutting it close.) When the manager called everyone up so we could do training to make the bed the correct way. So the entire staff, who had just finished loading boxes onto the floors then distributing the stuff inside to rooms, got off the elevator to find a floor that was supposed to be at least somewhat completed, a complete wreck. There were trash cans everywhere and everything was piled out in the hallway in front of room doors. 

She peaked her head out of a room to giggle about the mistake she made. The massive mistake. The one that was going to set us behind an entire day. This floor was supposed to be completed. Beds and all. Now that was going to be impossible. All because of her. Of course nobody thought it was as cute and quirky as she did. So, she ran down to cry to the manager. But- preserver we did. Me and Jenna made it our mission to fix all that Kevin did. And there were many many mistakes. Things that she'd checked off and things that she put into rooms on days when that was her *only* job. So, knowing everyone was mad at her, she called out the next few days. Getting out of doing any of the hard labor that was left to be done.  

&#x200B;

A few days later we opened and the new problems began. She had a habit of telling people they can do things they aren't supposed to, then saying 'just tell them Kevin said it's fine.' This happened when she invited a bunch of people into the hotel to have breakfast (without asking for permission from anyone.) And these people were not the most. . . classy people, and instead of leaving when asked, they argued with the *owner* because 'Kevin said we could!'

Then I walked in on her one night telling a guest of the hotel that he could park in the business' across the streets parking lot. That it was okay 'Kevin said it was okay!' As if that business cared who she was and wouldn't just have his car towed. 

She *forgot to charge someone. She just didn't get a card. Didn't make him pay. That's her one job.*

She over charged a woman $1500. *Nobody can figure out just* ***how*** *she did it.* 

On the computer was a day-glow green post it with 'DO NOT RENT 235' On it. Clear as day. When I came in she was in the process of checking that person in. I didn't realize, because I was literally walking through the door. But then I got the backlash from it, because she was gone before they realized the room was still very dirty and came back down. Then, upon further investigation I saw that she had changed the room number SPECIFICALLY to 235. We had a whole empty property and she chose the ONE room she wasn't supposed to rent out. Not only that, the person was already preassigned to a different room, so it shouldn't have been changed, and it wasn't a mistake. You have to click through a LOT of 'are you sure' type screens to change that. 

&#x200B;

And outside of work she might be worse. She told me a story about how she was sitting out on the porch and she heard screams for help coming from the woods. And she was going to investigate until her husband stopped her. And she didn't find it suspicious at all that the person calling for help was having a full blown conversation with them. Not just screaming or trying to come *out* of the woods.So this was about ten years ago when I was in college. It was finals week and due to a learning disabling I have, I’d take my exams in this Concourse between the two largest dorms on campus. I finish my exam and as I’m walking to leave I notice a back pack is behind a what I assume to be structural column.

Now this is 8 am in the morning and there should not be a reason for this being here. We were near the cafeteria so it may have been a workers bag but that would be weird since they had secured cubbies. Normally I’d ignore this but the previous few days there were bomb scares at several other colleges/universities. They were all pranks and likely so was this. But that being said I didn’t want to be the guy on the news if this wasn’t a prank being like “I wish I said something” so I called the schools public safety office to report it. 

I tell them all the same stuff I’ve told you here and the dispatcher Kevin sends some officers but asks me to stay on the line. They then say this.

Kevin: huh that’s for sure suspicious do you mind going over and looking through the bag?

Me: um no.

Kevin: Why?

Me: if it’s a bomb I want to be no where near it let alone go messing with it. If it’s not a bomb and a student left it I don’t want to be accused of stealing. You said the officers were on their way they can do it.

Kevin: I’m sure it’s fine just open the bag for us.

Me: I’m not going to do that, and if that’s all you need I’m going back to my dorm.

Kevin: why don’t you want to look in it? That’s suspicious

Me: Maybe because I think it could be a bomb. Why are you so insistent I do this?

Kevin: well the officers aren’t trained to handle a bomb.

Me: neither am I!

I hang up and later found it was obviously nothing. Public safety did come to question me as a matter of procedure and that was it thankfully!This one is quick. I used to work for a famous Midwest pizza chain. Once, my coworker brought brownies in for her birthday that she'd made herself and they looked delicious. She set them on the counter in front of some rarely used computers and we got busy making pizzas but she told everyone who was working that they could help themselves. A few hours go by and I remember the brownies so we go over to get some. Imagine our surprise and disgust when we see a single, hand shaped chunk of brownie missing from the tin. 


A driver, who I'll call Kevin, decided that he wanted brownies so bad that he would just use his hand (with no glove) and no one would notice or care. Nevermind the fact that 1) We're in a pandemic and drivers normally don't wash their hands between stops and 2) we work in a RESTAURANT which means we have supplies like plates, forks and knives that could have worked just as well, if not better, than his meaty paw. We grilled him about why he thought that was okay when he came back and he just couldn't seem to understand why we were upset when he'd been told to help himself.


Kevin wasn't allowed anymore brownies.I lived in a fraternity. Kevin was my roommate. To be fair, Kevin is brilliant with anything related to computers. To be equally fair, Kevin is brilliant with absolutely nothing else.

Kevin has decided that the five desktop computers he has somehow fit under his twin bed are no longer sufficient. Kevin decides to custom build a monstrosity of a computer to replace the desktops.

While I was gone at class, Kevin has decided that there is not enough space in our room for the ogre he is building, so he moves MY bed out into the hallway. Kevin is gone at the computer store when I get back and see this. I return the favor by moving my bed back in and his bed out to the front yard. A fraternity brother is taking a nap on it when Kevin returns and bitches a fit.

Kevin keeps tripping the circuit breaker. His computer is drawing way more current than it was designed for. Kevin tries to solve this problem by placing a gas generator precariously on the window sill and plugging into that. This works until a variety of bugs and one very confused squirrel attempt to make our room their new home. I tell Kevin the generator has got to go which of course results in him bitching a new fit.

Kevin has hired an electrician to install a new circuit for our room for his computer. It is winter, and the average temperature outside is in the negatives. Our room requires no heater. The computer is so large and energy intensive that if we DON'T open up the window with the snow outside the room turns into a sauna.

Our fraternity rents our internet from the University. I'm on door duty. The IT guy knocks on the door. He tells me that he think there is either an error or a hardware malfunction as it shows our single house is consuming a substantial portion of the entire university's bandwidth. I show him to the router box.

He confirms that there is no error. Our house is indeed consuming a large amount of data. He tells me I have 72 hours to solve this problem or the University will both throttle our speed way down and put a cap on overall data. I head strait to Kevin.

Kevin is trying to argue that the billion files he is downloading are encrypted so IT has no idea what the data is. It takes awhile for Kevin to understand that IT doesn't care what he is downloading, but that if he continues this behavior there will be NO internet for him or anyone else in the house.

Kevin now works for NASA.My friend's actual name is Kevin. During a school project, he forgot how to drink from a glass.

We were watching a video on Youtube called something along the lines of "memes to watch during a school project". We were at our friend's house, and he offered us a glass of coke. While we were drinking, I saw Kevin staring at his glass, and then he said "Guys, I don't remember how to drink".  I didn't really understand what he meant until he started laughing and almost crying because he really couldn't drink anymore. Me and my friend looked at each other, knowing that this human being wasn't a drug addict, just an idiot. In fact, a few seconds later he fell from the chair and start laughing louder. The rest of us simply drank our coke and continued to watch memes on Youtube. If I remember correctly, he received a better grade than us for that project.I knew a Kevina in college. She wasn’t the brightest and believed some of the most ridiculous things. The one time that stands out the most in my mind, was once when we went to a restaurant. 

Kevina was always telling us she was a vegetarian. She wasn’t quite rabid about it, but was always touting the health benefits of going vegetarian and how she had been one since she was in elementary school and was doing great. Well, I went out to eat once with a small group of friends, plus Kevina. We all placed our orders and I was surprised when she ordered a cheese burger. After the waiter left, I asked:

Me: So, you aren’t vegetarian anymore?
Kevina: I’m vegetarian, not vegan. I eat dairy and eggs. 
Me: But the burger is made of beef. 
K: Yeah… and…
Me: ….You know beef is cow meat, right?
K: No it’s not….

Turns out, Kevina was NEVER really a vegetarian. She thought because beef, pork and mutton weren’t called by the same name as the animals they came from, they weren’t meat. She had been avoiding chicken, turkey, fish, lamb, veal (because she somehow heard veal was from baby cows), goat, etc. but all the while eating beef, pork, bacon, mutton etc. 

It turns out, her parents were mostly the blame for this, initially anyway. She came home from school one day dead set on being a vegetarian. They didn’t want to give up meat so convinced her that these certain meats weren’t meat. 

How she made it to her freshman year of college without having this bubble burst, I have not a clue. 

After we convinced her that what we were telling her was the truth -this was the early 2000’s so none of us had smart phones, we had to go to her dorm and make her type “what is beef/pork/bacon/mutton” into google- she tried to go vegetarian but decided it was too much of a hassle as we kept informing her that certain things she really liked eating/drinking weren’t vegetarian.I am the Kevin.

I have had really bad gastro the last week, Im talking, in hospital on a drip bad. I am now at home resting and needed to fart. It felt like a good powerful fart, the type that feels like it can blow up a balloon or give you a speed boost in a race. I forgot I had gastro and that farts don't exist with gastro. 

I have done this twice today

Edit: three times today :(I suffer from Autism, meaning that I have stunted social literacy, chronic anxiety and a lower sense of empathy that a lot of other people. I’ve had so much help over the years that it kept me sheltered from normal things that I should experience at that stage in life. Because of all that, I can be incredibly brilliant yet have more Kevin moments than I’d like to admit.

But this story starts out when I was 20 years old with a passion for retro tech and old cars. Sometimes if I saw a car from the 90’s or earlier, I would look inside the car from the curb to check if it had its original stereo.

I was trying to track when tape players were last common and if the stereo was aftermarket. It was intriguing to me to see that there were classic cars that still had an AM radio, not AM/FM, just AM while others had an aftermarket CD player/bluetooth receiver. It was a weird habit, but a habit I was into nonetheless. So one day I was walking home from my homework in a coffee shop to find what looks like a 1984 Nissan pickup. which was especially unusual since this was around 2018 and I look into the window to see a cassette player with a green LCD and big metallic tuning and volume dials when a lady came out. 

“Hey what are you doing with my husband’s truck?” she asked and I look at her scared shitless that she was going to beat me up and I told her that I was just checking it out. She told me to stay away from the truck and I power walked back home seething that she was so paranoid about people in her neighborhood stealing junk pickup trucks. It took explanations from my housemate and my mom for it to finally sink in that it was sketchy as fuck!I'm a 17-year-old high school junior who is currently taking a PE (gym) class that I had to make up from last year because i couldn't do it during covid. And this year, they started opening the class up to freshmen. One such freshman is today's protagonist, Kevin. 

Kevin (14M) is one of those guys so stupid it's draining to interact with. He's CONSTANTLY joking (serious Kevin doesn't exist) and screwing around. He's always saying horribly inappropriate things and fucking around in dangerous ways. He is the ultimate Kevin. 

-----

It was the first week of school last month and Kevin introduces himself by screaming constantly and bragging about how he can "lift 53 pounds". Kevin looks a bit like drew Carey pre weight loss. At 14. And keep in mind I ain't exactly light as a feather, so you know i mean it when I say he is not ready to lift 53 pounds. 

------

Kevin started showing up in an anime shirt on the daily, puzzled as to why we didn't think it was cool. He has latched on to me since I'm the only older guy in the class, and the teacher has basically designated me "Kevin Duty". That is, i am tasked with making sure he doesn't kill anyone. 

So fast forward a few weeks and we are bench pressing dumbbells. I know I'm weak and so I only try lifting 15 pounds each arm, whereas Kevin gets overconfident and insists he can bench 40 in each arm, swinging the dumbbells around like a madman.

We are assigned to work in partners and I'm Kevin's caretaker for the day. Kevin "tries" for about thirty seconds, and our job is to stand behind and spot each other to make sure nobody drops a dumbbell. I tell Kevin as I'm getting onto the bench to spot me, and I begin. I close my eyes for ten seconds to push through the bench press. 

Wrong fucking choice. 

I open my eyes to see Kevin grinning like a motherf@cking trollface. I launch up faster than Usain bolt on an ICBM to when I see him gazing into my eyes holding a pair of 30-pounders about a foot above my nuts, and he's barely able to hold on. I launch backward and Kevin drops the dumbbells onto the ground. 

-----
Kevin also thinks it's hilarious to tell "the vegans are coming, run!". And other such inappropriate things. He even yelled into the girls locker room and ran away, and left me there to catch the blame. 

----- 
Kevin could not figure out a simple combination lock. No, not how to get the numbers right, I'm not good at that either. I mean he literally did not understand that it was a dial to turn. 

-----

Kevin claimed he would "eat" anyone who broke into his locker even though he doesn't lock it. 
-----

Kevin pounded the locker in anger trying to "force it shut" even though it was already shut. Apparently he thought that if you kick the locker enough it will lock. 
------

Kevin managed to get away with lying down on a bench for an entire class where we were supposed to walk a mile on the track, with the teacher only discovering after class. He tried walking the first quarter mile but gave up when the whole class passed a full lap in front of him. 
----

Kevin screamed like a banshee when I had the intestinal fortitude to commit the heinous crime of ... opening a soda that spilled some foam onto his empty unused lunch tray. To Kevin this is the end of the world. Yeah. 

----

Oh yeah, and he runs around yelling "i have the power of anime!" and repeatedly joking about how he should identify as a girl to get into their locker room. Haha, so funny Kevin, i forgot to laugh. Considering x-posting to r/talesofneckbeards lmao. 

So that's it for stories from a Kevin containment specialist. Hope you enjoyed, no doubt more stories soon...Friend confided in us once that her preferred and only method of birth control, is letting them cum inside because she can just "pee out" the semen to prevent pregnancy. She got pregnant a few months after she told us this. 

She also happens to have dropped out of high school, which I can't help but feel is somewhat related. And we have all tried to inform her before hand on the effectiveness of her methods, along with attempting informing on basic female anatomy (ahem, her own anatomy), but she just does NOT wanna know.At my retail job today I had someone who might be one of my dumbest customers.

In my department we sell various mousetraps among other things. One female customer (the Kevina) was holding a two pack of mouse traps and a four pack of mouse traps. The traps were practically identical but she kept asking what was the difference between the two. I told her repeatedly that one had two traps and one had four.

She also asked which traps were easier to use. I told there they were the same.

When I last saw Kevina she had picked out a different two pack of mousetraps that are easier to use than the traditional ones that she was looking at earlier. 

I am reminded of the Beavis and Butthead episode where they are dealing with a rat in their house and struggling with a rat trap. Ok gang. Some of you wanted more stories about my former room mate Kevin, so I’ve compiled some here I think you’ll enjoy. This is a long post so buckle up.

But first I’d like to explain a few things about Kevin and our living arrangement. Me and Kevin had been casual friends for about two years prior to us living together for a year. It was his apartment, and I just rented a room in it. Ultimately I had no say in some of the shenanigans he got up to because his name was on the lease. I mean, I did try to talk him out of it, but Kevin was a determined and motivated lad with a passion for destruction. 

I don't think Kevin had any mental issues. His Kevinness was just the perfect combination of cluelessness, arrogance, impatience, curiosity and a healthy dose of bad genes. I do love the lad and he was a good friend, but living with him and constantly worrying for him made me absolutely insane. Enjoy! 

**Kevin can’t remember his passwords**

Kevin would always forget his password for everything. Not remembering a password isn’t a ”Kevin” thing.. But it is if you only have one password for everything and that specific password is TATTOOED into your left arm. 

He would sit there for a few seconds… thinking… Then he would remember the tattoo…   
But where was it again?? He would search his arm, every day… Eventually find it… Type it in, and then exclaiming *”Oh, thank god!”*

(In Kevins defence: He had a massive sleeve and you wouldn’t be able to see the password if you just looked at the tattoos quickly, so it wasn’t on full display for the world to see. But I knew where it was by heart and he didn’t so there you go.)

**Kevin thought all gingers smelled the same**

Yes. Kevin was convinced all gingers smelled the same. He described it as the scent of sour milk and didn’t want to be near anyone with red hair. 

He went through a lot of trouble to avoid them. One time he was supposed to take the train, and ended up getting off on the wrong stop because a ginger had sat down next to him. He was stranded in the middle of nowhere for half a day - but happy with his decision. Why didn't he just find another seat? Who knows. 

**Kevin was lactose intolerant, but thought he could ”hack” his body**

He figured if he kept eating food containing lactose he would eventually become immune. He did this during the three years I knew him and he did not become immune. In fact, I witnessed him shit his pants on numerous occasions.

**Speaking of shit: Kevin was banned from the local water park**

So the story goes Kevin and his cousin (who from what I hear is also a Kevin) had been there when they was 15-16. There is no delicate way of phrasing what happens next, so I’m just gonna be blunt. 

The Kevins decided to shit in the shallow pool full of small children to see how long it would take before someone noticed the two logs and blamed one of the little kids. 

But since this is a story about two Kevins, y’all already know it doesn’t end well for them. They was found out immediately after shitting in the pool because one of the life guards had seen them giggling entering the pool and grown suspicious. 

**Kevin and his secret bottle**

As I stated in [this post](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/pelvpq/kevin_takes_out_the_trash_in_creative_ways/), Kevin didn’t like unnecessary trips anywhere. If he could do the thing he was supposed to do without taking any steps that would be ideal. 

So Kevin had concocted the most ’elegant’ plan. Sometimes, during the night, we all have to go. Most people get up and walk to the bathroom, but Kevin wasn’t like most people… He had a special piss bottle under his bed. It was mostly used for night time, he assured me, but sometimes when he was playing video games he used it too. 

**Kevin ordered a sex doll**

He decided on a whim he wanted one, but the ladies wasn’t in stock and he sure as hell wasn’t gonna hump a man. So he ordered a sheep and humped that instead. 

**Kevin loved messing with metal**

Kevin became inspired by TV shows where people would make things. One particularly terrifying session of complete madness inspired by these TV shows was when Kevin tried to melt precious metals in the living room. 

In the show people found old electronics and extracted the gold, silver and other metals from them and sold it. Kevin liked this very much, and tried it with his stereo. He took it apart and found some metal he figured was silver. It was attached to plastic which he couldn’t remove, so he decided to melt it. Indoors. With a tiny lighter. 

I walked in on him burning the plastic. He was sitting on the floor with all this junk around him, saying *”ow..”* over and over as the lighter burned his thumb. Black smoke rising from the plastic. I tried to reason with him, saying breathing in plastic is bad. He didn’t care, but eventually stopped as he grew impatient. 

It turned out the metal he was trying to extract was steel. This was not the only time he tried this. I can’t even remember how many times Kevin was trying to mess with metals and plastic in the living room.

**Kevin didn’t believe in WW2**

He was a firm believer that the WW2 was just fiction, pretty much. He had read a conspiracy theory about the Holocaust being fake and believed every word of it. This was true for most things. If it was on the internet, he would believe it. 

**Kevin read a book called ”The Game” and told a girl she looked like a giant ham.** 

Apparently in the book the author tells you to be *ever so slightly* mean to a woman and this will somehow make her like you. 

Kevin was not familiar with ever so slightly. He found a girl he thought was cute. She was wearing fishnet stockings, and was a bit heavy just the way he liked ’em. 

He told her she looked like a massive uncooked ham inside a net, and then laughed at her. Kevin got slapped in the face. I doubt he’s read a book ever since. 

**Kevin and the beeswax**

Another time Kevin got inspired by a TV show was when someone talked about beeswax. Kevin learner you could:

1. Make candles with it (Boring)
2. Eat it (Boring)
3. Use it as glue (Kinda fun)
4. Waterproof things like boots with it (Somehow more fun than glue..?)

Kevin didn't quite understand condensation and was always complaining about how our windows would fog up. He thought if he waterproofed the window with beeswax that wouldn’t happen. So he smeared melted beeswax everywhere on all the windows and the wood surrounding them in the hopes it would ”Keep the fog from coming in”. (again, his apartment. I didn't have a say in this) 

Obviously the beeswax eventually hardened and all the windows was streaked with it.

Silver lining: The living room no longer smelled like burnt plastic. It smelled like burnt plastic AND beeswax. 

**Kevin and his sword**

\*sigh\*

He had this ”sword”.. It was barely even a sword. He made it himself during one of his TV-inspired adventures. He tried to make an actual sword, but gave up after he couldn’t figure out how to make metal ”glow” (his words not mine) so he could bend it. Instead he just cut open a beer can and super glued the sharp metal pieces to a thick stick he had sanded down. 

Anyway… He kept the ugliest sword in the world in his car ”for protection”. Kevin was a large lad with lots of tattoos and a hint of insanity in his eyes so people rarely messed with him, but it made him feel safe. He did get in trouble for it though, but that’s a long story for another time.

Edit: I’ve been getting lots of messages about posting some more stories about Kevin. Maybe I’ll do another post focusing on more of his TV-adventures and the car sword story in the future. I had no idea people would enjoy this so much. It *almost* made living with him worth it lol.A former buddy of mine is a Kevin of the highest order. I say former buddy because at some point I just couldn’t take it no more and distanced myself. We lived together for about a year in our early 20s to save on rent, and I have so many stories about Kevin and his Kevinness I could write a book. 

Kevin had, much like every other Kevin, lots of quirks. This specific quirks however takes the damn cake.

I came home after spending a whole week camping with my girlfriend and was met with the most god awful smell imaginable. Kevin had not done the dishes all week, and the trash was overflowing. Our apartment was legit just a few steps from the apartment buildings main recycling area and it was certainly more of a fuss having to live with the sight and smell of trash than it would’ve been to just take it outside.

I knew from experience simply asking Kevin “why haven’t you taken out the trash?” wouldn’t result in the trash being taken out so I demanded he did it much like I’ve seen his mom do when she came to visit. 

And he actually did. Or so I thought...

As he was hand picking every single thing from the trash pile into another bag I just couldn’t be arsed watching and went into my room. A while later I hear strange noises from the bathroom. Kevin flushes the toilet... waits 10-15 seconds... flushes the toilet again... and this just goes on and on. 

Knowing Kevin, I immediately get suspicious. So I open the door. I can not stress enough how stupid this is guys...

This kid is flushing down every single item of trash into the toilet one by one!!!!

I ask him WHY ON EARTH he would do that, instead of walking the short distance to throw it out and Kevin says he doesn’t know why. He just thought THATS WHAT I ASKED HIM TO DO. 

I’m sorry. I’m getting flashbacks just thinking about this.I work night security at a warehouse and one of my coworkers is revealing his true Kevin colors-

1: Kevin was not present when I was hired in January due to his second exposure to COVID. This despite living with someone undergoing cancer treatment.

2: Kevin believes whatever his father tells him without any understanding of the topic. He said that he refused to get the vaccine on the grounds that it contains the mark of the devil or a devil named ingredient. Even though he couldn't name the ingredient he insisted that it was true because his dad sent him a video on it. I googled it and discover the "ingredient" was a test protein used in testing vaccines in trials not in the vaccine itself.

3: Kevin seems to think he is the best and should be a ranked officer (basically a manager/supervisor)....except that he literally doesn't want to work. He calls out at least once a week or goes home early for some reason. And because our company is passive aggressive no one calls him out, they just cut his hours from 40 to 32, what he was working.

4: After one of his call offs he came back and told everyone he'd had car trouble and that instead of getting a ride to work he'd gone with a friend to a pool party. He was smiling about how he'd left us short handed to hang out with his friends.

5: Kevin wants to be a police officer or a firefighter. He thinks that his work as an SO will move him up the ranks as a police officer. Or that his personal bullet proof vest is equivalent to that of a fire fighters apparatus. He cannot do a mile to a mile and a half patrol without weights without being in "pain."This Kevin is an older specimen I'm only losely aquainted with, but what I have heard and seen leads me to believe I'm better off having some distance between us.
He considers himself a handyman and quite knowledgeable about... everything.
Don't they all?  
He visited a course in blacksmithing.
A friend asked him "So has your teacher shown you the trick with hammering a cold piece of metal to red hot yet?"  
Kevin made fun of him for believing such a thing could be possible, as an expert in physics, Kevin was certain this could never work.  
Apparently he told the teacher this funny legend... and the teacher promptly demonstrated this trick.

When he visited a shared workspace I frequent, he witnessed a couple of guys struggeling to cut a piece off of a large sheet of acrylic.
His helpfull advice was to heat the blade of the boxcutter with a lighter, so it would "melt" into the material.  
It did absolutely no such thing.

But back to my title and what makes him a true Kevin, not just a slightly confused buffoon:
He put some of his belongings into a shed.
Not satisfied with the security a padlock provided, he decided to build a mechanism that would drop an axe towards anyone who opened the double door, not just the side he always used.  
This resulted in the adult daughter of his girlfriend almost getting axed in the face when she went looking for some of her stuff, that is stored in the same shed.
Kevin, and his girlfriend, saw no problem with this.
The daughter broke off contact.Been awhile since I last posted. Kevin has given me plenty of material to work with. Sometimes I wonder how Kevin has made it to his 20’s. His logic just makes me want to drink.

Kevin believes gay people especially men are only gay cause “women are too much work” and it’s easier to get along with a man than a woman. Now Kevin likes women but has no luck getting one. 

Kevin believe that only British people live in the Cayman Islands. I gave up on proving him wrong. He also believes England is just basically London and that its. Nothing else is there expect London.

He has very strange views on consent and sexual assault that I won’t go into cause they are frankly disturbing.

His car has been broken down for threw months now. Parents aren’t going to fix and Kevin still paying insurance on a car that hasn’t moved in three months. 

I witnessed him cry cause Burger King was out of chicken sandwiches. 

He’s still ordering strange packages online and has been ghosted by a guy whom he paid 70 bucks to for some “rare” cards. 

And he legit believes that babies replace a woman’s stomach when she get pregnant and once the baby is born, the stomach grows back.

Someone please send help and vodka. I don’t know much more I can take.

Edit cause I remembered one I forgot to add: When it comes to the situation over in Afghanistan, Kevin firmly that one we should not be getting refugees out cause and I quote “They need to stay. Their own people won’t kill them, they are only killing foreigners.” Secondly he has three solutions to the problem.

1: Bombing them. Sure innocent people would die but it worked with Japan and they forgave us so its cool. He also is convinced that no one really lives in Afghanistan so no one would miss it. 

2: Snipers.

3: Dogs who are trained to sniff out and attack only terrorists. 

Again please send vodka!*Background*

This happened in 2014. I worked for an Indian couple about the same age as me, and had met the husband because we both studied astronomy at the same university. He'd offered me a job at their store, which was closer to campus and offered to pay me slightly above minimum wage, so I was happy to accept when they invited me to meet their yogi outside of work (they followed some small yoga cult that I won't even TRY to explain because it involves magic diaries and a guy who psychically monitors your mental health). I ride with them to a large city 2 hours away, and am surprised to find that this religious leader I was meeting was an *extremely* pregnant 22-year-old white suburban mom who hosted private meditation sessions in her living room while entertaining her toddler son. This is our Kevina. (Fun sidenote, her husband wound up being a storyboard artist for a particularly-amazing animated show that had just become massively popular at the time, and he showed me the "ultraviolent cubist lesbian erotica" comic that had allegedly earned him the job, so that was neat.)

*The Kevinry*

Now, the first step to this meditation crash-course was for Kevina to just have a casual conversation with me to get to know me a bit. Fair enough. We get to talking about how Boss and I had met during an astronomy class, which triggers the following conversation:

Kevina: Oh my god! I **LOVE** astronomy! You know, I bet you can't guess what we're naming this one when he's born! *\*gesturing at her belly\**

Me: Oh, uh, there are a ton of great astronomers you could name him after, so I wouldn't have the slightest clue what to guess, haha. What did you pick?

Kevina: You have to GUESS! I'll give you a hint; it's the biggest star!

Me: Oh, so something relating to VY Canis Majoris? That's pretty cool. *\*Kevina looks at me like I'm speaking gibberish\**

Kevina: Huh? No, that's not a star! We're naming him Sirius! It's the biggest and most important star in the whole sky!

Me: Ohhh, okay, sorry, haha. That's still cool, though. But what do you mean by 'most important'?

Kevina: I thought you studied this? Sirius is the *highest level* of star. It's got the most points possible!

Me: I'm...sorry? What? I don't follow...

Kevina: Ugh, it's simple. So, you study stars, right? So you know that most of them are just basic 5-point ones. Some are bigger 7-point stars, but they're rare and more powerful. But Sirius is the only *9-point* star! It's like the king of stars! 

(I should note at this point that I can be kind of a dick when it comes to people saying stupid things, and by this point it's become physically painful trying to contain my laughter, but I was less successful at containing my sarcasm.)

Me: Oh, uh, that's weird, because, in astronomy, stars are physical objects that are basically just huge 3D blobs of super-hot plasma, big enough to fit thousands of Earths inside them, not the little shapes you draw. I think the points are just there to represent the general shape of a twinkling point of light, y'know? Sirius is still a good name, though! (I was genuinely trying NOT to insult the kid's name or be rude and didn't want her to take my correction the wrong way.)

Kevina: Huh? That's dumb. If stars were like that, then shooting stars would be WAY bigger!

Me: ... *\*looks at Boss with an "is she serious?" expression on my face\**

Boss: *\*looks at me with a look of embarrassment\**

Me: Shooting stars aren't actually stars. They're meteorites. Little chunks of rock and dust burning up as they pass through Earth's atmosphere, and only occasionally leaving behind big enough chunks to find on the ground. We get a really big one every several hundred million years or so that's a few kilometers wide and causes a lot of damage, like the one that killed the dinosaurs. But mostly they're tiny.

Kevina: That's the stupidest thing I've ever heard! You should get your money back from that school!

&#x200B;

At this point, seemingly mistaking my incredulity for embarrassment, Kevina gets back to the whole meditation thing and the rest of the visit goes on in awkward, meditative silence. Boss never invited me to a second meditation, and I don't know if he was more embarrassed about her beliefs or my willingness to argue with her over them. I'm still flabbergasted by the fact that this woman is apparently seen as a perfectly reasonable religious leader by a guy who literally majored in astronomy and physics.On mobile and English is not my first language, so excuse formatting issues and stupid language. Also it's gotten longer than I expected so bare with me. 

For some context: I work at a train dispatcher at a station where my signal box is right in between the platforms. To make things simple I have platforms 1, 2 and 3. To get to platform 3 you need to walk over the tracks of platform 2 (platform 1 is all the was on the other side of the station and has nothing to do with the rest or this story), so you're only allowed to go there when a train arrives there, the rest of the time we have chain to block people's path and signs to tell people to stay away when the chain is closed (both as a picture and in writing) but because Kevins and entitled people above the rules exist, we need to walk out and make sure that no one runs over the tracks whenever there's a train coming in on platform 2.If we don't and someone gets killed out of their own stupidity, we face prisontime.

On to the story:

It was sometime in between lock downs and I worked the evening shift and it was already dark, around 11pm, not long until closing time. A cargo train, transporting trailers (think flat carriages with the trailers on top and some empty carriages in between) was coming closer so I set the signals that they could just drive through. This train was supposed to drive over platform 2 and it did. Shortly before the train arrived at my station I went outside to make sure, no one was on platform 3 or on the tracks.
Enter Kevin (K) and his friends. A group of maybe five teenagers was hanging around the waiting area and came closer as they saw me leave the building (most passengers know that me walking out means a train is arriving). These boys were the only people other than me at the station, we don't see many passengers here which makes it nearly okay that we have to interact with them whenever there are questions even though that's not our job. 

K: Guys, come on, our train arrives!

Me: Nope, actually not, yours will arrive in 10 minutes though.

K: Oh, doesn't that one go to [next station]?

Me: It does, but it's a cargo train.

Kevin looked disappointed but shrugged and walked back to his friends. The train arrived (going through the station with 60-80km/h) and as soon as it got on the path over the tracks, I started walking back to my warm signal box.
I had nearly reached the door as I heard Kevin loudly adressing his friends.

K: I don't wanna wait, let's just take that one! Come on!

I turned around, not expecting anything, it's a bunch of teenage boys who want to be cool but Kevin actually walked towards the train, his eyes fixated on an empty carriage. His friends followed but more reluctantly. Peer pressure is a b*tch. 
I started worrying but still kinda hoped he stops and has a good laugh. Nope. Kevin got faster and I was too far away to grab him (grabbing him would also come close to assault so not a good idea anyway). I couldn't stop the train in time to prevent Kevin from killing (or at least severely hurting) himself but maybe I could stop Kevin. 

Kevin stepped on the white line that you shall not cross, especially when there's a train driving through.

Me: HEY!! (I yelled that as loud as I could, while starting to come closer again. I wouldn't go to prison for that little AH)

Kevin and his friends hadn't realized that I was still standing outside so they got startled and jumped backwards, before turning around to me. I gave them my best death glare and the boys understood, walking back to the waiting area.

I still waited outside until all 500m of the train had passed through and left my station just to make sure Kevin wouldn't have another stupid idea.
As their train arrived 10 minutes later, I watched them approach and enter really closely because after the stint with the cargo train I didn't trust Kevin not to try and jump in this train before it came to a stop (he actually looked like he was thinking the same thing but actually waited until the doors were open so he could enter).Hurray! Part 2 is finally here! If you missed part 1, [I gotchu fam!](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/p94smb/kevin_in_a_deli_part_1_of_2/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf)

A slight appetizer before the main course. Kevin and Female Coworker decide to try and weaponize the health department against the deli, swearing up and down that there was black mold. Kevin was so sure of this “black mold” that he even involved the health department. One store-management-panicked health visit later, the health department deemed the “black mold” to be…black tile grout

Still hungry for the main course? Good. When I was helping train Kevin, especially in closing duties, i stated that there are certain “shortcuts” that one could take—such as using the little shop vacuum for debris for cleaning the meat slicers and fryer resting station. I regret that phraseology. Aside from the fryer and slicers, the deli had the hot bar where you have the essentials and then the rotisserie oven. Every night, the grease trap underneath that had to be dumped. Instead of dumping like how it’s supposed to be dumped, he has an idea for a shortcut. A bad idea. Savvy readers will have guessed correctly that he used the shop vac to empty the grease trap. No, he did not clean it after and it sat for days. The rest of us all had the same idea: “I wasn’t the one who had such a boneheaded idea, I’m *not* gonna pick up the responsibility”

But wait, there’s more! This is r/StoriesAboutKevin, after all. A few days later after the Grease Trap Vacuuming, the department manager told him to take the vac and vacuum out the cold case slider thresholds. “Well, I won’t do that because the vacuum stinks and it will drive down sales!” *Record scratch* _did Kevin really say that?_ yes. Yes he did. The department manager, being 100% done with him the moment he was hired, disengaged. Perhaps out of sheer confusion and frustration.

Now, dear Redditors, I don’t know if you’ve smelled days old chicken grease that’s been sitting at room temperature; but it is the most convincing argument for vegetarianism I’ve ever come across. I’d like to say I have an iron stomach, but that was the closest I’ve come to vomiting from sheer odor. It was clear that Kevin, in his infinite pig headedness, wasn’t going to clean it. Likely because of the odor.



So, what ever came of Kevin? Shortly after this, a wholesaler owned by the same company opened up in a new development of the town. Kevin was among the first wave to transfer out there, much to our delight. Later, we met someone who worked at the same branch and same department he transferred to. She said that Kevin didn’t change much, focusing more on sabotage; he was still trying to pin health code violations on them, and was too daft to plant them. Kevin and his previously mentioned “friend” remained together, until she wisened up and metaphorically defenestrated him. Current whereabouts are unknown.Brief story from way back in the day.  I worked at a record store with my best friend, Jen, we were both in our very early twenties.  Our assistant manager was a nice enough guy in his mid-twenties, but less than bright.

I came into the store one afternoon to find Jen pretty distressed.  Turns out her stepmom, whom she adores, has a health issue and will need a hysterectomy.



Cue Kevin: "What's a hysterectomy?"

Jen: "They're going to remove her uterus.  She's devastated, because she was hoping to have kids with my dad."

Kevin: "I don't get why she's upset..."

Jen: ...

Kevin: "It's not like it won't grow back"

Jen, me, everyone within earshot: ...Presenting to you the dumbest man in earth... 

KEVIN! 

My brother Kevin (16M) has class every day first period in an auditorium and his schedule abbreviates it to "AUDI" as shortened. 

There is a brand of car called Audi. 

See where this is going? 

The mf drove to the nearest Audi car dealership and stood around for two hours wondering why his teacher wasnt there, before calling me in tears asking me to call the school, at which point we figure things out. 

Bruhhhhhhh!When I was younger and much dumber I married a Kevin.

Kevin is from Northern England, but moved to South Alabama to be with me. Lovely.

Kevin is a bit if a handyman. He's a trained welder and had built his parents a little summer cottage for their back garden. He was deservedly proud of that cottage, it was lovely. 

Unfortunately, Kevin also has a knack for finding the wrongest way to do something.

Kevin was here working on his truck. It was a recent purchase, but it was very used, so it needed some TLC. Kevin went and changed the oil, changed the brakes, and put in a new battery. It was running beautifully when he left the parts store. 

Later that day he tries to go to the store, but the truck won't start. 

He starts checking things over. The battery was new, so he knew that wasn't the problem. It didn't sound like the starter or alternator either. He decides it HAS to be the ignition.

I come home to him trying to pull the steering wheel off the car. He had the shroud and all disassembled and was trying to pull the airbag off. Luckily I stopped him before he seriously injured himself with that.

He ended up giving me the Silent Treatment for the evening because I tightened the battery cable and started the car. 

Unsurprisingly, we had issues. We separate amicably and move on with our lives.

He recently got engaged to a 30yo woman. He's 50, so there's a gap. 

She's got a good job as an accountant (he swears she isn't a TikTok Accountant). He repairs injection molding machines for a car parts factory. 

His Fiancee asked for a prenup, and he happily signed. 

Then she asks him to sign an NDA. Which he happily signs. 

I'm genuinely almost worried he's going to end up trafficked at this rate.I’ve been doing grocery work for 15 years this year and I’ve seen plenty of idiotic workers during that time. But the Kevin I’m about to tell you about was definitely the dumbest coworker I’ve ever worked with. Here are a few of his most memorable moments.

- I’m normally a third shift grocery worker, but the frozen lead was on vacation for the week and asked me to fill in for him while he was gone. While I was working, Kevin came up to me and asked me, “you doing frozen now?” Me, being a smart ass, said, “nope I’m doing drug GM.” He just looked at me confused and replied, “huh?” I basically had to explain to Kevin that I was making a joke. Even after explaining it to him he still didn’t fully get it.

- Kevin was 45 at the time. He would often use midwestern or southern words (ope, y’all, reckon). But I will never forget his use of the word “gots.” I don’t know about you, but I don’t know a single person over the age of 8 that uses the word “gots”. He uses it very often and it blows my mind every time.

- Kevin started off as a cashier/bagger. But he was so poor at both of his jobs he was reassigned to janitor. His biggest problem was that he would often drop what he was doing to talk to employees or customers. To give him credit, he is a nice guy but never was aware of his surroundings. On a random day when I was getting my groceries there, the cashier was checking me out while Kevin was right next to her talking her ear off. Finally she snapped and yelled, “GO ON YOUR BREAK, KEVIN!!!” He complied but he never fully understood why he was yelled at that way.

- Kevin also didn’t drive. The only vehicle he ever used was a bicycle and his wife would never let him use it. I don’t know what the circumstances were for that, but that is just sad when you’re that age and not allowed to ride a bike.

- Kevin’s wife is also 10 years younger than him and they have two little kids together (they’re doomed). On a random day, he and his wife were in the store shopping and they put on a show. Kevin was over looking for a cart at the corral and his wife was in line at customer service. The corral and the service desk are about 20 feet apart from each other but that didn’t stop Kevin and Kevina from screaming at each other from both ends. They were told multiple times to knock it off but they just kept arguing. It eventually led to the manager stepping in and threatening to throw them out if they didn’t stop. Once again, Kevin complied but didn’t fully understand what the problem was.

- as I stated above, Kevin was still a genuinely nice guy but was strictly tolerated by most people in the store. One of my other coworkers would straight up insult him, ridicule him and roast him right to his face. Kevin would always laugh and say that that’s what buddies do. Kevin had no idea that this coworker was being serious. Kevin also had it in his head that he was going to join us on third shift. My supervisor firmly said no and stated that Kevin would be found in a pool of his own blood by the following morning.

- Kevin would also regularly take huge dumps in the bathroom and never flushed. His regular diet of Taco Bell and fruit snacks didn’t help either. He was asked multiple times by management to please flush but he never would for some reason. We knew it was him because he would always probably state that he didn’t flush.

- Kevin eventually had to move back to Kansas to his old hometown but on his last day he wanted to take selfie‘s with several coworkers. Many complied just to be polite but Then he tried to hug and even kiss a few of the female coworkers. He was firmly told no and, you guessed it, had no idea why. Kevin is still in Kansas as far as we know and we haven’t heard from him since.

That’s about all the stories I have about Kevin. If I think of any more I will let you guys know.Hi everyone. I am very thankful for the criticism from my last post (due to my illiteracy). It helps a lot so I hopefully learn how to type better like learning the difference between Except and Accept. And among the comments I get are also questions. I will happily answer them before we get into the story.

First one is "Why didn't the cleaning agency pick out this pattern of events when my mother took over Karvina's jobs?" Well like most businesses, they mostly rely on computers and it is the computers job to calculate who gets which job. My mother has a fairly high star rating while Karvina has an average 2 stars. Since mum (No matter how sick or injured) will go to work, do her job properly and go home. So the computer calculated this and almost always my mum gets Karvina’s job.

Secondly, "Why didn't the old folks complain to the agency about Karvina's actions?" Well, old people are usually more polite to complain and it is a problem. There is even a list of elderly homes being under investigation for reports of maggots in elder's wounds and sexual assault. With my mum being polite and Kenny (The old man from the previous story) had enough of Karvina, he knows he picked the right cleaner. R.I.P for Kenny as he recently passed and some of his last words was to say to my mother "Thank you"

Lastly is "Isn't my aunt going deaf?" I can confirm that she isn't going deaf. She can hear fine, but she likes getting people listening to her so she can be the centre of attention. Trust me, this story shows she does listen but doesn't do what she was told.

Now onto the story with an added character

OP. Me also known as Easter. I am disabled and don’t mind any criticism. I obviously live with my parents, but I am used to it. Due to the lockdown, they definitely need me.

My mother. She is our Mount Vesuvius. She is calm at some moments, and yet erupts if there’s a problem. She is also caring and can put her ego aside to help people.

My father. He is tougher than you expect an older man should be. He had years of living on the streets from the age of 14 because he ran away from his abusive household and managed to build himself up by finding work. Nowadays he’s a handy man and helps my mum with cleaning sometimes.

Then lastly, my aunt Karvina. No relation. The type of woman you want to vote off the island first after spending an hour with her. She has an inflated ego, but is kind and generous when needed. 

It was before the dreaded plague and we are always too tired to cook anything since my parents work and I was going to TAFE. So we often cook up some minute meals or take out. Then my aunt Karvina decided to make us some food. It is nice for her to do it, but it turned out her cooking nearly killed my dad. She made mushroom stew one time and I can tell by smelling it, something was off. My dad has Diabetes and he can’t have certain foods due to his medication. One of those ingredients is garlic. And guess what she put in her food? A lot of it.  Mind you, he at least knows how to cook food without poisoning anyone. So my dad, being the best cook in the house, gave her some piece of advice.

Dad: To cook something, you don’t need to add so much garlic. Besides, I am not allowed a lot of it because of my medication.

Aunt Karvina: But the recipe requires it. If there’s less, it might ruin it. 

Dad: What was the recipe?

Aunt Karvina: It’s online and it specifically said 2 tablespoons of garlic.

Dad: You can add less. Less is more.

Aunt Karvina: But it might ruin it.

I searched for the recipe for mushroom stew online while they chat and using my inner Kevina brain, found the first result and checked it out. I read it carefully to be sure and…

Me: Ahh, you said it requires 2 tablespoons, right?

Aunt Karvina: Yeah

Me: It said 2 TEASPOONS, not tablespoons

She took a look at it and shrugged it off while saying “You’re not the chef.” 

Me: I have a Cert II in Home Economics and even I know you don’t add half a jar of spices and-

Aunt Karvina: Whatever, just try it. 

You can see visible steam coming out of my father’s ears when she cut me off. She even proceeded to give my dad a bowl of this death stew before we, including my mum, gave her a crowded death stare. That many stares on one person is enough to kill you more than the witch's poison in dad’s hands. We decided to give it to the dogs and went to get KFC. 

Edit: Sorry for scaring you guys about giving the dogs that much garlic and your right. We shouldn't have done that

You think after that, she at least learns from her mistakes. NOPE, she even cooks most of her food in water. I don’t mean rice or eggs, I am talking about a perfect pork roast, succulent lamb and roast beef. I can understand it can save on cleaning dishes and using that method for stews (and that can work), but you don’t add a cold roast on a deep pan, add water and not have it seasoned. My dad once again gave her cooking advice. 

Dad: Why does the pork look like it’s been through the gates of hell and back?

Aunt Karvina: I don’t know, I followed the recipe carefully this time.

Dad: How long did you have it in for?

Aunt Karvina: For about 2 hours. I even checked the clock.

It later turned out that her clock was broken and she left the roast in for 5 hours. She didn’t realise this because she was getting the tin asparagus, carrots and brussel sprouts ready for the dreadful looking meatloaf. To be honest, I was hearing “Life Is A Lemon And I Want My Money Back” by Meatloaf ringing in the distance. We ate that meatloaf and we got food poisoning.

She repeats this ongoing cycle of bad cooking and we later give up on her. She is a waste of brain cells at this point. She still is to this day cooking bad food for us, but we have a secret. As I am now out of TAFE and mainly spend my time at home, doing chores and among other things, I decided to do the cooking so my parents don’t get sick like last time. As for the food, we normally give it to the dogs.

By the off chance we invite her to dinner, she will often get excited when either dad and I cook. I guess she hates her own cooking as well. I don’t know. All I know is this is the end of the terrible cook. If you are interested in more stories from my aunt, let me know in the comments and see you later.When we first started taking, he mentioned his mother was annoying. I thought I understood because who has a perfect relationship with their mother?     


No no no no.... I had no idea a 60 year old woman could be such a **nightmare!** And then she visited our place for the weekend:  


* Kevina threw away some of our silverware. I asked three times not to help clean the table, but it didn't matter. She "helped out" anyways.
* We went to a local aquarium and ***SEVERAL TIMES*** we told her to stop banging on the glass for the animals to move. She also read it out loud on a sign "please respect the penguins' home & do not knock on the glass." None of this stopped her.
* Kevina refused to listen to answers to her own question. I am not kidding. She would ask you a question and then ask it again two minutes later. Or worse; Kevina would interrupt you answering to ask another, completely different question and then ask the first question again after (omg I hope that made sense because living through it did not).
* Her favorite past-time is giving unsolicited medical advice. Please note, I did not say **good** advice. Kevina was more than happy to tell us all about how "laundry smell" from fabric softener is actually toxic chemicals you are inhaling. Or that it's not illegal to take things from the back of the rack at the store because "did you know they put the expiration dates on the packages?"  


I'm grateful it was only a couple days or I may have ripped my hair out...This kevina just so happens to be my sister, this is a compilation of the dumbfuckery that she’s said, been told by her “gay work friends” and believes whole heartedly over the last ten years.

When I left school I was training for a qualification in general building operations, which requires me to wear a hard hat BY LAW, kevina saw this as me coming out and joining the village people.
I thought she was kidding at first, but she never let it go, to make matters worse, she takes a permanent marker and writes “yes, I am one” on the back of my hard hat.
When I report this to my lecturers and ask for a replacement, I’m thrown off the course for vandalising my p.p.e.

She never apologised or accepted blame.

So according to her logic, every construction worker and engineer on the planet is gay.

Next….I was working at a multiplex and had to wear the company uniform, including trousers, unfortunately the trousers only had front pockets and I wasn’t allowed to wear my own.
Now I usually carry a lot of stuff with me and keep them in my front and back pockets, (phone,wallet,keys and at the time cigarettes and a lighter) so I had to have all these things in my front pockets, which makes them bulge.

According to kevina’s “gay work friends” this means I’m gay, because I’m trying to make my balls look bigger for other men to see.
Not that I need trousers with more pockets or carry less things like the cigarettes! 

(smoke free since 2013)

Kevina thinks that me growing a beard makes me gay.
I’ve always wanted a beard since I was a little kid, and when I got my own place I grew a goatee and loved it (still have it today).
Kevina thinks that because I’m looking after my beard and trimming it, that I must be gay, because that’s what gays do.
I’d rather not look like I’m homeless and take a bit of pride in my appearance.

Now at one point, just to piss her off I grew my goatee long and made it into a rat tail, and to add to the look I also started wearing bandanas, just to see her reaction. (Still wear the bandana)

She practically threw a coming out party, as this was absolute confirmation of a gay man.

Truth was everyone thought I was a biker, only she came to the gay conclusion.

Eventually me and my best friend (who is gay) tried telling her that her “gay work friends”  were messing with her.
but she still insists that I’m just “in the closet”.

She says this despite the fact that she has met at least five of my ex girlfriends over the years and walked in on me mid coitus on multiple occasions, (no lock on my bedroom door).

At one point I looked her dead in the eye and said “kevina …I know this is going to be hard for you to understand, but I need you to accept this and me when I tell you that…I’m straight! I know that it’s hard for you to accept but it’s true .
I’ve always known, plus all those times in college and all the straight porn I watch just made me realise it sooner”
I’m not even joking , I did this just to get through to her.

So there you have it, apparently the gay uniform is a builders hard hat, bulging front pockets, a goatee and a bandana.

If you have any ideas on how to talk some sense into her PLEASE let me know, as she is driving me crazy with her stupidity.

Roast for grammar 

Anyone who wants this for YouTube help yourself.

Edit: thanks for all the comments, and tips on removing permanent marker from plastic hard hats, for more context on being booted from the course, some of the other guys on the course with me had vandalised their hard hats by melting holes in them with lighters, so the instructors adopted a zero tolerance policy on any vandalism to p.p.e.

Edit two: for everyone who thinks Kevina is in the closet and was projecting, I thought this as well for a while, but she got married and had kids since then.
I'm afraid she really is that stupid.I used to work for a company that has it’s own subreddit dedicated to the wild and…strange people that go there. Specifically, I was in the deli (imagine that, given the title). This will be a two part series, as the second part will solidify him as a Kevin, being so mind-numbingly dumb and deserves it’s own entry into this subreddit. I would like to see Rob of Karma Comment Chameleon pick this up, honestly. 

First, a little bit of background on Kevin. Kevin and I went to middle school together (little after the Xbox 360 released but was still red ringing) and were acquainted from that. It was about 7, 8 years since then (circa Nintendo switch release).  I _hated_ my middle school self so I wasn’t so keen on identifying myself. Kevin, on the interim, somehow managed to become a sailor with the US Navy. I don’t think he got up the ranking ladder, like at all.
Kevin was proud of his service, but not in the way you may think. He didn’t share about his time serving, but he had that “proud veteran” thing under his name badge. His proudest moment? He bragged about pulling a knife on his “friend” and spending time in the brig. He wore this like some sort of badge of honor, like someone spending a night in the drunk tank and claiming that they “spent time behind bars with the real thugs and gangstas”

It seemed like the military didn’t teach him a damn thing about discipline or work ethic. When he hired on and finished his training, he had a serious problem keeping focused and preferred to stand around and socialize. It never crossed his mind to pull out a salad or sandwich kit to maintain productivity (something that really ground the department manager’s gears). Then he took a liking to another deli employee. What little shred of productivity he did have, evaporated like a puddle of water in the Arizona sun. Him and the female coworker would stand behind the counter for hours and just shoot the shit just like it was a punch bowl social that they were getting paid to attend. At one point, they decided to sneak off for her first break and his last break. They were gone for HOURS and both came back extremely sweaty and breathing hard. The other deli employee realized what had happened, he went home out of pure shock and disgust.

Our story ends here, dear fellow Redditor. But fear not, because Pt. II will be in your lap before you know it. Until then, guten Tag.This is my first post also sorry if formatting is weird bc I’m using my phone to type this.

My friend has a buddy named Kevin (not his real name) and he is a total idiot both when he’s drunk and when he’s sober.

This story starts with my friend going on a hike with a group of his friends and Kevin. Kevin was plastered drunk while everyone else was sober. They walked up this pathway where there were wood chips all over the ground from a tree getting struck by lighting day’s prior. So, Kevin in his drunken state decides to pick up one of these wood chips and spotted a couple hawks that were sitting on a giant rock. He then throws this wood chip at this hawk and hits the hawks body. The hawk gets pissed off and attacks Kevin while my friend’s group scatters and hides from the hawk. Kevin tries fighting off the hawk but it only makes it angrier and it scratches the shit out of Kevin’s arm. My friend describes how much his arm was bleeding and torn up bad and he had to take him to a hospital. 

Later by the time my friend and Kevin get back to Kevin’s house to let his dad know what happened. Kevin’s dad explodes when he hears what his son did. Kevin tried to explain that he was drunk at the time but his dad shit him down by explain this part “I don’t care if you were drunk or high off acid, you don’t throw shit at a hawk and expect to not get attacked!!” Kevin’s dad also said more stuff but I couldn’t remember all of it.

After that whole event, my friend came up the brilliant nickname for Kevin. And he called him *Hawkeye* and as my friend told me this story i bursted out laughing because of the nickname he gave Kevin 

Moral of the story: don’t piss of hawks, drunk or not.

Also I’ll be posting soon about that one time when he thought you could hear a train coming by getting on the tracks and putting your ear on themGroup chat conversation about lockdown in Sydney

Someone: I’m so pissed off I can only go 5km from my local government area (local council)

Kevin: lucky you I can only go up to 5000m 😫 

Me: can you convert that to kilometres

Kevin: I don’t remember how

Me: Have a guess

Kevin I dunno like 2 kilometres or something right 

Me: 🤦‍♂️🤦‍♂️🤦‍♂️🤦‍♂️🤦‍♂️Because of his interesting looking face. It's charming, charismatical intimidating face that is just so pleasant to look at.
Most people don't realize it, they think oh.. what a great actor, great acting.. but Jack Nicholson got very rare combination of features that are well put together so they hired him to play roles so people buy ticket on movie to look at his face. 
Watching his movies you realize how boring are faces of people around him***This happened years ago (2017), so I don't remember the details...***

**Some background: I'm very interested in Outer Space and space travel, since my friends like to hear about Outer Space stuff as well, that's how we got to the topic.**

&#x200B;

# The story:

An old acquaintance of mine introduced me to his friend, who we will call Kevin in this story.

After a short introduction, I mentioned the OSIRIS-REx mission.

When I started talking about it, Kevin enthusiastically asks me: "You think humans will ever go to Space?"

Was a bit dumbfounded, so I just said: "We already did..."

Kevin was "suprised".

&#x200B;

When I asked him did he ever hear about the Moon landing, he said that he thought it was a sci-fi movie.

When I asked him how did he think OSIRIS-REx got into Space, he said he thought it was a meteor (OSIRIS-REx was a research sattelite that landed on an Asteroid for samples).

When I asked him about Mars Rovers, he just said "Those are cars, dum!" or something like that...

YES, he replaced Land Rovers with Mars Rovers.

&#x200B;

At that point I could do nothing but show him pictures (We were kids back then so we didn't understand the complex scientific part of how spaceships and sattelites worked).

Kevin didn't believe me for a while when I told him some of those were taken in the 60s/70s.

Don't remember much of what happened later, but I remember that Kevin looked like went through enlightenment.

&#x200B;

I didn't see Kevin since the acquaintance moved to another part of town a month or so later.

&#x200B;

EDIT: Thanks for 350 upvotes!First up the usual...on mobile, English is my second language and I have dyslexia so be kind when it comes to correcting my poor excuse for grammar and spelling.

On with the show in 9th grade I went to school with a slightly perverted Kevina...who was also not the brightest she was by no means stupid but sometimes she asked really dumb questions...this is one such a occasion.

In Biology class we were learning about evolution and fossilization when near the end of the lesson our teacher asked if our class had questions then Kevina in all of her brilliance asked

'Do bunnies, like melt after they die, like before they're fossilized do they melt' 

Our class was so quiet you could hear a pin a drop before our class bursted out laughing, the teacher calmed the class down and asked Kevina how she came to such a...brilliant conclusion.

'Well become in order to fossilize something it has to go into the ground right? So the bunny would have melt!' 

...I think there are no words in the English or German language to describe to how our teacher probably felt.

If there are enough upvotes I will post about Kevina's misadventure with geography

Update: here's the geography story for those who asked 
https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/p79iqo/kevin_goes_to_america/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=shareFollow up post about a pilot in our organization.  I flew with him for two years when he was a copilot, almost a year with him as a pilot in command.  I knew him for a year after his wings were clipped when he was a receptionist until he left the org.  He did improve so much as a pilot over three years that it got down to just once a flight did I think he would kill me.  As if that wasn't enough, I had to deal with Boss Baby who was persecuting any good aviators and forcing us to keep flying with Manbaby.

Once, Manbaby was the pilot flying on an instrument approach into an airport when we got a call from ATC.  "(Callsign), Approach, I have a Navy bird at your twelve o'clock, five miles, co-altitude.  I need you to do a left three sixty in place for spacing."

Manbaby: ... ...

Me:  "They're calling you.  You need to do something."

ATC:  "(Callsign), Navy bird twelve o'clock, now three miles, I need you to do the left three sixty now."

Manbaby:  ... ...

Me:  "They're calling you.  You need to turn now."

Manbaby:  ... ...  (happily flying towards the Navy bird)

Me:  "I have the flight controls.  Approach, left three sixty in place now!"

ATC:  \*big sigh\*  Thank you.

Me:  "Manbaby, didn't you hear that call?  What were you thinking?"

Manbaby:  "Oh...oh?  Oh, da call?  Da call?  Oh...da call."

I just flew tonight with a guy who was Manbaby's main copilot.  He gave me this gem.  Copilot was the pilot flying and Manbaby was the pilot monitoring for a night landing at a small, very dimly lit airport.  Crossing the threshold of the runway, copilot is frantically searching for the runway.

CP:  "Manbaby, I can't see the runway.  Where's the runway?"

Manbaby:  "Oh...oh?  Oh, da runway?"

CP:  "I can't see the runway!"

Manbaby:  "Oh...oh?  Oh...I forgot to turn on the lights."  \*click\*

Poof, there's the runway.

About every third landing he would want to land on the wrong runway.  Our main airport has two sets of parallel runways.  One example:

Tower:  "(Callsign), winds 060 at 12, cleared to land, Runway Four Left."

Manbaby:  "(Callsign), clear to land Four leff."  \*Lines up for 4 R\*

Me:  "Manbaby, what are you doing?  They told you Four Left!"

Tower:  "(Callsign), what are you doing?  There's a jet coming in right behind you for Four Right!"

Me:  "I have the flight controls!"

And he would frequently tell me to land on the wrong runway or level at the wrong altitude.

So, I called people from his previous office to get the scoop and he was utterly worthless, but it was a case of pass the poop sandwich.  I do wish I had known all of that beforehand though.  One guy told me that Manbaby had to do an orientation for a new hire and he was asked by the supervisor to go along with Manbaby.  Manbaby mixed up the files and told the new hire that he was fired and the guy freaked out and the other guy had to save the meeting.  The supervisor then told the other guy to do all of the reports and orientation, but to give Manbaby the credit.  

I don't know it for a fact, but I'm pretty sure it was that supervisor who pulled strings to get Manbaby the flying position.

And one final Manbaby reception story:

Manbaby was tasked to deliver a package to a high level VIP and to fill out forms that went with it.  Manbaby arrives in the neighborhood and he's forgotten the package and forms, but what the hey, just press on right.  Manbaby knocks on the door and there's no answer.  It's a safe, gated community, so the door is unlocked.  Manbaby just walks on in.  He wanders around for a bit before two women see him and start screaming.

Mother and daughter:  "Ahhhhh, get out, who are you?  Get out!"

Manbaby:  "Oh...oh...I have to deliver a package."

M & D:  "What?  To who?"

Manbaby:  "Oh?  Oh...oh?  Oh, da package?  Ummm, I don't know."

M&D:  (Starting to think they know what this is about)  "Well, where's the package?"

Manbaby:  "Oh?  Da package?  Oh...oh, da package...da package.  Ummm, I don't know."

I heard the story from a third party and so I went to the daughter, who works admin in our office.

Me:  "Hey, D, I have something I need you to confirm for me."

D:  "Sure, OP, what's up."

Me:  "Manbaby."

D:  \*audible growl\*

Me:  "Ohhhh, must be true!"

The best part was that Boss Baby had the ever loving stuffing beaten out of him professionally because he assigned Manbaby the task.I used to know a young girl, approaching her teens who was considered "troubled". This budding teen was bound and determined to experience all life had to offer, though it was not to partake in the cultural arts or intellectual stimuli that was abundantly available to her; she'd have none of that. She preferred a more dramatic life (much to her family's chagrin), something more likely to be made into a dramatic TV mini-series or an after-school special.

Part of Kevina's grand plan included assisting the local crack cocaine dealer with weighing and packaging his "goods". This after school activity would in some ways indicate that Kevina had some basic intellectual capacity. I was wrong. I learned just how wrong I was the day I was asked to take Kevina to see a psychologist to have a battery of tests run to determine where she was cognitively/intellectually. In other words - and IQ test. 

As a "reward" for not cursing out the test-giver and not hitting kicking, or biting anyone, I took Kevina to get some ice cream. On the way, I asked her about the test and how she felt like she did. Kevina was certain she "made an A" and said it was easy - "well, except for when the lady asked if I could tell her what the difference was between a chicken and a cow". I waited for her to go on, but since she just left that oddity hang in the air, I prompted her - "so how did you describe the differences?"

Kevina turned and looked at me and shrugged her shoulders - I asked her "do you know the difference between chickens and cows?" - Kevina said "not really".

Ok. I began to ask her how many legs a cow has and how many a chicken has. I asked if both had wings. You know - basics. I didn't want to confuse her with mammals vs birds just yet. Kevina was unable to answer these questions. 

That night I thought back to how I learned about animals - besides seeing real animals, I was read to and learned to read AND I had a "See and Say" - you know the toy that you pull a string, the arrow spins and points to an animal and goes "The cow says moooo"! How did this child miss these clues? She was not raised poor or by dumb people. She either is playing at being stupid or much more horrifying, she really is this stupid!*This was an anonymous personal account first published in the 2001 Darwin Awards under the name 'Tube Snake'. I have nothing to do with this story, and any first-person pronouns refer to the original OP, not to me.*

Last year my medical internship at a local hospital brought me a patient who deserves recognition. His problem was listed as "FBIP" which a nurse explained meant "Foreign Body In Penis." I found a middle-aged, slightly disheveled hippie lying on the bed looking dazed. His girlfriend was standing silently behind him. His story was as interesting as I'd expected.

Several days previously he was smoking marijuana while his girlfriend was out of town, and he decided to see what would happen if he snaked a three-foot length of aquarium tubing into his penis. When 6 inches still protruded, he tried to pull it out -- but it was stuck!

This predicament apparently didn't teach him a complete lesson. He then threaded some Weedwacker wire through the center of the tubing, which also became stuck. He decided to sleep on it and hope for the best.

The next day, it was still stuck. He tried to go about his day as usual, hoping it would just fall out on its own, but had trouble doing his gardening with tubing hanging out of his penis. So he cut the tubing flush with his skin. Another day went by.

He finally realized that the foreign objects were impeding the flow of urine, and despite his embarrassment he needed to go to the Emergency Room.

We tugged and pulled on what little we could grab of the tubing, and he wasn't kidding when he said it was stuck. X-rays showed the tubing and Weedwacker wire kinked and knotted in his bladder. A urologist took the man to surgery and, using a scope forced through the already-crowded urethra, managed to cut the knot and pull out the tubing.

Needless to say, that is one stoned experiment the hippie will not try again.

(Note: Since he was probably able to get the tubing into his penis without it hurting him, there is reason to believe that he had probably done this sort of thing many times before.)This happened a few months ago. I was talking to a lovely, sweet woman about how the world seemed to be opening back up (lol, sike) and how there seemed to be this shared sense of exuberance and hope. Everyone was ready to get out there and party.

She looks at me, doe-eyed, and goes,”I know! It’s like an Arab Spring!“

I stared at her, astounded. Unfortunately, we were interrupted before I could ask her to clarify, but the only thing I can think is that she either meant an “Indian Summer” or “Spring Awakening”. Or maybe a rumspringer?

Either way, definitely wrong. 

Bonus: my husbands coworker (actually a genius tho), liked to say, “we’ll burn that bridge when we come to it”Mandatory disclaimer, I’m on my phone…

Also, Disclaimer about this SubReddit, please leave all brain cells, logic, and your shoes at the door before entering the world of Kevin

One more thing, this is more of a rant to take the weight off my chest, so sorry if I speak rudely.

If you didn’t understand the title, I have a Kevin who thinks that VTubers like Snuffy on Twitch, is a real life raccoon girl. He officially makes 2 Kevin’s in my life…

Kevin 1 is my blood related cousin, he’s named Kevin. He’s a very sweet and smart kid, he’s the kid that bullies will protect. He was born with a deformed skull where his brain got about a third of it squished at birth. He’s had surgery done, my uncle teases him that him getting squished made him smart. That’s good Kevin, now bad Kevin…

I like to watch VTubers, I’m not the “SHUT UP AND TAKE MY MONEY!!!” guy, I’m the “I’m bored and want to watch something entertaining…” guy. So I started watching this VTuber called BungoTaiga. Bad Kevin walked in and here’s the conversation that follows… roughly… he stumbles his words, BADLY so I have to translate Kevin for you…

BK = Bad Kevin

BK: Whatchu watchin?

Me: Oh, just a type of YouTuber…

BK didn’t know what Twitch was, so YouTuber was easier for his brain than a VTuber Twitch Streamer… Lord help me…

BK: Hey she’s kinda cute.

He says this gesturing to Taiga’s avatar. BK doesn’t believe in anything LGBTQ+, so telling him that Taiga was a guy that was a bit too feminine in Kevin language was gonna make MY brain short circuit.

Me: Taiga just makes love videos and plays Zombie games.

BK to his credit: Oh, ok…

Then Taiga does some jokes and references that are exclusive to Taiga…

Me in my head: Oh shoot…

BK still a BK: She’s cute I wonder if she has a boyfriend?

I was shocked that BK didn’t recognize Taiga’s adult humor jokes. Now I’m beginning to worry for MY sanity, every time he opens his mouth it’s like my brain says good bye cruel world and kills itself…

He then told me to message Taiga, I tried to tell him that I don’t know Taiga, that’s when he drops bombshell one on me.

BK: If you watch her then you know her. 

Me: Yes I know Taiga for videos, not mu-

BK cuts me off: Then tell her I want a date this Friday. I’ll take her fur but she better not shed in my car.

Then it struck me, BK thought that Taiga’s VTuber Avatar was a real person and I knew her personally. He looked at me and (honest to God) begged me on his knees to tell Taiga to go out with him.

Me struggling to speak Kevin: Taiga lives in another state, sadly no date for you as the drive could be hundreds of miles. 

I thought I saved this situation, but what BK did next made me pissed, he grabbed my microphone that I had just replaced from his last BK moment and pushed the talk button to tell Taiga that he wanted to go on a date. Of course that didn’t happen. 

Me: BK, Taiga is streaming and can’t be interrupted.

BK: Then what about her?

He gestured to Snuffy. I felt my soul die, my brain go off to hang itself, and my faith in public schools go belly up…

I shut off my computer with Ctrl+Alt+Delete and walked away. For the next hour he started in on how I could keep the girls to myself and how selfish I am… 

Me fed up with his crap: If you want to go see them, you should get a job and get at least $50,000 to pay for the trip and a hotel for when they do meet you.

Honestly I was expecting him to ask me to call them and see if they’re were available. No, this guy went job hunting and texted me, thanking me for giving him a reason to get a job. His parents called me later that week to also thank me.

I felt bad that I used fictional CGI raccoon girls and whatever Taiga is to trick him, but him getting a job and getting an honest pay to see them made me feel even worse…

Then a week later he came back and asked me if I could hook him up. I no longer felt any guilt.

Me giving up on this idiot in front of me: No, they just announced that they were dating someone.

BK: Oh, damn I wanted to feel what fur in bed was like.

Back to VTuber avatars being real entities walking down the street. My brain just threw in the towel and peaced out…

I just went inside and told every mutual friend that he was hopeless. He still bugs me about it. Dammit BK take a freaking hint!!!



Edit: Thanks for the response, though the first Kevin I mentioned was the good Kevin. BK (Bad Kevin) is just a brain dead friend/lunatic who lives near me and is the subject of this story.

But here’s where things get interesting. About a week after this story took place, he found what VRchat is. Here’s yesterday’s debacle…

BK: Hey I heard that VR has a Skype!

In all fairness, VRchat is kinda like Skype, so I’ll let that one slide.

Me: Yeah, so? 

BK: Could I use it to call them?

Me: Christ almighty! Take a hint BK!!! They are already dating people, live hundreds of miles away, and are NOT REAL!!!

He looked like I told him Santa wasn’t real…

BK: Wha?

Me: It’s just CGI avatars, it’s a costume made by a computer!

BK in his most glorious moment: They can bend air?

When I said avatar, he thought The Last Airbender… I want to save any last bit of brain cells and get him out.

Me: No, that’s just a cartoon, NOT real. These VTubers are people in costumes, NOT real. You have no brain that exists, REAL.

BK: I thought that girls like a buff guy, not someone with brains.

Me: If that was true, you would need a personal security team to keep all the girls off of you, but it’s not. Girls don’t want some brain dead git causing them trouble and embarrassing them.

BK looked like I just told him the winning lottery numbers.

BK: So all I need to do is get a security team and girls will want me?

At this point I was done with him, I called my dog who promptly came over. Now I’ll give BK some points for IQ when he saw my dog and bolted. My dog is a pit bull, cattle dog mix. She’s a big girl, a nice 127 pound 5-year old who acts like a puppy and has never hurt a human or other dog in her life. She’s a teddy bear, looks scary, but is sweet as pie. BK saw Big Doggy and ran, she looked at me and gave me a look that basically said, WTF just happened? She got a treat and extra head pats. Also, she’s taller than a 6 foot person on her hind legs. 

If anything happens more with BK, I’ll post. He’s a danger to everyone and himself…

Update/Edit 2: 

He saw that I wrote this on Reddit. This was the phone call I got… End my suffering from his stupidity…

BK: Hey I found the story on RedBot.

Me: What?

BK: RedBot, you know, where people talk about parents?

Me: You mean Reddit?

BK: RedBot. It’s RedBot!

I wasn’t wanting to get into it with him again…

Me: Ok, so you found the story, why did you call?

BK: Now the VTubers can see me and will want to get to know me!

He said this like he was a genius who discovered something incredible. His ego was inflating by the second…

Me: Not likely, they don’t like crazy simps like you.

BK: What’s a simp? And don’t girls like crazy guys?

I put the phone on mute, went to the freezer, grabbed an ice pack and put it on my forehead. I wanted to try and calm down. This guys makes calm go out the damn window.

Me back on the phone: They don’t want crazy, the only girl I know who wants crazy is the neighbor down the street!

BK: So the neighbor is Snuffy and Taiga?!?

I realized that I just escalated this far more than it needs to be. With every bit of my brain killings itself off to be on his level I said.

Me: The neighbor down the street is dating someone, and Raccoon Girls, Mouse Girls, any kind of VTuber girl is gonna stay with the one they’re dating, because the animal that they are stays with their mate…

BK: So they have a permanent date!

*Angels singing Hallelujah! Balance restored in the Force! My brain performing necromancy on itself!*

Me: Yes!

BK: Ok, so does that me-

I hung up, blocked him, blocked his family, blocked him on EVERY SOCIAL MEDIA ACCOUNT I HAVE!!! I then locked the door, turned on Netflix and watched DeathNote for the second time.

If he sees this post update, Take a f******g hint you dumb**s! They are not real! They are computers! I WON’t TAKE ANY MORE OF YOUR CRAP KEVIN!!! IF YOU CALL ME OR COME NEAR ME, I’M CALLING THE POLICE!!! YOU STAY THE HELL AWAY FROM ME!!!

Thanks for reading!

Edit 3: He saw this ending part… His answer was through another phone call from someone else’s phone. His mother let him use the phone after he begged her to call me for a hook up… BK, but you need to stop.

BK: Why can’t you let me meet them?

I was done with him and his antics.

Me in an Australian accent: Sorry mate, I don’t reckon I know who ya mean. 

BK: Oh, sorry wrong number…

He hung up. Then called again

BK: Dude, tell me where-

Me now in French (thanks French teacher in high-school): Bonjour monsieur, que puis-je faire pour vous? 

That translates to: Good afternoon sir, what can I do for you?

BK: SPEAK ENGLISH THIS IS AN AMERICAN PHONE!!!

I internally groaned…

Me: J’ai peur de ne pas comprendre, qu’es-

He hung up. I tried to say: I’m afraid I don’t understand, what are you telling about?

He didn’t call back, he came to the door to see if I was home while.

BK: COOOOOKKIIEEEEE!!!!!! THE NAZI’S HAVE STOLEN YOU NUMBER!!!!!!!!!!

I swear I’m done with his BS. I just called the cops saying that some crazy person was screaming about Nazi’s at my front door and wouldn’t go away. He kept knocking…

Me using a fake voice (I can mimic a voice, like Kermit, and Arnold Schwarzenegger): I don’t know who you are but you better leave!

BK: Sniffy is that you? Or is it Tundra? 

Sniffy = Snuffy
Tundra = Taiga

Kevins everyone… 

I just waited and watched the cops pull him away from my door he was screaming the whole time about his friend not setting him up with dates and how the Nazi’s stole his phone number. One cop came to the door, I knew who she was, having a cop as a family friend can be useful at times. 

FFC (Family Friend Cop): Cookie, what the hell happened?

I just shared the post with her…

FFC: Why am I not surprised?

They took BK away and he’s not allowed within 100 feet of me. Not allowed to call, text, or follow me on social media. His parents were not angry at me, they were just apologetic AF, and I couldn’t blame them, they tried for 19 years to help that moron. They told me that they won’t let him near me, and they’ll send him to his uncle’s farm in Texas so I don’t have to deal with him. Sometime in the next 3 days, he’s gonna be in Texas. No more BK.

If y’all want more stories, just let me know!

Go Texas, God help you with that dumbass…

Edit #4: He called me from Texas…

KILL ME NOW LORD!!! 

This brain dead git had decided to call me earlier today, he called and here’s the convo… roughly, I kinda zoned out and ignored him after a bit…

BK: Hey OP, did you get your phone back from the Nazi’s?

Me internally groaning: Yes, and I’m busy getting ready for work what do you want?

BK: Is there a way to call Tundra or Snoffy here in Texas?

Me finally snapping: NO THERE’S NOT YOU BRAIN DEAD F===!!! JESUS F=====G CHRIST, LEAVE ME ALONE!!!!!!! YOU WILL NEVER CALL ME AGAIN!!! 

BK: But I want to get a date man, it’s been a while and I’ve worked up…….

I tuned him out and continued getting ready for work. I went over my mental checklist for work:

1. Badge, Check
2. Bag, Check
3. Lunch, Check
4. Water Bottle, Check
5. Uniform (it’s more of a safety vest), Check
6. Earbuds, Check
7. Schedule, Check
8. Car Keys, Check
9. Face Mask, Check
10. Phone, where is my phone…

I went to my desk and saw that BK was still on the line trying to guilt me about not having a date with VTubers… I spent 26 minutes getting ready and this dumb==s was talking the whole time. I picked up the phone, and hung up on him when he talked about how amazing of a guy he is… I blocked any number that is associated with him, programmed my spam filter for ANY calls and texts from Texas. I am done, if there’s an update, I will fly out to Texas, and strangle him…

I’m done with this idiot. And to any YouTubers who want to use this as a video, do so, just show the world how stupid r/storiesaboutkevin are…TV series explanation.
People think he was alone and was paying for sex. Of course, its not true. 

Charlie was attractive man with good height and very interesting, charming, unique looking face. And he didn't use hookers

If you watched this show, you will see itWe were having an election in my city.  I got back from lunch and had this conversation with my coworker, Kevina:

Kevina:  FYI, Dan (our other coworker) is taking this afternoon off.

Me:  Okay, cool.  Is he going to go vote?

Kevina (primly):  I have no idea.  He didn’t say, and I didn’t ask, because it’s none of my business.

Me:  Fair enough.

Kevina:  Hey, you voted yesterday, right?  Who’d you vote for?

Me: …Because he was happy all his life, no stress, people always treated him like a god(His words, he said his face was doing all the job)

And Stanley Kubrick, not attractive guy(but necessarily ugly either) who was always behind the screen. He had to work his ass off, and was always stressful, tired of things. His heart and breath couldn't stand that longNow, u/GenetixJ reminded me of a Kevina I worked at the pharmacy with. As you can probably tell, I am not them, and don’t know them. On mobile, I tend to digress so my apologies in advance. 

I work in a certain corner pharmacy. This tech was hired at least 6 months after I. Kevina had the caring nature roughly the equivalent of sand paper. Kevina also didn’t understand or care about HIPAA. Certain things don’t necessarily fall under it, but it’s on a need-to-know basis. I recognize one of our regular patients and greet her as Ms. [last name]. I make a soft quip to Kevina in passing how she’s a regular. Kevina, at full volume, responds with “oh, like [firstname lastname].” Regular patient doesn’t need to know who else fills with us. If we wouldn’t talk about Johnny Depp (for example) filling with us, why should Joe The Plumber be any different?

Not many techs *LIKED* the drive-thru. Kevina was no exception to this. But she had a tendency to bellyache about everything. Her claim to fame was how our city’s demographics were (and I quote) “assholes”. Most of our patients aren’t entitled and a majority are either silent generation/boomers, or young Gen X/older millennial family units. They really don’t get enraged unless they already have a stick up their ass or feel that we didn’t adequately explain what’s going on to them. _HERE’S THE KICKER, KEVINA WENT TO WORK AS A CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE FOR A CERTAIN BLUE CELLULAR CHAIN_When I was at school, there was that one music teacher we'll call Kevina. She retired a year after I graduated so there's no more strange stories about her around the school.

For a soft start, Kevina never understood personal space. She would come uncomfortably close while talking to someone. If you stepped back, she'd follow no matter if you were a student, parent or teacher. She actually scared my mum away with that behavior alone.
But that wouldn't make her a Kevina.

But these two anecdotes do:

One day Kevina came to school with a huge cast on her arm. We had hoped for a singing lesson so we wouldn't actually do something but as she couldn't play the piano with the cast we changed tactics, knowing that she tends to talk a lot when asked.
"OMG Mrs Kevina, what happened?"
She then started to tell us that she was mowing her lawn and something got stuck in the mower. Kevina decided to pull out whatever it was and reached between the blades - while they were still running! It's like a miracle that she didn't lose a finger that day. We all were shocked and told her, she was lucky that her arm would recover fully.
Kevina didn't share more details but let us listen to a CD instead of actually teaching. I believe it was Mozart but I can't remember correctly.


Another time we came to her lesson with Kevina nowhere to be found. The class she should've taught before us told us that she never showed up and that neither the other teachers nor the school's secretary knew where she was - she didn't call in but had missed out on three lessons at that point.
We kinda hoped that she wouldn't show up for our lesson as well and it seemed like we would be lucky - until Kevina showed up, half an hour in the lesson.
Again, we didn't want to learn and were honestly curious so we asked why she came that late and if she was okay. And again she told us:
For whatever reason Kevina couldn't open her front door as she wanted to leave. She was sure someone had stuck dirt in the lock so she couldn't unlock the door. She never thought about calling in, getting help or whatever but instead stood in front of her front door for three hours, trying to get out.
If you read attentive you may have realized that I talked about a front door, implying there's a back door. And there actually is one.
IT TOOK KEVINA THREE HOURS TO REMEMBER HER BACK DOOR SO SHE COULD LEAVE THE HOUSE!
At this point I need to say that Kevina always had a trolley with her since a handbag or a backpack would be way too easy choices and for whatever reason she couldn't just carry the trolley like a handbag. But since the area around her back door wasn't even enough for the trolley she needed to walk around the house open the front door (which was magically possible from the outside) to get her trolley out.
Props to her though, she didn't lock herself in again.Not sure if this belongs here as I recently found this sub, but here it goes:

I work in a pharmacy chain. If you ever want to know why your meds took so long to fill it’s because I just spent 20 minutes talking to Kevin…. On my 3rd day on the job I get a call from Kevin… Kevin is very upset, it seems he ‘almost’ put his arthritis gel for his hand up his rectum and he’s very concerned. 

Kevin: How can a major chain run a pharmacy and not know how to put warning labels on medications. I almost put my arthritis gel up my rectum! I just had rectal surgery and I filled my pain meds at your pharmacy. When I picked them up <cue sarcastic voice> “the cute girl at the register gave me my meds packaged in a bag with a fake smile. How was I supposed to know it wasn’t supposed to go in my rectum?”

A medication mix-up is a major thing. Arthritis gel isn’t used after surgery. So I need more details. “I’m sorry to hear that (and I was- I’ve spent a great deal of my professional life looking at errors and trying to fix them in an error-prone system). “What medication was it? It has recently been available without a Rx, did you ask for it or have you had it before?”
Kevin: “Yes I’ve had it before, I got 3 big tubes of it for my hands two months ago, its how I knew it was arthritis gel!! Does nobody there check the meds before they go out?”

Me, now thinking this is a setup… “Yes, I see that you did get three tubes, and that was a one month supply. Did your surgeon tell you it was also for rectal use?”

Kevin: “he didn’t need to tell me that! Why did you give it to me? It burned so much around my incisions that I called the surgeon”

So now we’ve established that Kevin did indeed shove his arthritis meds up his rectum, yet more juicy details are needed for a report.

Me: “OK sir, I see that you did get your post-surgery pain meds from us last week along with more arthritis gel. I’m not seeing the link that led you to use it rectally”. By now I was enjoying the conversation and using the term rectally loudly. Kevin was on the phone, so there was no concern about violating his privacy or embarrassing him. 

Kevin: “I was getting my pain meds for my surgery. You should have told me they’re not for rectal use”.

Me: “I’m looking at the label that was attached to each box and tube of the rectal gel. The directions are quite clear, stating “apply to hands up to 4 times a day”. At this point Kevin was getting annoyed I wasn’t understanding things.

Kevin: “Well I didn’t see it. When someone gets surgery meds they aren’t expecting arthritis meds”. Hmm… fair enough I think. But we fill prescriptions for people for multiple maladies very frequently. 

Me: “OK Kevin, now, how are you taking your pain pills for your rectum?”
Kevin: “I swallow them, do you think I’m some kind of moron?” Ahh… Kevin has laid down the gauntlet.
Me: “well Kevin, tablets and capsules can be taken by any orifice. “
Kevin: “it saws on the bottle to take a tablet BY MOUTH every 6 hours for pain. Jesus you must be dense. Is there a manager I can speak with?” Oh, now he’s gone Karen on me. 

Me: “I am in charge of the pharmacy today. Now, let me get this straight so I know I have all the details. You put your arthritis gel up your rectum. This is a gel you’ve previously gotten before. And your pain medication you took by mouth, and you’ve never had this before. You read the directions for the pills but not the gel”.

Kevin: “yes that’s exactly the problem! You should have told me not to shove it in my rectum.”
Me: “I can understand your dilemma. However, you receive medicaid. Federal laws dictate that we must counsel you on each and every fill. I can see your signature from where you signed stated you received counseling- both times in fact from getting your arthritis meds. I’m not seeing the issue here. They were clearly labeled, you’ ve had the medication before, and you indicated you haven’t read it. What do you want me to do?!?”

At this point Kevin seem resigned that he was not gettting through to me. “I’m going to call the surgeon and talk to him. We’ll see about getting a lawyer- you’ve been negligent”. With that Kevin slams the phone down. Who still has a land line anyway?

Well, I better document this. I send patient care notes to his  surgeon and arthritis doc stating the problem, puttting a hand gel up his rectum, and not following directions (Or common sense). In case he does more Kevin ‘things’ with the  doctors- best to have a continuity of care and understanding his kevin antics.

After closing I see a tired lady in scrubs looking at an endcap filled with junk. I ask if I can help-she’s also in healthcare and just looks drained from dealing with the burden of humanity. Turns out she’s a nurse with the surgeon and she had received my care note but wanted to find out more. She also informs me the rectal surgery was to fix damage from objects Kevin had inserted to relieve constipation.

Well, Kevin never got through to me that it was my fault he put his arthritis meds up his butt. I suppose that makes it a Kevin story? This was a 20 minute conversation, by the way. So the next time you’re wondering why your prescription takes so long to fill, its because we’ve spent 20 minutes telling someone not to put something up their butt.My mother was a Kevina in some ways, if not others. She had incredible social smarts, as she had Narcissistic Personality Disorder which meant that she could wind people around her fingers with no problem at all, but her problem-solving sometimes left a lot to be desired.

Take dinner portion sizes, for instance. When I was a kid we'd have enormous dinners. Whenever the topic of starvation came up (this was the era of Live Aid, after all), she'd say that it was criminal to throw away food. Yet, she'd continue to make too much and throw it away after the meal. She took to calling my dad a "rubbish bin" because he'd eat whatever was put in front of him, and I was a chubby kid for the same reason. After I left home she continued to cook huge portions just for my dad and her, and sometimes had an extra bowl of potatoes or whatever leftovers there were from dinner as an evening snack rather than throw it away. 

Several years after I left home I happened to talk with mum about measuring uncooked rice while preparing dinner to make sure you only get as much cooked rice as you need. 1/4 of a cup of uncooked rice per person makes enough cooked rice for most people, which made feeding the people in my household - all 2 of us - dead easy: 1/4 cup + 1/4 cup = 1/2 cup. Cook it, give each of us half, and everyone's happy. 

She got angry with me as "there's no way of knowing how much the people you're feeding are going to eat," so on that basis you just *had* to make plenty so people didn't go hungry. Which, in her household, meant piling people's plates up just high enough that it wasn't ridiculous, just over-generous, then throwing the uneaten rice away or eating it that evening.

Did I mention that me and dad weren't slim? 

I stuck by my guns and insisted that measuring rice is easy, and works. She just wouldn't have it. At the time this conversation happened we had a lot of other things going on - I was outgrowing the abusive patterns she'd taught me, and that had made our relationship rocky at times. I stuck by my argument that you can absolutely predict how much rice to cook because I was done with her madness. We talked about it for some time and she eventually realised I wasn't going to believe her, and went into "I'm only agreeing to this because you're bullying me into it" mode. 

Holding boundaries with arcs is fun /sHi everyone, this is my first story on this subreddit and I thought long and hard about it. Thankfully I asked my mother if it's okay and she said yes. Mainly because some of these stories are from her. Of course we start with a disclaimer. This is basically just telling a few stories of my aunt (who is kind and yet weird) and these stories are just too much fun to just keep between my mother and myself, so here we are.

Firstly there's me, your OP. You can call me Easter for the sake of this story. I am in my 20's and still living with my parents because of Covid and I am disabled with some mental illnesses, but I am getting better. I am kind of naive but at least I can accept any criticism (give me some in the comment if you have any for me).

My mother is a big lady but she at least the most competent person I know. She cleans for a living and is essential services. All you should know that she is like Mount Vesuvius if pissed off, but is a very nice woman with a sense of humour.

And lastly Aunt Karvina. She is a cleaner like my mother and she is also very nice, but on occasions she can be quite obnoxious. She has no relation to my family tree, but the is a friend of the family and that what matters. She is also dyslexic and think she has eyes of a hawk. Reason why she's the 'best cleaner' around.

Now for the story. My mum old clients started to panic over Covid hitting Australia and lay her off. Now for a while, we are a little stuck. But at least my Aunt Karvina suggest she comes to work for a cleaning agency. That way she can make money, become essential services and still clean for people. Imagine mum's face light up when she heard about the opportunity. She applied and got accepted IMMEDIATELY after applying. She not only get to clean, but she gets to help out elderly people with basic cleaning and chatting.

Mum was doing her job in her first week and she done so much work, she asked me for 5 cups of tea, which I don't mind. Than the next month happened. She got a call from the cleaning agency asking to help with one of Karvina's clients for some basic cleaning because Karvina called in sick with the flu. Mum accepted and drove to work. After she got back home at 6pm, she told me this gem of a story.

Mum told me when she got there, there was an old man who we'll call Kenny (obvious name change for protection). He was very polite and welcomed her to his home. As she was told to do some 'basic cleaning,' she noticed that this place needed MORE THAN BASIC CLEANING! The mats in the bathroom hasn't been swapped for months with the plastic imbedded itself onto the tiles, dust all over some of the pine furniture (cupboards, shelves, chairs, desks etc...), cobwebs in the corners of the rooms and the windows are as foggy as an ocean fog in the early morning. There was some obvious clean places like the sink being empty of dirty dishes, the floor vacuumed and mopped, but not clean enough to considered safe for an asthmatic to live in. As you couldn't tell, this has disgusted mum, so she cleaned the place as best she could. After mum was done, she fixed herself and Kenny some tea and biscuits.

She later founded out that he was in the same place as her father in the Vietnam War and she immediately lit up. Kenny enjoyed her company and asked "Can you clean for me again?" So with that, mum told him how he can arrange that simple change by calling up the agency and tell them what needs to be done. After giving Kenny those instructions and left for her next shift, she got a call from the agency to ask her to work for Kenny again. She obviously said "Yes" and smiled with joy.

It later found out by Kenny that Aunt Karvina not only didn't do her job properly, she often triggered his PTSD by talking over top of him and raising her voice further. Kenny is going deaf, but Aunt Karvina will often raised her voice a lot, even when he has his hearing aids in while claiming she's the BEST cleaner.

As Aunt Karvina continued to work there, there's a noticeable pattern of Karvina working for someone and later lost that job because of my mum who happens to take over. Aunt Karvina didn't take noticed because we never told her about it. I think it's for the best because she can get useful and she is getting to the point that she is starting to clean better. And Karvina is getting to the point to that she is trying not to lose another client by not raising her voice.

There are more stories of Aunt Karvina. If you are interested, I would like to know. See you guys later then

Edit: I did some editing error clean up and if I missed any, let me know

Edit: Thank you all for the people who helped me with my spelling errors. I am not that good with writing fluently if you couldn't tell. Much appreciatedI posted in a separate thread that I used to work as a merchandiser for a national soda brand. Basically my job was to make sure your store's shelves are always stocked.

Anyhoo, there are some interesting folks you meet in that community, including this Kevin who worked for a competing company.

Kevin was ALWAYS drunk, high, or both. Normally Kevin rode passenger with a normal merchandiser. My hunch is Kevin was not allowed to drive from a previous incident.

I'm in college and it's summer. Lots of labor in the summer disappears as students leave the area. In other words it's a good time to make money as there is a labor shortage. I am working 55+ hour weeks.

I walk into the backroom of a large market and it is ABSOLUTELY 100% a mess. There is cat litter, dog food, laundry detergent, etc scattered on the floor.

Kevin is in the forklift trying to get this pallet off the top rack but has the forks tilted in the opposite direction of what he should be doing. It is going to pull the whole rack down.

I scream at him and he ignores me. I pull him out of the driver's seat and he crumbles like a sack of potatoes on the concrete floor. Kevin seems to resume some sort of ability to think rationally.

I tell Kevin he killed have killed himself or somebody else and to go sleep off whatever he has. Kevin complies.

Well, Kevin goes out to the company truck. Kevin decides the hot parking lot is not where he wants to fall asleep.

Kevin decides to drive drunk. He wants to park under a big tree on the highway. Kevin runs into said tree and totals the company rig. 

I walk out of the store to see the mess.

I see Kevin 3 months later. They are so short on labor that they have kept Kevin, but he thinks the entire episode is my fault.

Apparently, I should have allowed Kevin to continue wrecking the backroom and putting his life along with everyone else's in danger.

UghhThis is a short anecdote about my mother, who can sometimes be a Kevina.

I have many stories about how abusive she's been over the years as she had Narcissistic Personality Disorder, but sometimes her traits showed up as Kevin behaviour, not as abuse. She was very impulsive and that sometimes got in the way of her thinking clearly.

Anyway! Kevina loved to garden, and at the start of this one particular year she bought a grow-bag and a half-dozen strawberry plants, which she planted in the grow-bag.

They grew, and reached a point where they'd produced quite a few strawberries. Now, anyone who's grown strawberries will know that when the plants produce fruit they put out a 'hand' of tendrils which have a total of perhaps four or five strawberries, one on each 'finger'.

Kevina noticed these tendrils with their unripe strawberries in spring and said, "Look how many strawberries we're going to get!" She was excited about the bumper crop to come!

Fast-forward a couple of months. The strawberries on any given plant tend to ripen at an uneven rate, ie., one at a time. One day, she saw that one strawberry was ripening on one of the tendrils. She got excited and pulled off the whole tendril so she could eat the one strawberry. I watched her pick the ripe strawberry off, eat it, and throw the rest of the tendril, green strawberries and all, in the trash and felt my heart sink. I don't think I pointed out that she'd prevented three or four strawberries from ever ripening because when she feels like she's done something wrong, she tend to go into attack mode, so I quietly hoped she'd realise what she'd done and just pick the one strawberry next time.

A few days later, another strawberry ripened and she did it again. And then a few days later, again.

Later that month we were both in the garden and she looked at the strawberry plants in the grow-bag. There weren't many tendrils left, so she complained about how bad the crop had been this year.I've just realised I can't post images to this subreddit, so [here's my screenshot on Imgur](https://imgur.com/a/qhY1pKv).

Context: Kevin's been making noises about booking a consultation with me for months (I'm a sort of writing coach/worldbuilding facilitator/character psychology specialist), and keeps trying to get my attention by showing me bits of his creative work that he's done. I've gone through the gamut of saying, "Hey, that looks cool!" to grease the wheels for further discussion, to "That's great. You've shown me a fair bit now, so what input are you wanting from me?" all the way through to "My dude, I need to draw a line under all these pictures, project updates, and videos you're showing me - unless you actually want to book something."

That's why my first message here sounds short. He 'forgot' that I said that the last time. Most people don't have anywhere near as much trouble with booking things with my calendar so his struggles seemed worth posting here.

This is a Kevin who has been on the cusp of booking my services for the best part of a year.

His dozens of character pictures are almost identical. He's clearly using the same base and they're all just standing; no dynamic poses, no colour, nothing but a few costume details to tell them apart. Oh, and they're all on lined paper. None of that is a problem in itself, it's just how impressed he expects everyone to be. He posts these to his Discord server with the full expectation that people will be impressed, even though his invitees rarely responded. The @ everyones got so regular and intrusive that I left his server in the end for some peace. So what did he do when he couldn't show me his pics by posting them to his server any more? He sent them to me in person.

Months ago, he drew some traditional (as in non-digital, with pen and paper) art of a logo for his project. I happened to know someone who's well up on their branding and logo theory and suggested he approach them for a logo (as his logo looked kind of uninspiring) and he said that he could, but that would have to be his "unofficial logo".

He tried to 'wow' me by telling me how the musical score was being made by him and one of his friends. He seemed to think this was impressive because apparently it's unusual for more than one composer to work on the same production.

Oh, and what is this project that he's so passionate about? It's a Transformers fanfic.This is the same kevina in my last post, but this was back when I first meet her in my home group.

So my name is a name that doesn’t have a nickname but there are names that use my name as a nickname. For example I’ll pretend my name is “Sam” for this post because I don’t want to drop my real name.

So I had to change home groups in year 10 and as I was introducing myself to my new classmates, kevina asked me what my name was because she didn’t catch it. I told her “oh it’s Sam” and she said “oh cool! What’s it short for?” I was a little confused but replied, “It’s not short for anything, just Sam”. Kevina didn’t believe me because “Sam is just a nickname” and you can’t possibly have it as your actual name. 

Kevina asked me if my real name was “Samantha” and once again I told them “no, my name is just Sam”, kevina then asked me if my name was short for “Samuel”, I awkwardly laugh and said/half asked her, “Samuel is a boys name?”

Eventually after a couple days going back and forth, she asked to see my student ID card to prove my name was just “Sam”, after I did so, she still didn’t believe me until I brought up my profile on our student portal that had our information on it (just name, date of birth, year started at our school).

She looked at me like I was a unicorn lmao and said she thinks it’s so weird and unique that my name is just “Sam”.So, for a while me and my friends had a Kevin in our group. We were only friends with him because he would always join us in our wacky adventures. It didn't matter what we would plan, he would always join so he kind of stuck with us for a while. 

Dome background: I first met him at my studies, which was an associates degree in film. After a while, I learned that he had already acquired his bachelors degree in IT. When I asked him why he didn't follow that field, he simply told me: "I didn't really feel like doing IT". It kind of makes sense that people don't want to follow a career path which they're not passionate about, so I didn't think too much of it. He had a pretty hefty loan for the film studies but before the first year was over, he dropped out. In the new school year, he would enroll in something completely different again: construction. 
He then started a pattern of not liking his new studies but loaning huge amounts for the first year and then dropping out. Everytime, it would be something radically different from the last time. It sort of became a running joke in the group until after a few more years I finally decided to have a conversation about what the hell he was doing. He was currently doing another IT studies, but this time as an associates degree in the hopes that "the work would be easier".

I asked him: "Kevin, you keep switching between studies and it seems like you're wandering around aimlessly. If you could picture yourself doing anything you'd like, doesn't even have to be a job, what would it be?"

Kevin: "Oh easy, truck driver! I've felt that way for years!"

Me: "What? That's fantastic! Why haven't you started working towards that sooner?"

Kevin: "What are you, an idiot? Haven't you ever heard someone say to first get a proper degree first and then do what you like on the side?"

A few seconds of silence pass as I try to process his reasoning

Me: "But you know being a truck driver is also a proper paying job right? You could totally do that as a career!"

Kevin: "No," Kevin stated firmly, "that'll be for on the side. First, I need to get a proper degree"

I dropped the conversation after that, knowing that there would be no talking sense into him. Not long after that, due to something else completely we told him he wasn't welcome anymore to the friend group so I sort of lost touch. 
 
That was a few years ago and now, a friend of mine works at a community college where Kevin was studying again, this time something in media marketing... 
I just hope that he I day realises that being a truck driver is fine so he can drop the loans...

Edit: Some people in the comments asked why Kevin got kicked out of the group. In short, he also had a temper problem and would get salty over the dumbest things. I have three examples which perfectly portrays him. 

First one, everyone in the group games together. This one time, we had a game in which you could level up and the difficulty of the game scaled to the level. Basically, level 15 players can't play with level 60 players. 
So one day, friend A asked in the group chat if I could help him with a level he was stuck on as we were on the same level, when Kevin started complaining: "Oh hear that friend B? Guess we aren't good enough to play with them..." 
Friend B: "Right, our levels are too low"
Kevin didn't care about logic, his feelings were hurt so all he could do was be angry for a few days. 

Second story was in a bar. Four of us were drinking and three of us had empty glasses. The waitress shows up and asks us kindly and playfully: "shall I pour four more?"
Everyone looked at Kevin but he just stared with this fake half smile, pretending to not exist to avoid this "awkward" situation, I guess. 
I told her: "I guess three will do for now, thanks"
Some jokes were made, I don't fully remember but everyone was laughing so she thought she could ask Kevin to chug the last three sips in one go so she could bring four more. 
Kevin was now certain that he was being swindled, the establishment had it out for his money so he told her, quite rudely, to back off. 
She stopped serving him after that and we tipped her extra for the good time. 

Lastly, four friends of the group decided to go on a vacation. We went to the grandparents of one of the guys in a different country. Everyone tried to adapt and at least try to speak the language a little, but not Kevin. Everytime the grandparents said anything, he would just rock that fake half smile again and pretend not to exist. 
At one point, as a thanks, I paid for something small for grandma as a gesture of being thankful. Later that night, she handed me something to drink and snuck a 5 euro note along with it. The next few days, we kept giving eachother the five euros back and forth in all sorts of funny ways as she thought I didn't even need to pay in the first place. 
The last night, I was thinking of a way to have the upper hand and leave grandma the 5 euros without her being able to give it back. When I came up with a suggestion, Kevin snapped:
"Dude, stop it! She doesn't want the five euros!!! So either shut up, or I'll shut your mouth for you!"
That didn't sit right with any of us, so after the trip, I sent him a break up text on behalf of the group. 

Ps. I completely forgot this, but for those who are still reading, here's a little bonus. Kevin didn't understand questions with two options. If you asked him: "Kevin, what would you prefer?" He would usually answer in ways like: "Yeah!", "sure" or "let's go!"So I used to work for a major soda company as a merchandiser. Basically my job was to stop by stores several times per day and refill shelves.

Twice a week, though, was load day. On that day a truck would drop off pallets meant to supply the store until the next delivery. Those days were pains.

The problem is that everyone else is also dropping off stuff and soon enough everyone's pallets are in everyone else's way. You are trying to move your stuff to your area in the backroom, work new product into store, change store displays, etc.

Needless to say when done incorrectly you are quickly at the receiving end of other grumpy merchandisers and the backroom manager.

So my supervisor is Kevin. Kevin is a big believer in always over-ordering.  There was this tiny convenience store in hickville that maybe had a population of 500 people. Their backroom is tiny. We have enough room for 2 pallets. We stack those pallets 2 high for a total of 4 pallets. But that's it.

This store has a sale. My boss orders TEN pallets of stuff. When I arrive to work through the delivery the manager is bent out of shape because there are pallets OUTSIDE the store that anyone with sticky fingers can take. 

I call my boss and explain the situation. He explains to me that I need to somehow make room in the store for the extra units. So I'm doing my best to do so by putting product where it is NOT supposed to go, and now the manager is even MORE mad. 

So I call my boss AGAIN. Now he's mad at ME that I somehow can't find room for 4x more product than should have been ordered. He dispatches a truck to come buy back some of the product. It's the same driver who dropped it off. He said he thought that delivery was going to be a bad idea when he dropped off 😂😅😭

1 more story. The 4th of July is the busiest day of the year. Every store has sales and people buy more soda than they ever plan on drinking. Every year 4th of July has problems as stores start to run out of stock before more trucks arrive to restock.

Every single vendor tries to solve this problem by over-ordering which means the back room is completely 100% full the night before.

The store that I am working has this old soviet union relic of a fork lift. The vertical forks are hydraulic, BUT the machine doesn't do the actual pushing forward. In order to move this type of lift you have to physically push it forward and backward. Obviously this takes some muscle and is a HUGE pain in the rear when maneuvering 200 12 packs per pallet.

To make matters worse, the wheels on the forklift are made of ceramic. What that means is if there is even the SMALLEST piece of debris on the floor (say a small piece of broken wood from a pallet) the lift WILL get stuck.

Anyways, I'm trying to get the last pallet stacked. Generally speaking, we try to avoid 3 high because of how dangerous it is. But it's 4th of July so here we go with Kevin's order. This will create a stack 3 high of pallets. The forklift can't reach the top of the 2nd pallet to out the 3rd pallet on top.

The way to fix this is to bring the pallet back down, throw some product on the existing 2nd pallet onto the pallet currently on the fork until the 2nd pallets height is reduced enough to stack the 3rd pallet.

My boss stops by and is aggravated I haven't finished stacking product. I tell him the problem. To his credit he helps me throw some product.

He decides he is going to use the lift. He has never used it before. He hits a piece of debris on the floor with the pallet raised as high as it goes. Instead of lowering the pallet my boss decides to literally get a running start and attempt to "push" the lift over whatever is stopping the ceramic wheel.

It looked like it worked at first. He definite got the wheel over the debris. But now the entire forklift starts to tilt  it is on a collision course with the OTHER soda company's stacked products. It his and causes a domino effect with all the other stacked pallets.

It is a glorious old faithful of sodas as pallets hit the floor and explode. It literally sounds like a war zone.

I got paid overtime that night to stay HOURS cleaning up the mess while my boss got to go home.  The backroom manager was lava hot mad the entire time. No matter how many times they cleaned that floor it was sticky to the day I quit.I have many stories from high school about this Kevina but something happened that recently reminded me of this story in particular.

Now this kevina was in my home group, and during a break while everyone was sitting down someone brought out a bag of dried apricots, kevina asked the person “what are those” and the person said they are dried apricots and asked kevina if she’d like one. Kevina said she’d love to try one and so she did.

Kevina then turned to the person who gave them the dried apricot and said “wow that was really nice! What’s in them”? The whole class room looked dumbfounded and the person said “apricots”, kevina looked surprised and said back “really? Apricots”? Someone else said “yeah dried apricots are apricots, what did you think they were”?. 

Kevina then explained that she had no idea that dried apricots were apricots. I then asked her if she knew what dried banana was and she didn’t know either, our whole class had to explain to her what dried fruit was, and to my knowledge kevina now works at a restaurant. Crossposted from I don't work here.

This was nothing special, but was a wtf experience.

I was visiting an associated section in our organization and knew the people in that section, at least in passing. As I walked by his desk, the admin assistance asked me, "Hey OP, what work status is (female employee) on? I'm trying to do the timecards."

Me: "Hey (admin assistant AA), I really have no idea. I don't work down here."

AA: "Well, I really need to know what status she's on because we're closing out the work week."

Me: "I'd love to tell you, but I work upstairs, not down here."

AA: "But what's her work status? I'm trying to finish the timecards."

Me: "You know, that's a great question for someone who actually works down here."

AA: "But I need to know her work status. Can you tell me that?"

Me: "I could tell you the airspeed velocity of an unladen swallow, but I have no idea what her work status is because I don't work down here." (Monty Python reference)

AA: "Huh? Oh...ummm, so what's her work status?"

Me: "You know, I think we're just going to have to chock that up as one of the great mysteries of the universe," I said and then broke eye contact and walked away.A little background for Manbaby Kevin: This is about a small aviation section where I am the lead pilot.  We are run by...business people not aviators.  We lost a very good pilot to retirement and the slot opened up.  Manbaby was a copilot in the section and was barely adequate for the position, but he spent most of his time being the pilot monitoring and not the pilot flying so his flaws were hidden for a while.  He put in for the position and the manager, a non pilot, asked the section's opinion.  Myself, one male aviation and one female aviator told the manager that Manbaby was not cut out for the position, so management gave Manbaby the job.

And so it begins.

On his first flight as a Pilot in Command (PIC) we flew to a nearby airport, had lunch and then flew back.  I did for him what my mentor did for me, I sat in the jump seat and let him and a copilot fly us home.  Immediately after takeoff he realized he did not program the Flight Management System with the route.  Not a huge deal, but fly the aircraft and do it when you are in a less critical phase of flight.  He looks down and starts programming the FMS and it's like looking down and driving.  He's weaving all over the place.  Alarmed, I look out the front windshield and all I can see is the ocean.

We had a long debrief.

Next, we were carrying passengers.  He sat in the copilot's seat, but I told him to fly the aircraft as another gauge of his skill...or lack thereof.  At 400 feet I noticed that he had backed off the power and we were slowing down and our climb rate was anemic.  We have a three warning system before you have to do something.

"Manbaby, you're getting slow.  Add power."

"Manbaby, add power.  Get your nose down."

"Manbaby, power power power!  I have the flight controls."

He had no idea he would stall the aircraft if he continued.

So, I brought this to the attention of Boss Baby, the manager, and was ordered to keep him flying.  Boss Baby was a career destroyer and bragged about getting people fired so we pressed on.

One rainy, windy night we were coming back on a VFR arrival and Manbaby was the pilot flying.  He reduced the power to descend to the check in altitude of 2000', but did not put the power back in.  So, we descended below 2000'.  In slow motion I watch as the the altitude drops to 1800', which was 1500' above the ground.  He then snap rolls the aircraft to the left.  We fall below stall speed and he's cross controlled on the rudder, which means we would spin into the ground.  I took the flight controls and he was completely unaware that we could be a smoking hole in the freeway in a few seconds.  I brought it to Boss Baby's attention and was promptly ignored so I started a file.

Manbaby would always get lost on VFR flights.  I showed him a way to identify his location so he could call it out to ATC when checking in.

Manbaby:  "(ATC), (callsign), three mile wess of da fix."

Me:  "You're east of the fix."

Manbaby:  "(ATC), (callsign), three mile wess of da fix."

Me:  "You're east of the fix."

Manbaby:  "(ATC), (callsign), three mile wess of da fix."

Me:  "I have the flight controls."

Manbaby was also the Maintenance Officer and had to coordinate maintenance service.  One example of many was this.  He was supposed to receive parts and get them to the mechanic on a Tuesday so the aircraft would be out of service by Thursday.  On Thursday I called the mechanic and the aircraft was still down because Manbaby didn't deliver the parts.  I tracked the parts down and they were still in transit, but Manbaby should have kept up with this.  I approached him while he was reading the comics.

Me: "Manbaby, the parts didn't come in.  Were you going to update the status?

Manbaby:  "Oh...oh?  Oh, the parts?  The parts?  Oh, the parts.  The parts didn't come in."

Me:  "I just told you that!"

He was also supposed to get one of the life rafts serviced.  I tasked him to do this in March as the raft was due no later than July 17th and it typically took 11 days to ship, service and return.  I told him he had to ship it no later than July 6th.

March.

Manbaby:  "Oh, the life raft...the life raft?  Oh, the life raft.  I can do the life raft."

April.

"Oh, the life raft...the life raft?  Oh, the life raft.  I can do the life raft."

May.

"Oh, the life raft...the life raft?  Oh, the life raft.  I can do the life raft."

June.

"Oh, the life raft...the life raft?  Oh, the life raft.  I can do the life raft."

July 7th.  The freaking life raft has not moved.

Me:  Manbaby, were you going to ship the damn life raft?  I gave you months...months to do the life raft!"

Manbaby:  "Oh, the life raft...the life raft?  Oh, the life raft.  I can do the life raft."

I would do the preflight and all of the admin tasks while he texted his son.  I once carried all of the survival gear and other equipment while he walked behind me carrying nothing.  I sarcastically said, "Well, I guess I'll do it all by myself."

He smiled and said, "Oh good.  I go my son's music practice."  He turned on a dime and all I saw was car exhaust as he drove away.

As a PIC, Manbaby would often fly with less experienced pilots and they finally told me their horror stories.  One female crew member was on the rotation with him and she told me, "OH HELL NO!"

I started getting aggressive with Boss Baby and would march into his office and say, "Boss Baby, I need to talk to you about that man!"

Examples:

"Boss Baby, that man nearly taxiied into a 747!  I know that's such a tiny plane and easy to miss!"

"Boss Baby, yesterday I worked a 15 hour day and that man worked a 15 minute day.  How is it fair that we get paid the same?"

"Boss Baby, that man is going to kill someone and that someone is likely to be me!"

"Boss Baby, I'm doing three jobs.  I have to find what Manbaby f'd up and fix it.  Then I have to do his job.  Then I have to do my job."

"Boss Baby, I'm going to make your life easier.  For Manbaby's performance report, all you have to do is say OP will fix it."

"Boss Baby, that man has a 10 kilobyte brain running a 10 GB program.  I can literally see the hamster on the wheel in his head dying."

"Boss Baby, that man has two brain cells to rub together."

Thankfully, all of the crews, the FAA and our HQ backed me up when Boss Baby fought tooth and nail to keep Manbaby flying.  We brought in a check airman to evaluate Manbaby and the check airman needed a drink after.  On the checkride, this happened...

Check airman:  "Manbaby, I'm not even from here and I'm telling you you're going to the wrong airport."

I finally threw down on Boss Baby.

"Ok, Boss Baby, I'll make you a bet.  On the rainy, windy night of my choosing, Manbaby will fly you to the airport of my choosing.  If you guys survive, I'll fly him as much as you want."

So, Manbaby was transferred to reception.  He took a call and then reported the information to the appropriate section.

Manbaby:  "Oh, the caller wanted me to pass on X to you."

Section chief:  "Ok, good, just give me the number and I'll call her back."

Manbaby:  Oh...oh?  Oh da number?  Oh, da number...da number.  Oh, da number.  I didn't get da number."

SC:  "Ummm, ok...well just give me her name and we'll look her up."

Manbaby:  Oh?  Oh, da name?  Oh, da name.  Da name.  I didn't get da name."

I could write a book on Manbaby, but those are just the highlight.Very new to Reddit, but most of my experience is from the YouTube, I have trouble reading and I like to listen to the stories. This post has a little bit of Kevin with TIFU, wasn’t me but I witnessed it. Not sure if this belongs here and if it doesn’t please let me know, now the story.

BACKGROUND!

This happened around 10 years ago while I was in the army. After basic training I spent a little time in Korea, this has its own stories to tell. I came back from Korea to a base back in the States. The unit I was assigned to was brand new and I already had a year and a half in. Most of the soldiers were new so I was placed in a squad leader position as a private first class, PFC. There were other PFC and even Specialist, SPC and a rank higher then me, but they received the rank based on college or JROTC. 

STORY!

Anyways, one of the first soldiers I had under me was Pvt Kevin. Kevin was always late to formations and I was forced by my platoon sgt to conduct “corrective training.” Kevin was always losing sensitive items causing lock downs, failing to qualify on the range and making our days longer and just a living hell. Kevin did not understand the concept of personal hygiene. Waiting in a room with him was unbearable. In addition to weapon systems we made hygiene items apart of his sensitive items, meaning at any point a team leader or NCO could ask for these items and he had to produce. Kevin needed to keep deodorant, body wash and shampoo on him at all times, queue the field problem.

We had just entered into our field cycle and were gearing up the HMMWVs and loading the radios. After all the radios were ready to go I try to conduct a radio check, nothing happened. When I checked it turned out the radio had been zeroed, wiped of the information needed to make them work. It turned out Kevin wanted to help, zeroed the radio and left because he had no idea how to fix it.

So the area we would be training in was a wide open space surrounded by a thick forest. The area was leveled and had a layer of rock, making it difficult to steak down GP Mediums, our tents. There was only a few hard sites, actual buildings, that could be used so our platoon was designated as using a tent, go 3rd plt. After clearing a spot of rocks and steaking down our tent as best we could we started tiding up the operating area and setting up an antenna. This antenna was so large it needed support cables, which also needed to be steaked into the ground.

Towards the end of the day clouds started to roll in. In this part of the US it was not abnormal for weather patterns to change so suddenly, so we did not think much of it. Unbeknownst to us, there had been a tornado warning issued and top brass decided not to tell us.

At the end of the day the wind started to pick up and we started to bed down. The tent was a piece of fabric that was held up by two or three Y beams, as far as I can remember. The outer portion of the tent was supported by this round pieces of wood and cables causing tension to keep the tent from collapsing.

After checking for sensitive items we all start to lay down, but mother nature had another plan for us. The wind picked up to the point that it was starting to slip under the tent, opening our flap. It got to the point where we could actually see the Y beam support starting to lift. SGT Z saw this and yelled at us to jump onto the Y beams to try and hold them down, so we did.

After a couple of seconds hanging off the support mother nature said “nope” and threw a powerful gust, lifting a support that did not have anyone at it at the time. After the first support went down, the rest of the tent went down with it. Grabbing my sensitive items and making my way out of the tent I assisted SGT Z with getting soldiers out and to the hard sites for safety. 

Now let me say this, when you bed down there is no particular uniform you have to wear, so people would wear pt shorts, ACUs or civis, civilian clothing. Normally this isn’t a problem except it was cold, very cold.

After getting most of the soldiers out we were still down one, it was Kevin. We could see a bulge in the tent moving around, he couldn’t find the exit. After finding the exit Kevin immerged holding all his hygiene items, but no weapon system or NVGs. We had to send him back in to correct this mistake. Finally Kevin came out and ran for the hard site. 

Now it was dark, very dark, with only lightning lighting our way; which gave me the weird sensation of running in slow motion. Ahead of me I could see SGT Z running towards the antenna, not seeing the lines holding it up. I tried to warn him, but the wind and thunder drown my voice out. SGT Z ran headlong into the cable, cloth lining himself and falling on the ground.

After getting to safety SGT Z started yelling at soldiers and other NCOs, trying to bring order to the chose. Across the tent was a group of soldiers huddling for warmth, some only wearing boxers and underwear. Before SGT Z and I could return to the tent to gather something to help them keep warm, the commander, I for get her name but we’ll call her CPT M, arrived driving her nice personal vehicle. CPT M ran outside to get a blanket, she returned with a pink swaddle blanket that could barley cover half the back of one soldier.

I got to give her credit though, at least she tried.

SGT Z was still yelling orders and giving commanders, not paying attention to CPT M. CPT M walked up to SGT Z and told him “SGT Z, yours balls are showing.” Now SGT Z, being a former Marine, took this as a complement. “Thank you ma’am,” he replied, excited his efforts were not going unnoticed. “CPT M, looking him dead in the eye said, “No, your balls are hanging out of your boxers!” SGT Z looked down to see his family jewels hanging out for the world to see. SGT Z, with a shrug, tucked his over sized manly bits back into his boxers and continued on with giving orders.

The next day we all emerged to sunlight, like I said, weird weather. The tent had been completely flattened and our uniforms were scattered all over the area in the woods, in trees and under bushes. Before we could completely gather our items and reorganize ourself 1SG F arrived on scene and called a company formation. We then got berated for not being in proper uniform, before being dismissed. We spent the rest of the day trying to reclaim our lost possessions.

I don’t know if anyone ever talked to the 1SG, but I did serve with her in Korea and she is an excellent 1SG. Its been so long since this happened so past this I cant remember what happened. Thanks for reading and if you’re interested in anymore stories from the military I may post them later.

Also, if anyone was wondering, Kevin ended up getting discharged for cultivating Marijuana in the Barracks and trying to sale it from his closet.  I met Kevin working in Kiddie Land at my local amusement park when I was eighteen.  Somehow we became friends, but I can't remember why.  The first time he invited me to his house, Kevin and his twin brother Kevin, both named after their dad, both appearing indistinguishable from one another, my friend, who we'll call Kevin # 1, was in the midst of a violent brawl with Kevin # 2.  For some reason #2 was totally naked, chasing #1 around the house screaming "I'm gonna make you eat my asshole!".  It was profoundly disturbing.  Their dad broke up the fight, yelling out very vividly "if the two of you don't stop then you're gonna have to eat MY asshole!".

  Their mother, who was the most normal human being I ever met, was in tears, desperately reminding them that they had company (me).  She looked emaciated.  God only knows the horrors she's laid her eyes on in that house.   Kevin #2 locked himself in his room, and the crashing of lamps, and whatever else has the ability to shatter, rang out for the better part of an hour.  Kevin # 1 apologized, and we hung out in his room.  Everything was copacetic until he said "wait til you see THIS".  He opened his closet and a pile of seemingly empty Maxwell House containers tumbled to the floor.

  His room looked like twenty sticks of dynamite had went off, but miraculously hadn't broken a single thing.  "Check out these beauties", he said with an excitable disposition.  Each can was labeled in black marker with the integers of different years - 98', 99', 00', etc.  I asked what they were.  He said "the real present is inside".  Suddenly I felt ill.  He didn't even have to say it, and I prayed he wouldn't have the impulse to open one of them.  It was his fart collection.  "99' was a doozie.  Shall we?".  "No, Kevin.  Please don't".  "Okay, but you don't know what you're missing".  We played Madden and I left, partially traumatized.

  The second time I went over, Kevin # 2 was inebriated.  He was an absolute prick.  A few years later he moved to Vegas to be an accountant and became a degenerate gambler, coke head, and alcoholic.  He also did amateur fetish porn where he played a submissive gimp who liked getting ball busted (i.e., kicked and kneed in the balls for pay).  Except he wasn't in it for the money.  He genuinely enjoyed getting kicked in the balls.  At one point our friend Brooks found some of his videos.  I clearly remember a dominatrix busting his balls and asking "do you like that, bitch?", to where he replied with "kick me until I'm infertile".  We must've rewound that part a thousand times.  

  Kevin # 1 didn't like it when we'd watch it.  Brooks used to ask "why?  You both have identical DNA".

  As far as that first year working with Kevin, I can recall a slew of bizarre things he did.  He'd repeatedly put kids into ride seats backwards.  That's what got him fired.  He was already on thin ice after telling a four year old to "keep that fucking thing in your mouth (referring to a pacifier) or I'll shove it down your throat".  He told a couple that their rambunctious child "probably has a mental disorder".  He once buckled in a group of kids in a ride, turned it on, and then walked off to a concession stand.  Luckily I or the parents didn't rat him out, since I stepped in during my break.

  He was also a pig when it came to eating.  He picked up a half eaten corn dog off of a bench and ate it.  His excuse was "I saw the guy eating it and he looked pretty clean".  He would trip over his own feet often, but would never put his arms out to brace himself for the fall.  He'd just smash his face in.  When I explained what "brace yourself" means, he said "I don't wear braces".  One day he showed up to work covered in dirt, cinders, and blood.  His eye was swollen shut.  When we worriedly asked him what happened, his response was very simply "fuck humanity".  A girl working at a game nearby said he "just fell, got up, and angrily asked who put 'that stick' on the ground".  There was no stick.  He tripped over his own feet.

  As far as him tripping over his own feet, it was immediately apparent that the reason was because his shoes were about four sizes too big for his feet.  He looked like a clown walking around.  When I asked him his shoe size, he said "I have to special order them.  They're 16s".  When I commented that he was shorter than me and all I wore was a 10 1/2, his response was "you know what they say about guys with big feet".  

  Anyway, all of the former occurred within a year of me knowing him.  Once we got to college and lived together for a full semester, well, that's a whole other story.  A story so insane, so vast, and so riddled with incidents, that it will take some serious preparation to even begin to get into that story.

To be continued....This is the finale to the trilogy of my Kevin film series. I’ve made 2 other posts within  last year here about how I was forced to make short films with 2 different Kevins during my junior and senior year of high school. If your interested just check my profile for those stories about details of why I made short films during that time of my life. Dastardly tales of betrayal, stupidity, heatstroke and (almost) arrests had led up to this! Now onto the final.

Quick overview: My high school was a early career type of whatever you want to call it. They had programs for careers like culinary, law, manufacturing, agriculture and as you can guess television and film. I was in film. Leading to the last few months of my senior year. We had a line up of the last few fun film projects that we were all getting ready to do. I was excited, especially after my escape from Kevin and his dumb film ideas and harassing. Unfortunately we were all blindsided by… Headmaster Kevina 

The Schools headmaster Mrs. Kevina and Vice Principal Kevin had a discussion that I’m convinced went like this: “Head master Kevina!” 
“Yes?” 
“The district board said that we need more ways to promote our school to get more students interested with early career training.” 
“Yes that’s right… how will we promote our fantastic programs?” 
“I know! We can have videos made that overviews what the programs have to offer!”
“That’s a great idea Vice Principal Kevin! Wait! Won’t that cost us a lot of money to have professional quality videos made?”
“Darn that’s true… it will cost us money… wait! I have an idea! We can force the film students into free labor and disguise it as a letter grade!”
“Brilliant idea!”

Thus leading to this slap in the face of having our last projects being turned into making videos for EVERY SINGLE PROGRAM in the school. If my memory serves right, there were around 60 programs. That means 60 videos. Made by 12 eighteen year olds who has amateur level skills in “filmmaking.” Now including me,  out of the 12, only 4 people in the class were competent in this type of video making. Thus the 2 months of hell began. 

Headmaster Kevina came in and gave us the song and dance of how great this will be being made by “such capable students and future Hitchcocks, Spielbergs and Tarantinos.” I could probably picture my face listening to this garage. She told us that she emailed every teacher about this arrangement and we are free to enter any classroom willy nilly and force the class to drop what they’re doing and help us make a 1-2 minute promo video for said program.

We were spilt into teams of two. I was stuck with this Brazilian girl who barely did anything. I know she was Brazilian because she would bring it up in EVERY conversation I had with her. Me: “Hey did export all the footage into the computer?” Her: “Oh I forgot! You know I’m Brazilian so I was just everywhere today!” Me: (that literally has nothing to do with you being a lazy moron)

So I was put in charge of 4  major departments: Wielding, Foreign Language, Forensics/Law enforcement and Culinarily.

First up was language. So when I walked into sign language and the teacher looked at me like a deer in the headlights when I told her why I barged into her classroom with a camera. Apparently Headmaster Kevina hadn’t emailed everyone about this… This led to dozens of thousand yard stares I’ve received by half a dozen teachers. nothing noticeable happened except for Latin. On this day I walked into the Latin classroom with the Kevin from part 1 of this trilogy. Kevin walked in and said “Hey uhh y’all speak Latin here?” Everyone looked at each other and busted out laughing at Kevin. The teacher informed us that “Latin is a dead language.” (Then why bother learning it?) 

Culinary: Me and Brazilian Kevina walked into the schools kitchens and just started secretly filming people make food. The Chef teachers did notice us but I just think they hadn’t received an email about it but they just couldn’t care less that we were there. 

Law: These guys were awesome actually. I had a little conference with all three law teachers and they dropped all their lessons to help us make the promos. I made the three best promos in the class… which will come to our detriment later…

Wielding: Screw everyone there because APPARENTLY they just decided “hey uhh so we’re just not having class today… or ever so just don’t bother coming to class.” Which made it impossible for me to get any footage. 

So the law videos. Everyone was having trouble matching the flow of all the videos since we were a team of inexperienced and unorganized misfits. The teacher loves the law videos which the Brazilian girl took credit for. When arguing with Headmaster Kevina and the film teacher about this mismatching film styles and the rapid response to this was “Everything just needs to match the law videos!” So basically meaning that I needed to work on every video to have everything match. I wasn’t going to do that so the Brazilian master mind can handle all that mess on her own. 

These stupid promo videos took us such a long time that we didn’t even get every 60 videos done. So Headmaster Kevina wasn’t “mad” but “very disappointed.” If I could have said “I honestly couldn’t care less” I totally would but graduation was next week.

Since then they made the poor souls of the Juniors then Seniors do the rest of the work in our place after we left. Wether they got it done, only they know… 

Thus the end of my high school Kevin film saga… until I went to college. Alas that is a story for another day. Hope you enjoyed.My brother, the Kevin in this story, has never been the sharpest tool in the shed. He believes that dolphins cause cancer, but we aren't here to discuss that. One day, Kevin was eating a croissant and asking when we got "blue-cheese" croissants. He was saying how delicious they were and when was the soonest we would have more. This was odd, because the last time we bought croissants was WEEKS ago. I saw him holding a croissant that was covered in blue mold and happily munching away at it. I told him it was moldy and not safe to eat but he insisted it was fine because "it tastes all good to me". I threw out all the rest when he wasn't looking so he couldn't eat anymore "blue-cheese" croissants.

Edit: Y'all want to know about the dolphins. OK, well 5 or 6 years ago Kevin was a young adolescent and we still had some hope his brain would develop further. He is very curious and loves to ask questions, so I was explaining how electromagnetic waves work in simple terms and that electromagnetic waves with really high frequencies can cause cancer. He looked shocked and asked "Wait, so does that mean that dolphins cause cancer?" I had to keep questioning Kevin to figure out how on Earth he came up with this conclusion. He thought that 1. Electromagnetic waves and the waves in the ocean are the same. 2. That all waves in the ocean are created by the movements of dolphins. He thus concluded that dolphins cause cancer.So I had this Kevin in my fraternity. 

Granted, storage space in the house is limited, but this guy took it to the next level with leaving his crap all over the house.

When his mini fridge wouldn't hold all the stuff he bought, he went to another members fridge and put the remaining beer and hoagie sandwiches he bought in that members fridge without telling that member. Then he all but got into a physical fight when he went to retrieve items only to find out said member consumed them already.

Kevin decided to go to a yard sale. He decided to purchase a giant L shaped couch at the sale. Only 1 section of the couch fit in his room, so he left the remaining pieces out in the narrow hall which created a giant pain for members trying to get through.

Members had enough of that couch I'm the way and moved it outside. It rained that day. When Kevin returned he threw a giant 2 year old tantrum that the couch was ruined.

Kevin decides his truck needs new tires. He orders them online. These giant tires show up, and instead of directly taking them to get installed or even just putting them in the tailed, Kevin puts them in the entryway to the house.

They sit there for a week. At a house meeting Kevin is informed those tires need to find a new home, namely either on his truck or in his truck. Kevin does not reply.

During a house party some intoxicated members decide it would be funny to roll the tires. Our house is at the top of a hill. As they release the third tire Kevin sees it happen and chases after it on foot. All 3 of the tires hit another fraternity house at the bottom of the hill, and now their members are outside.

They think Kevin rolled the tires, and Kevin is trying to roll the tires back up the hill and is now mad at the other house because they are hassling him.

Kevin decides he wants to get into the amateur radio scene. He decides his small radio is no longer sufficient and decides to install a large antenna on the top of the house's roof. Kevin installs the antenna without permission. 

There is a problem. Kevin's room does not have direct access to outside. Kevin drills a hole into another members room to feed the cable through. Kevin makes no effort to tack this cable to a wall, under the carpet,  etc. Kevin then drills another hole to feed this cable out of that members room, across the hall, and into his room. Again, giant cable laying on the floor.

Annoyed, the member in the room he drilled into cut the cable and threw it out the window. Kevin becomes irate about damaged property, and reinstall s a new cable while the member is at class.

When that member returns to see the cable back, he goes up on the roof and pulls the whole antenna down and drops it in the front yard. Kevin barges into the members room and starts spouting off verbal sewage. That member was a lineman for the football team. When he stood up, Kevin realized the fight was a poor idea, walked back to his room, and slammed the door.

There were so many episodes of stuff like this 🤣This will partially be r/storiesaboutkevin and r/amItheasshole but I want to post it here. Here's the basic back story: Firstly, many apologies now for the cluttered details of this story. If I put every detail in order in of how everything went down, this would be the worlds longest thesis. It may be confusing but I'll try to make it make sense. Disclaimer: no real names in this post. Okay, here it is. 

I've been living with my bf for years now; with the help of his family, it's made things less painful to deal with money wise. We've been together for over 8 years now, me being 24 and him being 26. My bf is a full time university student getting his BA this year and has always had relatively consistent work where as I've struggled with working for literal years due to disabilities and illnesses springing up every 2 years or so. I'm not gonna give a sob story about me today, though. He takes good care of me and I swear I don't deserve it. Blah blah anyways, on with this story. 

3 or so years ago, we insisted on our friend to move in with us. She's 22 now. She was in an extremely toxic situation at her families house prior so moving her out was pretty easy. She's my sister basically. Our other roomate moved in shortly after she did and was kicked out by my bf's family six months into him staying with us (at the time, we were still under my bf's families roof and it wasn't our decision to kick him out). After we finally found a place elsewhere to actually move to, we decided to bring him with; I'll call him Kevin. 

I've known Kevin for years and my bf has known him even longer. All went to high school together before meeting our other roomate; I'll call her Gem, in University. They both lived in pretty toxic, shitty households. In similar yet very different situations. The long and the short of it, he was essentially groomed into being useless in decision making and reliant on others for guidance with everything, and she was bullied into believing she wasn't good enough and always needed to try more, do more and be better. 

Both of them have autism so it make it a lot harder and took a lot more effort for them to get to where they are now. With Gem, I honestly couldn't be happier. She proved to herself and her parents that she can be responsible, move out, pay bills, take care of herself, get a dog, live her life and everything in between. 

I'm already biased a bit due to my hatred for Kevin's mother due to my own issues from the past involving me and things said about my own mother so... I try to not let that affect the way I see Kevin but after a year + of him living with us under OUR roof, we've noted too many things to count that Kevin has done. 

One quick storytime example of his Kevin-ness is that at our place we first had before recently moving again with Kevin and Gem, he noticed our airfryer had melted our power outlet in the kitchen down to the wires and decided to not say anything for 3 days. He moving it back in front and act like it wasn't there. When I decided to clean the kitchen, I discovered it and panicked thinking it just happened. I contacted the other two only to get back from him that he'd know for 3 days and just didn't say anything. He'd used the fucking thing after he found out. We rent and we were in a complex. He could've burnt our place down our others and cost us or security deposit, damage costs, fines or worse. I cannot describe how mad I was. How mad we all were. THAT should've been the final straw, but no, my boyfriend insistent he could change and that he'd try to be a better person, blah blah blah. The only reason I'm writing this post is because the other day, it just hit my bf like a cement truck just the overwhelming weight of EVERYHTING. He fell into a pretty bad depressed state that night and struggled to comprehend all of it. Yeah, we are waaaaayyyy too patient sometimes. I want to be a nice person, and by no means do we with ill-will on Kevin at all. He's still a good friend and a well-meaning guy but the damage from his mother has seriously taken a toll over his childhood, adolescence, and adulthood; controlling him and reinforcing many behaviors at every turn. He has a scued idea of responsibilities and just being mature. Sorry for all the rambling. I've listed a bunch of his BS below. 

From my notes, this is what I've written over the span of 8ish months: 

- Remarks on the past without thinking it through
- No genuine or proper apologies for behavior in the past
- Created trauma through insistent friendship with my ex for 2 years
- Showing many instances of apathy or simply not caring for a situation or wanting to learn more of a situation
- Created conflict with my relationship due to immaturity, not respecting personal space with "directly" affected, and creating an awkward presence with current behavior
- Doesn't know how to read a room before saying/doing something entirely inappropriate or uncalled for
- Hovering constantly
- Using his autism as an excuse
- Using his depression as an excuse
- Having pretended to be suicidal over the idea of us messaging in a friend's chat he wasn't a part of because he thought we weren't going to be his friend anymore (yeah, taking himself to see the pearly gates or taking a blade to the wrist are the correct responses to that - not trying to be insensitive but have to be specific with terms)
- Doesn't interact with friends unless it's for a given purpose only he wants
- Struggles to understand the importance of separation between art/artist regarding real world problems or fictional media (supporting people who are garbage humans)
- Inappropriate behavior surrounding negative issues
- Being antisocial when outside friends come over to visit
- Not understand many basic cooking skills
- Can't be bothered to clean up messes he makes
- Having confidence in decisions
- Finding a new job (commitment)
- Being more serious about getting his driver's license
- Obvious physical health issues
- Taking pride in activities/himself
- Taking accountability/stop making excuses
- Addiction issues (goes with health problems)
- Understanding logical situations/having common sense with literally anything
- Responsibility over individual tasks (half-assing things)
- Not being so informative about daily events (get a journal or something)
- Income privacy issues (talks too much about it)
- No sense of space or sound (makes a lot of noise and is quite disruptive)
- Lives by a 'must be told what to do' lifestyle (too dependent) 

Daily Lifestyle Schedule:
- Wakes up
- Goes to work
- Cleans only his stuff unless asked otherwise
- Lays in bed watching TV all day
- Eats a lot
- Sleeps 

Okay... after all of that now, I don't know where else to go. We've had, if I need to put a number on it, about 11 conversations with him about these exact things. 

Some I already know are gonna say "wtf are you still friends with him?" And the answer for me is that I want to think myself as understanding, forgiving and patient... I'm too patient, though; patient or stubborn. My bf and I are similar. He takes friendships to heart. Almost more than family at times so it's intense and extremely hard for him to let friends go or even confront them, but after the amount of stress, feeling down, anxious, having mental breakdowns, and so on, we're done. 

We are done with him and don't know where else to turn. Gem gave me the idea to do a reddit post a month or so ago but I was hesitant. It only came up again 2 nights ago when I suffered a serious panic attack due to ptsd from my ex. I seriously don't know how many more details I can or even should add to this because on my screen right now, it seriously does look like the bad REALLY outweighs the good but at this point in our lives it kinda has. There's too much to talk about, too much to remember and too much I've probably forgotten. I feel so numb yet I cry probably once every day or so about it all. I want to help and be a good person, but I know I can't be everyone's savior. (Thats what my mom said to me growing up but I kinda didn't listen to that) We might try convincing him to move to his own place and then way he can still have "independence" and not have to go home to mommy dearest. Oh, keep in mind, Kevin is turning 26 this year. 

Sorry now and again for the mile long post and any spelling errors potentially. I just want to see if any one has any outside opinions and unbiased views on this situation. I'll respond if anyone has any specific questions. 

Kevin won't change. I'm not convinced he will. 

I feel like I'm the one in the wrong constantly for criticizing him on anything. We are truly, truly exhausted. I'm exhausted. 

Reddit, what do you think of all this?I got my commercial license in November 2016 through a company sponsored training program. Basically this means the trucking company paid every expense for getting my license, and in return I signed a contract to work for them for a year. If I work for the entire year, they'll forgive the debt and I'll be free to go. If I quit before it expires, they drop a $5,000 trade school bill on me. One of the terms in that contract said I have to work for 6 months in their expedited division, meaning I share the truck with a teammate who drives while I sleep, I drive while he sleeps, and the truck moves for about 20 hours a day.       

I got along with Kevin pretty well before this when we were sleeping in different hotel rooms, so I thought he would be a good teammate. I could not have been more wrong. The main reason I quit 3 months into that contract was that they refused to give me a new teammate, so now I was a trucker by night (I prefer the graveyard shift), and a babysitter by day of someone almost the same age as my dad. He was good at making sure the truck didn’t kill anyone on the highway, but that was about it.       

*He didn't seem to understand his life was in my hands when he was asleep, and would constantly wake me up to ask for help with something he didn't even try to figure out himself. Things like the radio, the GPS, the seat adjustment, even the cruise control which works exactly the same way as it does in every car I've ever driven. So when my turn came, I could do maybe 100 miles before I had to park the truck and pass out from exhaustion.         

*He went to insane lengths to blame his fuckups on anyone but himself. I'm pretty sure he has a gold medal in Mental Gymnastics.      

He didn't swing a turn wide enough when exiting a truck stop (despite 2 giant signs warning him), so the trailer wheels went into a ditch and we got stuck. He got a $150 ticket for blocking the road, and the company paid $300 for a winch-out. When a safety manager called him the next day to ask what happened, he said "the truck stop is working in cahoots with the city to keep the ditch there because it generates revenue for the towing companies and the police." When they didn't buy it, he tried to blame me even though I was asleep when it happened.      

The GPS is a tool, but he treated it like a God that would rain hellfire down on him if he displeased it. When we arrived at the customer on another trip (middle of nowhere, only building in sight bigger than a house), he ignored the giant sign that said "[customer name] truck entrance" because the GPS told him to keep going. Turns out we came just close enough for it to think we arrived, so it started directions to a fuel stop over 500 miles (800 km) away, and he followed it without question. 2 hours later, I woke up to a call from dispatch asking why we drove right past the customer without stopping and got back on the interstate. Eventually I put it all together, got in the passenger seat, and confronted him about it in as calm of a manner as I could after being woken up at my equivalent of 3:00 in the morning to clean up another one of his messes. His excuse was "the GPS told me to keep going, and I don't mess with computers like that", then he tried to blame me because I put the route in. It wouldn't surprise me if he pulled a Michael Scott and drove the truck into a lake because it told him to.      

*Truckers are required to log every moment we spend in the truck so we can prove we're complying with hours of service laws, and this was done on the same computer that we used for messaging the company, GPS, etc. Somehow he expected the computer to just magically know who is driving, so he constantly forgot to switch to his logbook when his shift started. This meant he would log his driving in my book right after I logged 10 hours of driving (law caps it at 11 hours per day) and ignore the lights and alarms warning about an hours of service violation, and I'd get a phone call from a safety manager asking why and how I drove 18 hours in one day. That happened 4 times.       

*It was damn near impossible for the company to reach him because he ignored his phone if he didn't feel like answering it. I even once saw him delete a message on the computer, then pretend he never received it when dispatch called him to ask for a reply. Don't want to answer a question? Just pretend they never asked. It even works if they can see when the message was opened.       

*He was pissed off that they kept sending our 18 wheeler to the ugly parts of the city. “Oh I'm sorry. Your next pickup will be shipped from that warehouse on the beach in Miami.” /s.      

*He was too scared to drive in North Carolina because of the sharp turns on I-40 at the Tennessee state line, which can easily be managed if you stick to the truck speed limit. He took it as a personal insult and tried to chew out our dispatcher every time we got a load going anywhere in that state.      

As soon as I had a job lined up with a better company, I waited for a load going through my home town. Then I met my brother at a Walmart near my house, threw all of my stuff into his car, and called the office on the way home to say "I quit. Kevin is on his own".My cousin (whos name is actually Kevin) is the single most stupid person i know. Naturally he is antivax and a "truth seeker", but those are small parts of an incredibly stupid whole. Here are some examples of his weird, weird world:

1: He eats cigarettes after he smokes them, he thinks that if he eats them, he will poo out the smoke later and thus, no lung cancer (he has asthma btw).

2: Kevin has had 6 cars in one year, all of them have been bought for him, all of them he has crashed in the exact same place in my area.

3: He claims that he is directly related to the British royal family, not only is everyone in my family scotish, we decend from Italy as far back as the 1700s.

4: He used to bully people for being fat, he was obese and would break down into tears when people didnt want to talk to him for bullying everyone.

5: Kevin tried to steal my Xbox 360 because i had an achievement on Halo Reach that he didnt. What was this achievement? Beating the game on Legendary All Skulls On.

6: My family keep our sewing machine locked away from him when he visits because he thinks he can grab the needle while its stabbing away at the fabric. He has tried this hundreds of times, he has also been hospitalised by this twice. (He turns the machine on himself to catch the needle).

7: Kevin once fitted a lock to his door and somehow locked himself out of his own bedroom with the key inside. His bedroom doesnt have any other exit besides a window with a 2 story drop.

8: He refuses to play PC games because apparently "console is better in every single way", whenever i ask him if his xbox series X is backwards compatible to all pc and console games, has cheaper prices for titles or can be played with multiple different input devices including those made for people with very specific disabilities, he will say no, but insist its better anyway. He turns 22 next month.

I have many, many more stories about Kevin, like the time he called the police on me for saying i was too busy to talk to him because i was "robbing a bank", i was playing Payday 2, but ill stop the stories here for now.

Ill share more if there is enough interest.I was living in a sharehouse at around August  2020. Due to disagreements with the manager  most of my housemates and i  had decided to move out and therefore the manager decided to fill the empty room which one of my previous housemates had moved out of. I had also signed a lease for a new place and kevin moves in two days before I am planning on moving out. Kevin seemed like a nice enough guy but it was a bit strange that he didn't have any food with him and he didn't go shopping and instead eating everyone elses  food. First day went by uneventfully but on the second kevin  was out all day which was weird because we were in a pretty strict lockdown.
When he came back and i was pretty much done packing my stuff for the move the tomorrow, he walks out on the deck where i was having a cigarette  and the conversation goes something like this:
Me:Hey how's it going
Kevin: Hey bro, i had my phone and wallet stolen can i borrow some noodles?
Me:yeah sure but how'd that happen?
Kevin: i don't know they just got stolen, found this facemask though
(Proceeds to put on facemask)
I think nothing of it thinking he meant that he found it in a store and bought it then i realise that he had his wallet stolen and ask
Me:what do u mean found it?
Kevin:it was on the ground at the train station. 

I nope the fuck out of there saying i have more packing to do. 
To this day i still don't get how that guy has made it to 30.Today I was reminded of an encounter that happen something like 10 years ago. 

I was walking to a bus stop when I saw a girl walk out of a small kiosk next to the stop. It was a hot day, so the door to the kiosk was propped open. As soon as she get out she loudly yells to her friend group across a nearby school yard.

Kevina: "He asked for an ID! Can you buy cigarettes for me?!"

One member of the group removed himself from the rest and walked in to the kiosk. Kevina waited for him right outside, occasionally peeking inside. Shortly after he walked out with a puzzled look on his face.

Kevinas Friend: "Somehow he knew I was going to give the cigarettes to you, so he refused to sell them to me. How did he know that?"

They both ponder this mystery for a bit until Kevina spots me by the bus stop. So she calls out to me, again very loudly.

Kevina: "Hey, you! Could you buy cigarettes for us?"

Me: "Sorry, I am only 17." 

I didn't want to buy cigarettes for them anyway. But the legal age for tobacco is 18 here so I couldn't do it even if I wanted to. I thought this would be the end of the conversation. Nope.

Kevina (still being loud): "It doesn't matter. He wont know you're under 18."

Me (facepalming): "He does now seeing as you are literally screaming at the top of your lungs right in front of the open door to the kiosk. He can hear you."

She looked at me puzzled. Then turned around and looked at the propped open door. My bus thankfully arrived, so I didn't have to continue dealing with them. But I also never got to see if she figured it out. 

I've seen plenty of entitled people treat service workers as if they are less than human. But this Kevina and her friend seemed to lack object permanence and thought the guy in the kiosk ceased to exist when they left the kiosk.so this isn't about 1 person but a lot of people I've encountered while working at a cat rescue/adoption center which doubled as a café. 

so basically the place was a rescue home for cats where we'd help and rehabilitate stray cats and put them up for adoption and was funded by the café connected to it. the attraction of the café was you could play with the cats while enjoying your food and if you took a liking to a cat, you could adopt them. we had a bunch of rules to prevent the cats from feeling overwhelmed or manhandled, making sure our guests know that this place is the cats' home while they are guests so they need to treat the cats with respect and to respect the rules we had. one of the most complained about rule was not being allowed to pick up the cats which wasn't a rule before but since there were a lot of cases of people manhandling and injuring cats, causing a spinal injury in one of the cats, which ruined it for everyone else by having the "no picking up the cats" rule in place. another rule was to sanitize your hands every time you left the café since all the cats were rescued and we didn't want any of the cats to be infected by a preventable disease since stray cats can get immunocompromised (yes, we followed covid protocols years before covid). but that's enough back story, here's the list of kevins I've encountered.

&#x200B;

kevin 1 : was annoyed that he couldn't pick up the cats and when i explained the reason to him he got annoyed and said,"i paid to play with the cats not to sit and eat." we have no entry fee to the cafe so all you pay for is the food, so i stood there confused since i couldn't tell him that without being rude.

kevin 2 : a lady called the café and asked if she could adopt a cat and we said she could and we suggested that she visited the café and see which cat got along with her since adopting a stray is about how you react to the cat and not vice versa and she said, "oh don't worry. I'm just looking for a specific breed. you wouldn't happen to have a Siamese cat, would you?" yes ma'am. we would most definitely have a purebred Siamese cat at a rescue and adoption center for stray cats.

kevin 3 : a lady called us asking about adoptions, and i quote, if we did home deliveries for the cat and if we had a list (she was trying hard to say menu) of cats which were up for adoption. i'd had a long day and was tired and thought it was a prank call so i responded, "sure ma'am, would you like your cat cooked or uncooked in addition to that, how finely do you want it diced?" my boss heard me say that and gave me a look. she was a really chill person and burst out laughing when i explained what happened. turns out the called was very serious and called my boss complaining about me and how rude i was to her.

kevin 4 : a person kept refusing to wash his hands because, "stray cats are used to living on the streets so their immune system is stronger than domestic cats."

I cant remember any more people I've encountered, but if I do, I'll be sure to add it to the list.The ongoing Olympics reminded me of what happened last time back in 2018. I was in college and my roommate Kevin was the stereotypical crazy guy. He would piss in buckets and throw them off the 4th floor of a dorm, he would play porn on any unsecured tv, et cetera. But the dumbest thing he ever did was try to recreate the winter Olympics inside. 

It was February 2018 and the winter Olympics had just started, but I was paying it little to no mind as the only sport i like is baseball and it was winter. Kevin, however, was determined to live up the Olympics. I first realized something was wrong when I walked into my dorm to discover a MASSIVE amount of dry ice on the floor, and Kevin standing on it with a hockey stick swinging at his alarm clock because he didn't have a puck. I helped him get rid of the dry ice, but I realized Kevin was going to be doing this shit for a while. 

It's now 2 AM, day 2 of the Olympics coming up. I have a long day of hard work ahead of me in college, but Kevin has a long day of skipping classes and playing winter sports. All of the sudden I jolt awake to see Kevin OPENING THE FUCKING WINDOW (it's Minnesota in February, about 10 degrees Farenheit, -12C). I leap up to stop him, but he's just stuck his head out the window screaming, "WAKE UP! THERE'S HOCKEY ON TV! WAKE UP!". Campus security actually comes to check it out. 

The next night i tell Kevin, "frankly dude i don't have time for your bullshit so stay quiet" or something like that, but he ignored it. Once again it's the wee hours of the morning when I hear Kevin singing in swedish and watching Kevin spray paint a swedish flag ON MY OWN FUCKING SHIRT. He spray painted my shirt, it was just a t shirt and i wasn't wearing it but still. 

Fast forward a few days and this time its beyond insane. It's 3 AM and He has put a fucking hockey stick into the sprinkler, as i rush to protect my possesions Kevin OPENS THE WINDOW and says, "when life gives you water make a skating rink!" 

At this point I'm ready to use his face as a Zamboni but I evacuate and the maintenance team comes to fix the damage, which they make ME pay because he blamed me convincingly enough. 

Fuck kevins.so my friend told me this story he is from a state with some weird people, so he said when i was little i had some friends that would eat hand sanitizer literally grab a hand full and shove it in there mouth and eat it!at my grandparents house there was this little park outside that had a little area of three trees in. One time when i was hanging out with my cousin by the trees, we were going around and smacking twigs off of the branches with sticks. Then we went around looking for sticks to whittle down to make little spears then we found a pen to write names on our sticks i will not say the names as they are not appropriate. Then an old guy with two dogs went to where those trees were, he looked at the twigs that were on ground and looked at us and said "you guys like what you did here" to which we replied "yeah its like art"  "excuse me" he replied i dont know what he was expecting from two teenagers and we said louder "yeah its like art!" he scoffed and walked away then he left about 15 minutes later. Then we went back to the trees then a kevina appeared on her front porch she saw all the branches on the ground and came over to us the conversation went exactly like this and said "look at the fucking mess you made" not the best first impression is it? we said "im sorry what?" in a very confused tone 

"dont be idiots pretending your confused" she replied, "but we are confused" we replied "look at the fucking branches on the ground you know what you did" oh btw we were just teenagers having fun outside we weren't intentionally trying to hurt the trees "were just teens having fun though" i replied "stay right here i'll be back" we said "okay" then she came back with a bag of cheesie puffs and tried to bribe us with them so we would tell her where our parents were so she could talk to them we said "no" quite firmly then she replied saying "eat these fucking cheetos" we said "no" again then she threw the bag on the ground and left i called her out and said "but you just left a plastic bag on the ground" then she said "clean it up yourselves" we again said "no". But then as me and my cousin were going to sit down on the grass this kevin opened his front door and yelled "are you guys hitting those fucking branches!" 

we did not reply then he yelled "if you guys are hitting those fucking branches im gonna come outside and beat your ass!" we did not reply, then he yelled "alright im gonna get my shoes on and come out there!" then we started running and he said "yeah thats right run you fucking cowards" then this aboriginal man who was a very kind man said "they should not be talking to you that way, that place is a green place everbody can use it and play around in there but right now you need to go tell your folks about this tell them everything that happened i'll deal with him if he comes out" we said "thank you so much and thank you for being reasonable" then we left so do you think that me and my cousin are in the wrong or kevin and kevina.EDIT: Many of you have pointed out that the person in question is not a Kevin. I would say that she is both entitled (because of her frequent behavior) and a Kevin (because of the cluelessness), but if the story doesn't belong here, I am fine with it being moved somewhere else, if mods can do that.  


Hey Reddit,

I want to tell you the story of a girl I used to know. I think she fits the Kevin archetype because, if you knew her for two hours, you would start wondering how she managed to survive to this day.

Her name is V. She is the most Kevin person I have ever met, not because she was particularly dense, but because she got everything wrong. Literally everything. There was nothing in her life that she was not messing up. The worst part was, she didn't even realize. Allow me to give you some real life examples, that is, things that I have seen her do/have heard from her.

&#x200B;

\-Her father was abusive towars her family, sometimes physically. She excused him and loved him because "he's still my dad". No thought process behind it, just blind acceptance of a terrible situation.

\-She had no job, didn't go to university, did nothing all day. Literally just sat on her arse playing Fortnite or going for walks with friends. Did I mention she wasn't even 30? She was wasting away her best years not improving in any field, and she was obliviously happy about it. I saw her bringing a half-assed CV to a call center where they told her "The heck are you doing here? Just send it online like everyone else". She was just clueless and was happy with it because mama paid the bills.

\-She played Fortnite all day. Wouldn't even be that bad, except she asked me to play every night, even if I told her from the get go that I absolutely did not like the game. I stopped replying after a while because I really did not want to play and she really did not want to shut up about it.

\-She was on a ""diet"". The ""diet"" was her skipping meals every day and eating fruit for dinner. If you know a thing or two about dieting, you know that this is basically starving your body to death, and the only results you get out of this are a weight gain and a muscle loss, not to mention the loss of appetite since your eating habits are all out of whack. If you told her about the dangers of her ""diet"", she would laugh and say that she does what she wants. Last time I saw her, despite her marvelous ideas, her physique had gotten worse.

\-Along with her ""diet"", she also did physical exercise. Her physical exercise was biking for 10 minutes every two days. Achieved absolutely nothing, but would post stories about it on Instagram.

\-She littered. Cigarettes, tissues, you name it, she threw everything on the ground.

\-She only listened to a specific subset of songs, which were love songs written in her regional dialect. I live in a country where dialects are massively different among each other, and these songs, apart from being super bland, were frustrating to hear for folks unfamiliar with them, because you could understand maybe two-three words every two sentences. Of course she blasted these songs all the time in her car, so everyone on the street could be disturbed by the loud noise.

\-She wanted to be an Instagram model of some sort. Now, if you are into the social scene, you know you have to market yourself in a certain way to rise to "fame". Well, she posted the wrong things, with the wrong tags, at the wrong times of the day. Everyone can use social media the way they like, but don't say you want to be a social media star if you are actively sabotaging youself.

\-Every time she got with someone, she sent an audio to our common whatsapp group telling how awesome it was. In one of the audios you could hear the guy talking in the background. Absolute cringe for days.

\-She had no interests or hobbies, she did not care about anything. She wasn't even good at Fortnite somehow. The only thing she did once in a while was going shopping to get a lot of expensive stuff using her parents' money.

&#x200B;

In the end, we had an argument because I didn't ask her how she was doing every day. No, I am not joking. We were not that close (I distanced myself after seeing what kind of person she was), and when she got covid, she wouldn't shut up about it. She got an incredibly tame form of it and didn't even have symptoms, but she still expected everyone to feel pity for her.

Did I say that we had an argument? SHE had an argument, I just stood there dumbfounded while she insulted me through message, and told me to off myself. I was working during her tirade so I had just a few minutes every now and then to look at the endless angry messages. I was done with her BS at that point, I made copies of her messages, went to the police, and threatened to bring her to court. She finally stopped.

I felt immediately relieved because I didn't have to be afraid of Fortnite every evening from then on. She kept looking at my social media stories for a while, now she has disappeared for good.

If you are out there, V, get a clue and stop being dumb in literally everything you do in your life.  Last time I heard from Kevin was when he left me an answering machine message which began with "hey cock knocker, how you been?", before launching into a fourteen minute diatribe about his new "meat and potatoes" workouts and finishing with "if you aren't going to say anything than fuck you.  I'll be over around 8".  I purposefully left at 7:30 and didn't come home until 1:15 am.  He got out of his car like nothing had happened and followed me into the apartment before opening all of my cabinets until he found peanut butter.  He went into anaphylactic shock again for maybe the fourteenth time since I've known him.

  That was in 2013.  Apparently not long ago, his dad gave him his house in order to move in with a woman he knew for about two weeks.  Evidently she hadn't agreed to the arrangement, so his dad asked for the house back.  Kevin refused, and sued his dad in court.  Kevin acted as his own attorney, citing the nonexistent and purely made up "Indian Giver Laws" claiming that this particular statute would no - contest force the judge to decide in his favor.  He didn't win.  Luckily his dad, who also has a peanut allergy, died of anaphylactic shock after 58 years of several hundred other like occurrences after chowing down on a Pay Day.

  Kevin inherited his dad's $8,099 life savings and used it to rent space in a dilapidated rathole at the end of a road next to a train trestle far from any main roads and turned it into a bar he named simply "Men Only".  We live in a steel mill town, so the idea was to open a bar for mill workers, whom Kevin had always regarded as heroic.  The theme was purely pornographic female objectivism.  He drilled holes in the bathroom wall and inserted pocket pussies for men to penetrate after taking a piss under a sign reading "pleez kum on floor an' not in pusseez".

  But because he didn't have the wherewithal to promote his business (he never even made a sign, only said to his friends "if I build it, they will come"), he lost a thousand dollars a week, so he sold his house to his next door neighbors for $2,500 and slept in the decaying building for the next week and a half before going bankrupt.  So, he called me, after nine years, and stated plainly "I'm gonna have to move in with you".  I explained that I hadn't lived in that apartment complex in ten years.  He called me and screamed through my answering machine about how much of a "fuck nut" I am for not telling him I didn't live there, despite the fact that I, in fact, had done exactly that.

  Last night, an old friend of mine texted me and told me Kevin was staying with him and stating all of the nasty things Kevin had said about me.  I really didn't pay any attention to it.  The last thing Jason told me was that he got home yesterday afternoon to find his Xbox One missing.  When Kevin finally showed up at 10:20 pm (he drove to a gas station five blocks away in a town he'd grown up in all his life at 3:30 pm, and then got lost on the way home), he responded to the topic of the missing Xbox with "I started playing 'Alien: Isolation', but I kept dying, so I sold it at GameStop".  "WHY?", questioned Jason in an incendiary tone.  Kevin replied with "what do you mean?".  "Why did you sell my Xbox and game?".  "I already told you.  I kept dying, so obviously it was broke".

To be continued...This happened a couple years ago. I was a field trainer for a cable company. My job was to train door to door sales reps so they could be as successful as possible. 

I helped Kevin.

Kevin was over the top, happy, clueless and overall a great guy. He could talk to anyone, didn't care about how "dangerous" a neighborhood was and could make some good sales.

Over time I no longer had to walk with him and train him. It was time to let the baby bird fly.

He did, then I noticed a change his work phone was always tracked via GPS so keep track of time in the field, door knocks, contacts and so on. 

One day when I'm training another new rep my Xbox app goes off. Kevin and I were both gamers and would play regularly.  I was not a manager over him I was just a trainer. However I found it odd that he'd be online in the middle of the day since I know he already got a sale that day and his GPS showed him still knocking doors.


I loaded up my tablet and felt like doing a surprise check up.

I went to the location marked on GPS and knew he was in a house. Good for him I thought. 

I waited for him to come out only to see an older lady in her late 40s walk out and thank the customer. 

I approached her and asked how she was, who she was and what's going on.

I was confused because the past month or so he had more than tripled his sales and was in the running for the company trip meaning top ten reps in the company. 

She explained that he had a mental breakdown and wouldn't leave his bedroom and after he told her about the job she looked up sales advice and and even door to door sales books. Turned out she had been running an ebay store buying and selling. 

I told her that what he and she was doing was super super wrong but out of curiosity did that last house buy?

Yes 

They bought TV, internet and even phone with the upgraded boxes and battery backup.

I told her that it was great she's so good but I'm sure tons of laws were being broken.

I asked if she liked the job and if she would come work for us officially. 

She thought at her age no one would hire her for a sales job.

I said, well if you don't mind the fact that we will be firing your son I will personally make it top priority to hire you.


We fired Kevin 

The company didn't want to hire mom but I showed the numbers.

She had been working really hard and only 6 people in the entire company sold more than her.

During Kevin's exit interview he explained his clan in ark got raided and he had to rebuild, that he told his mom to work for him.

We hired her 3 weeks later and though some people were upset she still got to go on the company trip. 

I left the company for a bigger company but I hope she's doing well.Hey! Been a while since I posted but most things have been quiet on the Kevin front at my job lately. This one, however, was a doozie and I couldn't wait to share!

So I work at a popular Midwestern pizza chain and, one night, we were very busy. Orders were being delivered and picked up at lightning speed and we were all very much in the zone when, suddenly, one of our delivery drivers comes from the back of the store and says, "Someone is knocking on the back door. What should I do?"

I'm confused and concerned because that door is very clearly not for public use. Think an unused emergency door behind a section of strip mall with no welcoming sign and a steep hill. I say, "Well, definitely don't let them in." The driver confirms he wasn't going to and leaves on a delivery.

Things start to slow a bit and we start taking phone orders again. I pick up the phone and give my store greeting. This is what followed:

Kevina: Hi, I'm with [popular delivery app].

Me: Oh, okay. Just go ahead and come in. We'll hand you your delivery. (Having delivery app drivers assume we'll run the order to their car is a common thing and I assumed that is what this woman wanted.)

Kevina: Um, but are you open?

(I'm confused at that because A) I picked up the phone B) Our sign is lit and people are coming in and out and C) I just told her to come in.)

Me: Uh, yes, ma'am. We are.

Kevina: Because I've been knocking on the door for a while and no one's opened it.

(That's when it clicked that SHE was the one insistantly banging on our back door! She would have had to park on an extremely busy street, unsafely, gone up a very steep hill and ignored the fact that all of the surrounding businesses were a part of a strip mall you access ON THE FRONT THROUGH AN OBVIOUS PARKING LOT.)

Me: Ma'am, we're a part of a strip mall and it sounds like you've been at our emergency back door. If you come around to the front, main entrance, we can serve you.

Kevina: Oh, I'm so sorry about that! But, where is it?

Me: Like I said, around the front. Via the parking lot.

Kevina: Oh! Okay! That makes sense.

She came in and was acting like we need to make it more obvious that it wasn't the front door she was banging away at but there is literally nothing else we can do to make it seem less welcoming.

She then asked how she woukd be able to tell the two orders she was picking up apart, and I said with the names on the labels on the boxes and pointed to them. She looked at the boxes for a while and then repeated "But how do I tell then apart?"

I don't know how this woman is allowed to drive.So I just posted a Kevin story and it reminded me of another Kevin story.

So again I used to be a field trainer for a cable company. My job was to train direct sales representatives to do door to door sales.

One thing about door to door sales is it attracts people of all walks of life. 

Kevin 2.0 was a kid that I figured was on the spectrum. 
Traits of this Kevin
No eye contact, ever.
Constant pictures of his food even if we went out to McDonald's. 
Would whisper or talk so softly you had no choice but to ask him to repeat or be absolutely quiet to hear him

Just overall a weird guy.

I figured he'd never make it in sales but he proved me wrong. 

Training him was easy but hed ask weird questions and in weird order. Such as because the company required a credit check one would ease people into it in order to get their ssn and run the check.

Not this guy. He'd go straight up to a person, hand them his tablet and ask for their ssn. If they passed he would pitch the sale. If they didn't he'd move on without even introducing himself.

This blew my freaking mind every time some complete stranger gave out their ssn without so much as a who are you.

Time passes and the virus hits.

The company changed what we did and for some reason they had us going door to door, not knocking but still disposition doors.

This made no sense at all but hey if we hit 50 doors we got paid an average of what we were making before the virus.

This kid would disposition all the doors from the office and not even go into the field. Human resources wouldn't let us fire him for that.

Then they changed the policy that we had to come into the office every day. They would check to make sure you swiped your badge in the morning. If you didn't swipe, you were counted as a no call no show.

This Kevin was caught after weeks of doing as follows.

He would swipe his badge at roughly 7am every morning,  the office didn't open until 8 but a badge swipe would still unlock the doors. Then he'd completely disappear the entire day.

Then at around 10pm he's swipe his badge again.

This made absolutely no since at all so we looked into what was going on.

At 7am he would swipe his badge as he LEFT the building. At 10pm he'd swipe to get IN the building. He had built a nest in the warehouse. He was literally sleeping at the office.

To this day my mind still wants to know why when he had his own apartment just a few miles down the same road as the office. 

When we fired him we asked but he simple said because.....My wife has a friend with a son who is a few months older than mine but is showing signs of becoming a hall of fame Kevin. Each time I'm with him he does something special. He may only be 4 (he turns 5 in a couple of months) but he's on another level

So my son goes to day camp and they have a parents event and fundraiser for their Olympics week one evening and we agree to take Kevin. There are little carnival games and face painting and bounce houses. 

My wife of course gets caught in a conversation so I'm alone at it with my son and Kevin.  They go in a bounce house with 2 other kids and at the end of the five minutes they come out. My son comes out and puts his shoes on.and I look around and can't find Kevin. Then I hear him crying. I turn to find him somehow behind me a good 40 feet from where the kids leave their shoes just out in the line of traffic nearly being trampled. He's got this pathetic whimper and says "Mr Love, Mr Love my shoe won't go on." I kneel down to help him and see that he is trying to put on 2 left shoes. Then I notice that neither shoe is the same. Not the same brand or color or design. I know from habit that he has black slip-ons with the brand on the tongue. He's got one of that brand that is a different color and has an animal pattern and one that is a completely different everything, brand, size and has velcro which he can't operate. As a point of reference all the other boys in their peer group can operate velcro. I drag him back to the bounce house to get his shoes and he's still having a meltdown because he still can't understand why two left shoes, none if which are his will go on his feet, But I track them down and resolve it

I really stayed on him for the rest of the hour and he only had 1 more meltdown. In the end he was very happy because he got his face painted like a ladybug. It was actually a butterfly but if he was happy calling it a ladybug I'm not going to correct him. 

Maybe this seems mild but it is just one in a very long chain of events of incurable numbskull behavior that to me can only be explained by the fact that the kid is a Kevin. I'm going to be moving out of state in a few months but I'm determined for my wife to maintain her friendship so we can keep track of this kid. He's entertaining as fuck.Hello everybody. I have two stories for you today. It would have been three, but he has the hyperactive version of adhd. The two Kevin’s in this story are cousins. For simplicity, the first one will be CK, for cousin Kevin. The second will be BK, for brother Kevin. They both are not that bright. These stories will tell you why. Let’s start with the first story.

This story takes place at my Grandparents cottage. At the cottage, we would of used the fire pit, but we are using a barrel. CK is 9, and decided that he would sneak out of the Bunky (small house with a living room and a bedroom. Nothing else), and put wood into the barrel. Then lit it up. At 11 pm. The logic I think he thought of was: “Hey, I could start a fire at 11 without adults watching because why not”? The only reason he was caught was because my Grandma was up at time. I think he was going to try to be a fire bender from Avatar?

Onto the second story:

This story took place at my moms house. In this story, BK is 10. My uncle is single with an adult daughter. For Christmas, he got me and my brother a PS5 bundle, which includes a pair of headphones. This is what the exchange: 

BK: Hey, Op, can you help me with something?

Me: Sure, what do you want help with?

BK: I just want help with something.

Me: Yeah, but what?

BK: I just want help.

Me: Yes, but I need to know what you need help with.

BK: Do you need to know what you need help me with?

Me: If I don’t know how I am I going to help?

BK: I don’t know.


And I still have 5 years of stories in the future. I’ll try to keep up.“Look at their jerseys- Ned Brouwer, Ned Meewens. . . Isn’t it weird?”The Kevin of this story is me. I'm Kevin. 

My brother loves to ride the four-wheeler around the backroads by our house. Last night, He did just that. When it started to get dark, my dad left in his truck. Then, my sister came inside with a cut foot, so I took care of it. I went through all the bathrooms of the house looking for medicine to put on her foot and knocked on the locked bathroom door. My brother answered and said it wasn't in there. I put the bandaid on her foot after just using hydrogen peroxide. 

Anyway, I noticed my mom pacing around the front porch. I went outside to see what was wrong and she asked if I had seen my brother. The memory of just talking to him completely slipped my mind, so I said no. She said he never came back from riding the four-wheeler and dad was going to look for him because it was getting dark. All three of us were calling him and he wasn't answering. Getting increasingly worried, we started contacting neighbors. Dad came back and asked if my brother had come home yet, and we said he hadn't, so he went back out to look again. 

We were about to call the police when my brother frantically runs down the stairs on the phone with dad saying "I'm right here!" He wasn't answering the phone because he was in the bathroom. (I swear he's always in there for hours) He's not supposed to have his phone in the bathroom so he left it in his room like he's supposed to. He had gone down the road on the four-wheeler and come back and put it away in the barn like he was supposed to. The only thing he didn't do was tell someone that he was back. 

He was confused that I was worried because I had talked to him, which I had completely forgotten about. "You spoke to me, Kevin!" he said. I feel that this was somehow partially my fault... 

We're glad he's ok and mom told him to just check in next time. I can't believe I could forget almost immediately that I talked to him. I would hope it was a one-off thing, but I do dumb crap like that all the time. So does my brother, but that's not the point. I'm genuinely worried about me moving across the country for college. I'm not gonna survive with this utter lack of common sense. 

Not sure if this story belonged here but I wanted to share.My younger brother had a Kevin in his freshman biology class. They were reviewing the names of the spinal columns for an upcoming test. The teacher asked “what column is this? I’ll give you a hint, the name sounds similar to the opening of the uterus”. Kevin yells out “the Fallopian tubes?”I originally posted this on r/entitled parents and wanted to Post it here too enjoy 

Cast = 


Karen 
Kevin stupidest guy 
Many cops to count 
EM
BD booss dad
Daughter she's Kathy but ima call het daughter bec it's easier 
My son Mark 
Neighbour Karen 

So I was 21  I came in college late bec I am a single dad , I in the first class I met the couple who made the entire college miserable. Karen was racist , homophobic ,and a pain the ass 
Kevin was the dumbest guy I've ever seen he was religious and valways said "I read the Bible so I'm god" or "you're not Christian your fucking insert n word here" he once said a cop if he wants coke (not the drink) he was arrested bec he had 5 grams of Coke. Karen came hurrying and hit the cop With a broom . Idk how tf they showed up 1 week later Also they're parents are rich like crazy rich so yeah . one day guess what  yep I was there target they both demanded not asked "wanna have threesome " I choked and stared laughing and Karen said "what's so funny" and tried dragging me I said no and Kevin stared crying "I want sex " and Karen stated yelling while Kevin was acting like crazy and Karen said the most dumbest thing on this planet possible by any creature "if you don't have Sex with us I'm gonna tell lord Jesus to kill you we are his children " I Said "uh okay everyone is and left for my class the she called the Cops on us and told them " officer arrest her he Said he won't have threesome with us " and he's a racist homophobic swear . Police officer was pissed and told Karen to fuck herself , then Karen called her mom and she came and slapped me and tried to drag me again and said  "Jesus gave permission my daughter to r**e anyone " and started hitting me utill cops arrested her then Karen pepper sprayed me she also got arrested and then she bit one police officer so badly he had to leave his job . Karen and her mom got arrested and money couldn't save them this time and also got sued for ten million dollars , and 3 year's in prison , and Karen got 1 year ... Fuck the law man  
Anyone asking the cop Also received a mansion , 3 car's if he dropped all charges but I didn't so yeah they got punished . 1 year oh boy Kevin made my life a living hell he told one of the processor that I was having relationship with a 2 year old it was my fucking daughter and this time I I beat the shit out of Kevin when he said racist stuff about my daughter I can take lightly so yeah I went completely bear dad mode ig  . Here are some dumbest guy of the year award winner Kevin's many stories...
He refuses to believe that holocaust 
Kevin once ate own poop...why I don't fucking know and he brought them in a plastic bag and started eating it , and shouting " awoo hola lalalalalalala  motherfucker lalalal oo " something stupid like this and everyone started calling him poo eater .
 He once somehow I don't fucking know how got permission to have Sex in prison with Karen and taped it and showed us at class presentation on reproduction teacher didn't Stop him because he it was Sex topic I don't remember. 
  I took my daughter who turned 3 out with few friends on chucky cheese Kevin showed up and told .....  " OMG I wana f that kid " I beat him so hard he didn't bother me until. 
 
Final year 
Karen was back this time she showed up at my office and demanded that I get fired when asked why she told again " he Said he wouldn't have threesome with me and my boyfriend so I did what Jesus would and attacked him with my mom and got one year in prison for that . 
My boss took my side and Karen got dragged out by security and forcefully dragged her out .

Then  Kevin and Karen got pregnant and had they're first child  

Karen's dad got In trouble with IRS bec of unpaid labor and taxes and bet who was one of the unpaid worker.....me 
When I took him to court he said that I didn't deserve it bec I got his wife arrested yeah he got sued by me and 22 other employees and paid  $2m each of us bec he even used verball abuse and harassed 

Welcome 2020 
I was successful  because of  the money I recived from BD even  though I had bad luck at dating I adopted mark 2 year old I moved in a nice Home In Beverly hills and my daughter Kathy was 9 ,
Oh  boy we have a  neighbour it was Karen and Kevin they're still together and have 5 kids an 6 year old twin girls , and others 3 kid's I don't know and another infant twin boys 
I thought after having kids they're gonna be a new person ....... fuck no 
Kevin saw me and recognised me , and oh boy he was still a Kevin so was Karen who was pregnant at the time they stated chewing me out to one of the Neighbours who's, also a Karen and single mom they shot death glare at me and Karen even made a comment about my daughter skin colour , my savage  9 year ole said "oh no a Keren like the internet ones dad " my friendly neighbour stared laughing badly and then she saw my son and, again said " huh you keep those asian slurs now " 
And I said " look a fat bitch is barking " 
And quickly went inside 
So covid hit and Karen and neighbour Karen knocked on my door I didn't open and asked why are they here and to get out they demanded that i get rid of my son because he was the Reason of covid , I told them to fuck off oh boy I'm gonna make a part 2 of this because my hand hurts and I have more dumb Karen x Kevin mini Stories to tell and yeah we're face to face neighbour so we see eachother everytime we go outside .... byeIn my last post I talked about this Siberian Husky that keeps breaking out of its kennel at the pet store I work at, and I decided to make a second part as somethings have happened recently. Since my last post Houdini has figured out how to use the opening she creates and physics to break open the kennel door, I know I couldn’t believe it either. So one day I’m cleaning, and I look over to her kennel and see she is not only out but her kennel door is wide open, which was strange since I thought I had locked it, so I put her back in and make sure it’s properly locked, but I still have my suspicions so I watch her, and she begins doing her normal routine of going through the opening until I see her push her legs through the bottom of the opening, and too my horror uses the pressure to cause the metal latch locking the door to fail,?and the kennel door to swing open. So I put her in a new kennel which sometimes calms her down (thankfully it worked) and tell my manager what I just saw, and she’s just as exasperated as I am at this dog, so she decides she’s done with this dogs antics and tells us to put a heavy bag of dog food in front of her kennels door. This works for a few days, but just the other day while we’re moving the dogs around, for space for the new dogs coming in. She started chewing on the metal bars to the kennel door. (it’s not fully metal it has a wooden frame and the bars are held to the frame with these zip ties) She managed to break a tooth while chewing on the bars and later that night, she managed to chew through the zip tie things (not sure what they are called) causing the bars to literally fall off. Night shift never told anyone what happened, so when I got in the next day I’m panicking as I see it’s her kennel, and the bars are inside the kennel and there is no sign of the dog I look around the store and she’s nowhere. I later find out she’s fine and that a coworker took her home for the night, until the kennel doors can be fixed since we just got new dogs there wasn’t a free kennel for her.I'm the first of my family to go to college. My family comes from a tiny town in the Nebraska sandhills, about as close to an uncontacted tribe as you will find in America. Our town had about 800 people, and very rarely did any of them leave at all, let alone move away. Our town revolves around the church and everyone knows everyone else by name for the most part, or at least their families. 

I decided to go to college, and left that town forever, but sometimes I still go back to meet with my family. It's then that I receive updates on Kevin, my younger brother. He's 17, I'm 23. I graduated college this summer and have work in the city, but over the 4th of July I visited Kevin. Usually I am told by my parents of Kevin, but this 4th I got to see it myself. 

On the afternoon of Friday the 2nd, I pulled up to my parents' house. We eat dinner and Kevin is behaving for the most part. I catch up with all the small town drama, and my parents make clear they are still irked by my decision to leave. Next, I ask about Kevin. 

"Oh, he bought a bunch of fireworks for this weekend! It's gonna be awesome!". 

FUCK. 

It's Saturday morning and my mother is frying up some eggs when Kevin slides down the stair railing holding a lit orange firework, screaming "oompa loompa!" He throws it at the window, which is rattled hard by the small explosion but it's underwhelming given the size of the firework and it doesn't even break the window. Still, awfully dumb. My mom amazingly seems totally unbothered. 

By afternoon we head to the town center for the "[town] days" celebration, which is a shitty festival held the day before the 4th so that you can get two days of drinking beer in public and shooting off fireworks in a row. 

Kevin steals a giant bowl of potato salad from an old woman and runs with it like a football. Apparently in Kevin's mind everyone plays along with him, but in reality we stood in horror as he chucked the glass bowl into the street and it smashed on the cobblestones. 

We leave him alone (TIFU) for the rest of the evening, and he and his friends chill at the town restaurant, but we can tell they're planning something. Unfortunately we're kind of helpless especially given my parents and I were already somewhat cold to each other due to my decision to leave and couldn't get on the same page. So nobody has a plan for his insane 4th. 

It was 7am on the morning of the 4th when Kevin and his friends (7 of them, somehow) are running around the middle of the town with GUNS. EVERYBODY here has guns, but it's even more troubling in the hands of Kevin and his henchmen. They're running around the town square holding rifles. They do this for a few hours and apparently nobody thinks anything of it except me. These are all things that seem normal in small town life. 

Kevin and his Kevin Krew barge into our house for lunch, which my mom gladly serves up and my dad acts like they're his own friends. At this point I feel like I'm taking drugs, seven dudes with rifles are eating lunch in my house! 

Kevin then does one of the most idiotic things I've ever seen. He yells to one of his friends, "hey Josh [fake name]! Have you ever seen me clean my rifle?". Josh replies, "no!" 

Kevin then *pours an entire fucking jar of pickle juice down the barrel of a loaded gun*. 

But that's not even close to Kevin's amazing stunt that evening. Did you think those fireworks were really just for a wholesome backyard show? Oh no. Kevin shows up to the mayor's house and starts shooting them off. Directly over the mayor's house. 

The mayor (keep in mind this is a small town, we know the mayor) is sleeping in his home when a firework goes through the window. 
The mayor charges out with a shotgun thinking Kevin and his friends were armed, and he fires a warning shot as they scatter into the bushes, slowly surrendering as they say something to the effect of, "it's just a prank bro!". 

To recap, Kevin made the town mayor think someone was attacking his house. But this is far from his dumbest stunt, only his most dangerous one. 

Let's go back to a few years ago. Kevin was feeling too warm, so he had a genius idea. Just get ice "inside the body". He shoved a bag of ice cubes up his ass. We had to visit the rural hospital when he got a twist tie that was on the bag lodged up his anus. 

Kevin had an obsession with how "salami looks like a penis". To the point where he used "salami" as his word for "penis". "My salami hurts" meant he needed to piss. "She makes my salami stand" for an attractive woman. 

Kevin stated that mowing the lawn was pointless because it would "just grow back". 

Kevin claimed he fucked a goat. To a friend who had a farmer for a dad with goats. He then reassured his friend he didn't fuck THAT goat. 

What an idiot.So, around 10 years ago I spent a couple of months volunteering overseas. Due to rotations in volunteer housing and programs, I kept running into this pair of dudes who were very friendly overall, but quickly gained a reputation for being absolute Kevins. The funny part is that they had gone there together, had been friends since childhood, looked very much alike, and even shared the same first name. So, Kevin A and Kevin B. As they say: Twice the Kevin, double the dumbness.  Everyone called them Dumb and Dumber. For a few months we were actually roommates in a rented apartment, and that’s when they unleashed most of their kevinness upon us. There were 5 of us, with opposing schedules, so we’d usually come home wondering what crazy new situation we’d find. Here it goes:

&#x200B;

* They’d come back from work/parties late at night, and walk past a street that has lots of restaurants and grocery stores. Now, in certain places like these, distributors leave boxes full of products leaning on business doors, so the clerks bring them in when they open. Dumb and Dumber would bring those boxes home because they thought they were “free stuff”. We tried explaining to them that there is no such thing, but they just didn’t understand. So, once a week or so, we’d wake up to a giant sack of oranges in the kitchen.
* They’d have horror film marathons on our free nights, scare themselves to death every time and complain about nightmares, then do it all over again two or three days after. They’d take the movies super seriously and spend the next few days following the in-universe rules until they forgot. For example, if they watched Silent Hill, they wouldn’t go out if there was fog, and stuff like that.
* In one of those movies they learned about Astral projections, so for around two weeks, they’d spend hours in the apartment living room attempting it. After a window slammed once, they got scared “of their own powers” and stopped. We solemnly concurred that it was for the best, since such powers are difficult to contain.
* Kevin A apparently didn’t know how showers worked, because every time he took one, he’d flood the entire bathroom and half the apartment. We told him to figure it out, and he did for a few days. No floods. Turns out he was using our towels/laundry to wedge the bottom of the door from the inside, making a fucking pool we’d all then had to empty with buckets. He really thought there was no other way. When we explained that he could slide the shower door to keep water from gushing out, he just shrugged.
* When getting ready for going out, they’d go into the recently salvaged bathroom and make a huge mess, experimenting with everyone’s products like mad fucking scientists. Of course, they saw no problem in grabbing other guys’ hairgel, cologne, deodorant, etc. and dropping them, mixing them together, or spilling them on the floor. When confronted, they kindly apologized and stole a crate of products from outside a pharmacy to replace ours.
* They’d leave the TV turned on to the HDMI “blue screen” all day, and complained if someone turned it off. Their logic was that they wanted it on “just in case someone wanted to watch something”.
* They’d throw improvised after-parties and bring in people from the street. Like, they’d be drunk coming back home and started inviting random people they saw, usually other drunks. They saw no problem in having complete strangers using our stuff and hanging at our place.
* Kevin B would try to put metal stuff in the microwave. Pans, utensils, and ramen cups with tinfoil lids. We’d usually stop him since we, well, didn’t want to fucking die, and he found it super annoying. He thought we were the stupidest guys on earth because “it can’t be that bad”. So, we let it happen once, and after we heard shrieks coming from the kitchen, he came out scared af and apologized.
* They’d experiment with recipes and cook large meals (simple stuff like pasta and rice), make a huge mess, but then forget them over the stove and go eat outside. They would return home and refused to clean up/wash the pans because “they didn’t even eat at home that day”. Additionally, when they actually had to clean the kitchen, they’d try to “trick us” and put all the dirty dishes back in the cabinet instead of washing them.
* On the other hand, one of the other guys was studying to be a chef, and took cooking very seriously. He’d make fancy dishes to share, but Dumb and Dumber were skeptical. They’d say “tuna croquettes” sounds a lot like cat food, and therefore probably tasted like cat food as well. Chef guy took offense, but it was funny seeing these guys missing out on dinner.
* They got tired of being called dumb all the time and challenged my other two friends to an “intelligence contest”, where they’d ask them questions they themselves didn’t know the answers to, so there was no frame of reference. The  fact that the other guys accepted the challenge kinda makes them a little Kevin as well. I remember one of the questions was “Who invented the regular plane? Like those where people fly on”. The whole episode was fucking hilarious.
* We had a long discussion with Kevin B because he thought going to college was a scam and a complete waste of time. After all, none of his family had gone to college (go figure) and he “already knew all there is to know anyway”. Destiny was kind to him, as I ran into him in a business expo and for all I know he owns a small company. Let’s just hope it’s not microwaves and kitchen utensils.
* We were taken on a trip where we were offered a couple of payed courses. We chose scuba-diving and so did Insane Kevin Posse. They somehow managed to sit through the whole course without learning anything. The instructor, who was a no-chill grumpy old guy, was very worried because he didn’t want to be responsible for these guys drowning or whatever. He was actually the one that named them Dumb and Dumber in the first place. So, on in-water practice day, he’d lost his patience because they were in the diving school van throwing shit around and laughing. They hit him on the head with an empty coke bottle, and you could tell the guy was fucking pissed. We get in the water, and like 3 seconds later both kevins’ equipment starts going crazy, leaking air and not sinking. They both panicked and had to leave the water — ended up missing practice day entirely. So, either they managed to screw up in less than a minute, or the instructor messed with their stuff to have an excuse to kick them out. Probably saved their lives anyway.What's up guys, gals, and non-binary pals! I'd been listening to StoriesAboutKevin on YouTube and it reminded me of a Kevin I once knew back in high school (quick note - high school in the UK runs from age 11/12 to 16). I've wrote about him in TalesOfNeckbeards but thought a lot of his antics would fit in here

Now, Kevin (not his real name obviously) and I met when we were 11, at a social skills group for autistic people - yes, we're both autistic. We both happened to be going to the same high school soon, and since said school was known for its good support for autistic students, we encountered each other a lot.

At first, we didn't get along, but we started to become friends once we discovered we had similar interests, such as watching shows like Drake & Josh and SpongeBob SquarePants. It turned out to be a toxic friendship which I'll explain in this post, but it took me years to realise it. Now that I've gone through a brief origin story of our friendship, here's some of the Kevin stuff he did.

* He absolutely HATED any kind of work. Sure, nobody likes to do work that much. But with Kevin, if you asked him to do any task he didn't like, you were automatically his enemy. I remember all the times he'd complain to be about the 30 minutes of labour he had to do, even if it was important. He'd then rant about the person who asked him to do it.
* When we had to do work experience as part of a school project, whilst many students did something like spend a week at the office, he just spent the week watching TV and playing video games whilst his mum did all the work for him.
* He had anger issues that were easily set off. Unfortunately, I was often the target of his frustration. Sure, he never hurt me, but it was always as if it were my fault he forgot to do something like bring something important for school.
* Adding on to the work thing, he was also rude to people who wanted him to do stuff he didn't see as fun. Like when we were at a youth club, he'd always moan when we were asked to go off the computer and do something like a sport for fun.
* He seemed to develop a little crush on me, but didn't seem to understand how attraction worked. Back at the time, neither of us had ever had girlfriends. I remember him saying something like, "I'm tired of never getting a girlfriend, guys like us will never get one. Maybe I should just try going for guys." When I pointed out that I cannot just change my sexual orientation, he got offended and asked "Why not??" Additionally, pursuing guys doesn't raise the chances of finding a partner....
* He always tried to one-up me, I don't know if it was because he was insecure or something, but it always bothered me. The first time was when we finished high school, I went to sixth form whilst he went to a community college. For some reason, he seemed to think the fact that he could call professors by their first name, whilst I had to refer to mine as "Mr/Ms/Mrs (surname)" meant that he was in a better school environment.
* Another thing he would commonly do to one-up me would be to try and constantly act as if he were the better looking one. I don't really care which one of us looked better, but when he had a girlfriend for a week, he sure loved to point out how he had a girlfriend and I didn't.
* Another example of trying to one-up me: He would constantly act like him going to community college whilst I was still in "high school" (my sixth form college just happened to be ran by my old high school) meant he was smarter. I remember one night he just kept going on and on so I had enough and reminded him I was the one going to university, not him (I don't think university means one is smarter, but I'd had enough at that point).
* He could never keep a secret. One time I confided in him about a crush I had on a girl in the youth club we both attended and soon after, not only did my crush know, but also my entire school year - and she didn't even attend my school!
* Things were always someone else's fault, never his. I remember one time he made a really offensive comment to another friend of mine, let's call him Jake. Jake told me how he was never going to speak to Kevin again after the incident and I couldn't blame him. However, Kevin would always lament to me about Jake whenever Jake refused to speak

I'm sure I could go on and on, but I'm sure you get it. Eventually I broke off the friendship as one night my dad accidentally referred to our autism as "having problems" (as in like the difficulties we face socialising) whilst driving us, and Kevin responded by slamming the car door hard and flipping the bird. Somehow seeing him behave like that to my dad made me realise being the doormat to his anger and insecurities was not a healthy friendship, and as I was just about to go to university anyway, I cut contact with him. I spoke to a friend some years later who still has contact with Kevin, and apparently Kevin is mad at me for never having time for him and his mother thinks I was rude for never speaking to him again. Whatever. I've had much healthier friendships since where I wasn't the doormat. Anyway, hope you all enjoyed the post!she isn't the typical kevina but she has her moments, once she was on our trampoline and she ran inside to tell it was broken in the corner, we have a round trampoline and it was only one of the springs that was of. another time she was sleeping in a tent outside in our backyard, she chose to lock the zipper to itself, then we heard a scream from outside, we then discovered her head was locked outside her tent, it was the funniest thing I have ever seen, she said she couldn't come free, the zipper was locked to itself so it was working as it should. it took her 30min to come free without help.This one isn't as insane as some of the other posts here, but I still think this is a genuine Kevin experience. I had a roommate for a couple months who was a Kevin, and while I didn't know him too well, the one thing I did see were all his cooking mishaps. Kevin had never washed dishes, and didn't know \*how to use dish soap\* until I showed him how. Kevin bought TWO George Foreman grills, because he thought you had to buy the top and bottom halves separately. Kevin would constantly store jugs of juice/cold brew/iced tea in the fridge horizontally, without securing the lid properly, ensuring the drink would leak out all over the refrigerator. However, his greatest achievement was his brownies. He wanted to make some brownies for his girlfriend, so he went out and bought one of those Betty Crocker type brownie mixes. When he tried to make it, he insisted that since it was "instant" brownie mix, he didn't have to add anything. We tried to tell him that you have to add the water and oil and stuff, but he wasn't having any of it and we were tired of his BS. So he just dumped the mix into the pan as a dry powder and threw it in the oven. He didn't quite start a fire, but he did have to throw the pan away.Obligatory I’m on mobile post, so please excuse formatting errors. 

Years ago, I worked with a Kevin at a movie theater. Not too many people enjoyed dealing with him. He was grossly incompetent at his job. He would constantly make mistakes, and mess up the till, if he joined me in cleaning the auditoriums after a movie let out , I would have to tell him to pick up trash only while I swept, or he would spend five minutes or more sweeping one spot (and sometimes, he would still try to sweep). 

He would also talk CONSTANTLY whether you wanted to talk or not. Mostly it was incoherent babbling, or it would be a conversation about sports, cars or girls. I’m not big into sports, I don’t care about cars, and I’m gay, so that’s three for three right there. He practically alienated the girls on staff with inappropriate comments (if you saw his Facebook page around that time, he was groping the breast of a nude statue if that gives you any idea). Our GM had a hard time bringing himself to fire people so there was no use complaining to him, and as a local theater, there was no HR.

Things came to a head one night. I had already clocked out hours prior, but that evening, I received a message from another coworker saying, “Hey, Kevin got fired! Enjoy.”

Curious to find out what happened, I checked with several other coworkers who were on shift that night. Turns out Kevin had been working the box office that night, and a customer, a heavyset black woman, came up to the box and he called her “Precious”. Please note this was only about a year or two after the movie, Precious, had come out, in which the titular character is an very overweight black girl, so she immediately starts crying. After a talk with the manager on duty that night, he fired Kevin on the spot. The entire staff meanwhile felt bad for the customer. Even some of the more apathetic ones told her if she wanted to kick his ass, they could pretend to have not seen it.

The very next day, I was walking to work when I encountered said manager, who was also on his way in. I couldn’t help myself. I had to say, “So… ‘Precious’, huh?”

He just groaned and replied, “Oh god, that. Yeah, he went too last night. I felt bad for that lady too. I thought she was gonna deck him.”

When we got to the theater, I’ll give you three guesses as to who tried to show up and come to work like nothing had happened. The manager spent a few minutes yelling at him to get out. To this day, I have never seen anyone that oblivious.My sister in law, although I love her, is Kevina through and through. 
One of the best examples from several years ago I will never forget is when I had to explain to her how loans worked.
Kevina thought that when you borrowed money for a car, house, etc that you just pay back the amount you borrowed.
She had never heard of interest before and had no concept of how it worked. 
I explained that the banks have to make money too and they don’t just give out the money for free. You pay back more than you actually borrow. I think she was around 20 years old at the time. She believed me but still didn’t understand why banks wouldn’t just let you pay back the same amount you had borrowed “since they have so much money.”
Then, fast forward 5 or 6 years and me and my husband bought our first house for $165k. We were both making about $15/hr at the time and were in our early 20s. 

She asked me if we got a loan for the house.

I sat there stunned for several second before telling her yes, we got a loan to buy the house and we did not have $165k saved up.My former roommates are born Kevins. Mr Kevin works as a tour guide and has a lot of book smarts, but no common sense, and his wife is ... well,  a Kevin.  


Highlights:

- Mr Kevin only knows one way to get to work, one way to the grocery store, etc.  It's always the longest, least direct route.  He is continually amazed when other people can get places faster than him. 

- Mrs Kevin asked me one day what two colors mixed together to make orange.  I suggested taking some good coloring and glasses of water to play around and find out, thinking it would be a teaching moment.  She gave up and went to ask her husband. 

- Mr Kevin can only cook in the microwave.  Spaghetti, scrambled eggs, everything gets microwaved. He will boil water for tea on the stove though,  so there's that. Of course,  he boils the teabags in the water for 10+ minutes. 

- The missus often gets into minor car accidents.  She forgets to check her mirrors or her blind spots.

- When they decided to do a keto diet, Mrs Kevin argued with her husband about whether or not potatoes were carbs.  She insisted that,  "they're not carbs, they're starshes"

- I once had to stop the two of them from locking her chihuahua in the closet for a "time-out". 

-  One day I came home from work to find the missus cleaning the kitchen.  She proudly showed me how she'd made a "super strong" cleaning solution. It was bleach and ammonia.

- Mr Kevin got a text one day and he goes, "huh, Mrs Kevin just sent me a picture of herself holding some kind of animal and I don't know what it is." It was a Guinea pig.

- They went on a cruise in the Caribbean.  Prior to this, Mrs Kevin had no idea there was more to the earth than the US.

- She is currently pregnant!  He is NOT the father.  Yes he knows this.  No good can come of this. 



I'll post more as I think of them.  It was ... an interesting experience in that house.This is a Army story on Kevin. I’m gonna try and simplify things for non military members, but if I don’t make sense let me know.

This is about a prior service (means he was enlisted. As in a Private before) Officer who commissioned from a military academy (what’s considered the best kind of school in making officers).

Kevin was already weird to begin with. He spoke about all these things that he knew nothing about and was considered insufferable to most people. He would act like he knew all these things, but when asked about it or asked to perform it, he would fucked it up spectacularly.

This isn’t quite about his poor technical skills though. There’s plenty of it since he was armor officer (tanks). I’ve seen him seriously fuck up basic soldier tasks. This is about him trying to marry a girl he knew for less than a month that was a gold digger. I mean, even Stevie wonder could see through this shit. 

Basically my boy Kevin met her and started dating immediately. She pushed hard to get married as all dependas (a unflattering term of spouses who live off military benefits. Hence are labeled ‘dependents’) do and Kevin ate that shit up. Among privates this kind of behavior is somewhat common. You may have seen various memes of desperate military dudes proposing/getting married after a week. It’s a meme because it happens with PRIVATES, usually NOT officers. 

Now this girl is known around the base we’re  stationed at. She was a serial marry and divorce girl who would steal half of whoever’s shit. So knowing this information Kevin proposes to her. With Kevin being a private before and then going to a prestigious military academy everyone expected absolutely not this. I know officers are immune to this kind of stuff, but this was next level

Now most of his peers weren’t his friend, but watching him do this was like watching a really slow car wreck and it just hurt to watch. So his peers actually staged an intervention confronting her and him. They caught her in a crazy string of lies and blasted away her credibility, but old boy Kevin knows better and can change her!

*clap clap clap*

So Kevin is still on the path to marry this girl. This shit got so ridiculous and pathetic that it went up to the company commander and the battalion commander (high ranking dude to be put bluntly that usually aren’t involved in this kind of matter) telling him that this is a bad fucking idea. But nope! They don’t know her like he does. 

“I love her, sir!”

One of the guys that she married even called Kevin and said that he got tricked and how she’s just trapping him. But nope! He knows better because he feels the chemistry!

Fast forward to today. They’re divorced. 

Surprise surprise surprise. 

She took half his shit and now he constantly talks about his “dumbass bitch ex wife tricked him”, but nobody has any sympathy for this fool anymore.

Good people honest to god tried to help kevin from making a giant mistake but he just wouldn’t listen. This was more sad than anything. Kevin isn’t mean or aggressive, but horribly naive. I guess this also serves as a cautionary tale. If a bunch of people are telling you this is a bad idea, then it’s probably a *fucking bad idea*

If any military members are reading this fucking DON’T marry a stripper or a girl you’ve known for less than a month without a prenup! Talk to your platoon sergeant and if they say it’s stupid, then it is likely stupid.

Thanks for reading!My first Kevin story. This just happened. I work with mostly Kevins. This particular Kevin is technology illiterate. Last week he kept saying his phone wasn’t working. I looked at it and it was perfectly fine but I guess he mistook the phone connecting to the WiFi for…something. I told him his phone was alright but he didn’t believe me and got mad so I left him alone. Today he comes to me and asks me for the number to the police. Confused, I said “911” and he dials it and I like “wait why are you calling the police?” His answer, “so they can unlock my phone.” That’s not how that works. At least the emergency operators were kind and let him know gently, because I’ve been laughing at him ever since.This is about an incident called "The Egg Incident", my family makes fun of me of it, and I classify it as a Kevin moment from the stupidity of the action.

&#x200B;

We were getting ready for an Easter party (getting dressed, cooking food, etc) and everything was doing great right?

Well then it gets to the time we make the deviled eggs and my downfall.

My mom told me to put the eggs in the pot so we can boil them for the eggs. I said okay and get to work. **I start by cracking all 12 eggs open and putting them into the water,** and didn't even notice what was wrong with that. I remember my uncle seeing this and asked "is that what your mom wanted you to do?" with my response being "Yea, she said to put the eggs in the water."

My mom and aunt ended up driving to the store to by more eggs. I never lived that down.Just posting this here so that anyone can link to the entire story from u/Strongbadjr, rather than needing to have individual links! Please note that this saga begins with Part 2; the first post is of a different Kevin!

[1) (Prologue) Kevin Violates Parole](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/nsms5q/kevin_violates_parole/)

[2) First Day, First Kevin](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/ntbqpi/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_2_first_day_first_kevin/)

[3) Frozen](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/nvk90d/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_3_frozen/)

[4) Kevin Gets Lost](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/nwcxuo/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_4_first_kevin_gets_lost/)

[5) Shutdown](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/nyo55t/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_5_shutdown/)

[6) Breakdown](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/o1kpyq/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_6_breakdown/)

[7) Flashpoint](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/o64q9c/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_7_flashpoint/)

[8) Brake Check](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/o838xt/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_8_brake_check/)

[9) (Finale) Nuclear Winter](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/oaqirm/kevin_in_a_big_rig_part_9_nuclear_winter/)Just got rudely acquainted with the newest "phenomenon" going down in my city. Apparently Kevins in my neighborhood have been jumping through vinyl fences and yelling "ohh yeah" like the Kool aid man for a "Kool aid man challenge". 

I was sitting at my desk a few hours ago and hear a crash I run outside and a Kevin has crashed through my fence and is running away as I look outside. 

I've posted here about a family member before so this felt like the best place to post, seems like Kevinish behavior. Feel free to remove if wrong sub.I went to high school with a girl that was an odd Kevina- the kind that somehow aces school, yet can't seem to comprehend the world around them. She was also extremely unpleasant and we somehow managed to get classes together seemingly all through middle and high school, even though we were constantly about to rip each other's heads off. A couple of her incidents really stick out in my mind. 

-She comes into class with a full face of makeup on. It's really poorly done but I wasn't gonna comment on it, because that's an asshole thing to do. But then she turns to me and asks me to give an honest opinion about how her makeup looks. Like, genuinely wanting all the good and all the bad. So I tell her that it doesn't look good. Cue to her screaming, "THAT IS SO RUDE! I CAN DO MY MAKEUP HOWEVER I WANT TO." And I'm all like, "Um...you asked?". Our other classmates pitched in at this point to tell her that she shouldn't be offended when SHE'S the one that asked. She got huffy and turned away. 

-A year later, we're in class and we have a substitute. Our regular teacher was in poor health, and one of her problems was that she has issues with her blood sugar. She would eat/drink something in class if her blood sugar levels were dropping, but wouldn't eat/drink otherwise, and expected us to do the same. I guess Kevina had a problem with this, loudly complaining to the substitute that it's "sO uNfAiR" how our teacher can eat/drink in class but we can't. At this point this girl had been loudly bitching the entire class time and I'm sick of her shit so I'm like, "Hey, you know she has issues with her blood sugar so she has to eat sometimes, right?". This girl gets HIGHLY offended and exclaims, "That's not how that works! I have problems with my blood pressure, I know!". I try to explain that blood pressure and blood sugar are two totally different things, and she says, "I'm going to be a doctor, they're the same thing!". ...huh? As per the last time, other classmates chime in confirming my statement and she is NOT having it. Basically pulls a "you're wrong, I'm right, shut up" sort of thing. 

I don't know what she's doing now, but I hope she's not in the medical field.The men in my house tend to be Kevins (one of whom is named Kevin) - despite one having a PhD and the other in one of the best college programs for his field. Here are some highlights from Kevin #1 and Kevin #2 as of late.

• Kevin #1 put beef in the microwave to defrost. He didn't even turn it on to defrost it or put it in cold water and I had to explain to him you can't leave beef out like that in 90 degree weather.

• I had to help Kevin #1 change the filter on the humidifier last week. He couldn't figure out how to get the filter back in to the machine without my help and didn't listen when I told him we needed to wait for the filter to completely dry before we put it back in. 

• For the past several years, I have been cutting the grass near our fence with scissors because Kevin #1 believes it's not worth it to replace the weedwhacker when all we need for it is a new string and my mom (who has done this before) to replace it.

• Kevin #1 has an unhealthy obsession with keeping the house cool in summer. One time when I was in a Zoom meeting for an internship on video, he walked into the room I was in wearing JUST HIS BOXERS to "open the windows" to cool down the house even though I kept telling him to leave.

• Whenever Kevin #2 does the dishes, there are large pieces of food stuck to them despite them running through the dishwasher. I regularly have to remind Kevin #2 that he needs to take the large chunks off of the plates before putting them in our very old dishwasher.

• According to Kevin #2, you don't have to clean the bathtub when cleaning the bathroom because it cleans itself when people shower.I’m grateful for all the kind words about my other two stories my dudes! As promised, here is story number 3. Also once again, 100% kudos to Strongbadjr for opening this can of worms. 

Now I know you’re all wondering who on earth is Mr Koo. You see once upon a time, circa before I was but a twinkle in momma Draegin’s eye, my uncles raised chickens. Chicken fighting was a big social thing where we are from, but my family didn’t agree with it. Socially they would discuss marches and act interested, only to go behind the patrons backs and buy up as many of the chickens as possible under the guise of taking them “up state to fight”. In reality, they took them to my grandparents small farm where they could lay eggs, free roam and peck around as they saw fit. One of the biggest birds they had was the star of our story, a black and white Asil chicken named Mr Koo. He had apparently been the chicken champion before my uncle Charlie won him in a poker match. On the ride home, Charlie didn’t know how this super aggressive chicken would react in the cab of his pickup. Sure enough, he gets in, plops his butt down and all he heard was a “kooing” sound all the way home. Evidently even champions enjoy the concept “bye bye”. 

When they got home, Charlie took Mr Koo inside the house to get him cleaned up. Evidently Mr Koo decided at that point he wasn’t leaving. Over the next day he would attack anyone who tried to get him to walk out the door. Yet, as mighty as he was, when the hens started calling and clucking about, Mr Koo decided there were greater things in life than chilling on the couch. He even impressed my grandpa when he actually managed to kill a fox that got into the chicken coop. Not only that, but he barely had a scratch on him. When he was found, he was sitting on the fox like a trophy. When you think about it, technically we had a pet attack chicken. 

Now that we’ve caught that up, let’s learn about the Kevin in our story. In Uncle Eddie’s words, Kevin was an idiot. They had worked together at local trucking company. They mainly ran auto parts to Laredo, Texas and back to several locations across the Midwest. 

Similar to the Kevin in the first story, this Kevin was cocky. Yes he could run. Yes he knew well how to operate a truck. Unfortunately, he didn’t know how to keep from running his mouth on people. Every time Eddie stopped with him at a diner or some small mom and pop to get fuel, he complained. Got coffee? “Pft it’s too weak”. Food? “I wouldn’t let my dog eat that but I guess I’ll have to suffer”. Shower? “Water was too cold and there were spots everywhere”. 

Flash forward to the week of the incident we are all here for. Uncle Eddie and Kevin happened to be near the farm and decided to take a week off for a clean bed, home cooked meals and some fishing. As they roll up in the trucks on Sunday, my momma happened to be there. She was barely 18 at the time and Eddie and Kevin were in their late 20’s. Kevin took this as a perfect time to flirt. Eddie, already sick of his BS from the road, slammed him upside his truck. 

> Eddie: “Now son I’ve seen you whine and cry for months now. I’ve put up with it. But you get within an inch of her and these chickens will eat good for a while”. 

> Kevin: “okay okay, sheesh.” -brushes himself off after Eddie lets him go- “You have my word”. 

They shook on it, and proceeded inside. Kevin of course had a retort. 

> Kevin: “Besides, chickens don’t even eat meat”. 

> Eddie pointed toward Mr Koo, who happened to be glaring a hole in Kevin: “Tell that to him”.

>Kevin: “Pft, just throw a fox in there with him and you’ll see who’s the meat eater”

Momma had walked up and given uncle Eddie a hug at this point and heard what Kevin had said, and laughed “Well considering he killed the last one, I think they’re all afraid to come around anymore.”

Kevin’s eyes got big as Mr Koo still glared at him from the yard. Dinner that evening was a great time. According to Uncle Eddie and Momma, my grandma went all out with all the “fixin’s” as we call it. Having had 4 kids, she still cooked for an army so there was plenty to go around. As for Kevin’s complaints? Grandma shot it him down. As soon as they sat down, she led the table in a simple prayer, which included the line “and we are going to remain grateful for the food we have received” while giving him a quick glare. 

Monday morning comes and goes with everyone sleeping in, except grandma of course. She’s up with the chickens, tossing seed and other small bits from dinner the night before. Eddie wakes up and strolls over to the bathroom to handle his morning business. Upon returning to his room, he notices his drawer where his wallet was kept had been left ajar. “Strange, hmm” he thought, but grandma appeared behind him. 

> Grandma: “Now I done went through ya wallet and didn’t see no money. You got a savings account?”

> Eddie: “Yes, ma”
Granny glared at him with that look she has had for years. Think of that meme of Fry from Futurama, only an older southern belle with the sass of Sophia off the Golden Girls. 

> Eddie: “You said I didn’t have any money in there though? I could have sworn I had at least $40”. 

> Grandma: “I didn’t see anything, but you might have gotten better at hiding things though”.

They hugged, Grandma told Eddie it was nice to have him home for a bit and they parted ways through the house. About this time, Kevin stepped out of the bathroom. 

> Kevin: “So you’re missing money?”

> Eddie: “So you’re eavesdropping?”

> Kevin: “Hey man, I just didn’t want you to think it was me.”

>Eddie: “Did I say it was you? No? Okay then. Now get your head out of your a** and come help me get this fishing gear together.”

They got the pick up truck loaded up and headed to the far end of the land where our local river had an amazing little beach. When they arrived, some of the local women were down stream about 100 yards swimming. Kevin took this as his perfect time to make a move, despite Eddie telling him not to. “I got this” he says. Yeah. He got over there, one of the girls boyfriend happened to be a guy Eddie knew had previous boxing training. So what does Kevin do? He runs his mouth. Eddie tells it like this. 

He glanced over at Kevin while tying his hook to his line. He hears Kevin say “So? What are you gonna do about it punk?”, he hears a loud thwack, and Kevin on his back in the sand. Dude stood over him, fist balled up ready to hit him again when his girlfriend grabbed him. They get their things and leave. Uncle Eddie proceeded to finish baiting his hook and cast his line, take a seat, crack open a cold beer and enjoy himself. Kevin is still 100 yards down stream laying on his back for another 5 minutes or so. He mouths off something toward the group as they’re leaving, then noticed Eddie kicked back on the bank. 

> Kevin, at the top of his lungs: “AINT YOU GONNA HELP ME?!!!”
Eddie just looked at him and took a drink of beer. Kevin gets himself cleaned off and comes back over to where Eddie was. Kevin starts to say something but Eddie cuts him off 

> Eddie: “It will serve you best to keep it in your pants while you’re here. If you can’t, go ahead and hit the road. I ain’t your keeper. You’re welcome to stay but I ain’t saving you.”

Kevin didn’t say another word about it. By the next morning, they rolled in with a whole mess of catfish for dinner. My grandma had breakfast ready for them. They washed up, ate breakfast and decided to take a couple hour nap. After everyone got up, they went out on the porch before dinner was ready. Mr Koo was pecking around the base of the steps when Kevin kicked a small stone from the porch at him. Mr Koo glared at him. 

> Eddie: “You do that again and he’s gonna attack you”

> Kevin: “Yeah whatever, it’s just a stupid hen” and proceeds to do it again. 

Uncle Eddie said it was like something from the freaking Matrix took over Mr Koo. When the stone was near him he jumps up and over it, wings flapping and talons out going straight for Kevin. Not quite having time to process this Rambo fowl’s fury, he begins to laugh, only to turn it into a “OH SH—“ as he trips out of his rocking chair to run inside. Mr Koo is right on his ankles. He claws at his jeans and his boots while pecking at his calf muscle. Luckily Kevin throws him back long enough to get inside the screen door. 

> Kevin: “Ha now, ya stupid bird” -kicks the bottom of the screen door-

> Grandma, carving knife in hand: “You kick my damn door like that again and I’ll show you a stupid bird”. 

Uncle Eddie had picked up Mr Koo and took him to the other side of the house and came in the side door. 

“Eddie honey, your friend here is about to get it if he kicks my door again. I ain’t saying it again. Now y’all come in here and get some of this fish”

Kevin just looked around with a scowl. Not much was said over dinner, but Kevin finished early and excused himself to bed.  Very early that next morning, everyone is woken up by a thunderous crash inside the hallway.  Thinking grandma had fell, Eddie ran outside to find Grandma standing over top of Kevin with a frying pan. 

> Eddie: “Momma what happened, what’s going on?”

> Grandma: “I caught this one here was rummaging through my chest of drawers I keep in the hall closet. That’s where I always keep my jewelry and some emergency money.”

Sure enough, Kevin had a pair of earrings in the floor next to his hand. He had just started to come to when Uncle Eddie punched him as hard as he could. 

> Eddie: “So I bring you here as a token of friendship and you steal off me and my family? Nah you’re gone”

Eddie went into the room Kevin was staying at and went through his bag. Inside he found the $40 dollars he was missing, he found a disposable camera, 2 other pairs of earrings and a small gold chain necklace my great grandfather had given my grandma. All in all it might have been worth a couple hundred at best but it was the principle behind it. 

My grandma just collected her belongings, put everything back as it was and placed Kevin’s bags outside. Uncle Eddie drug him outside until he woke up. He immediately tried to swing on Eddie but ended up tripping himself. As he got up, Mr Koo came close. He proceeds to punt Mr Koo toward his truck. Uncle Eddie wanted to run after him again, but my grandma stopped him. Instead of threw his bags at him. Kevin opens his bags to check for a rag to clean up the blood on his busted lip, when he notices the missing goods.

> Kevin: “Heh, it was just a bunch of useless costume jewelry anyway, I ain’t worried about it”. 

He opens his driver side door, and gets the truck started to warm up and inflate the air tanks. He then takes his bags over to his passenger side. My grandma then notices Mr Koo hopping up on his bottom step, then his top step, then as he shut the passenger side door he hops in the cab.   

> Grandma: “Did you jus—“

> Eddie: “Yup”

A sly grin comes across their face as Kevin flips them off and hops in the cab. As he catches 3rd gear he begins to swerve historically. His trailer is tipping hard while his truck slams into a large rock. He then rolls off to the left and into a small creek embankment. The door opens, and Kevin staggers out of the truck and lands on the ground. A few moments later, Mr Koo casually struts out of the cab, onto the step, flogs at Kevin on last time before doing that characteristic “peck walk” chickens do back toward the house. 

They ended up calling 911 because they figured between a frying pan, a hard right hook, a severe chicken flogging and a truck wreck he may need medical care. When the police showed up, he demanded Mr Koo be put down. The cops laughed at him, especially once they heard our side of the story. According to Uncle Eddie, the company they ran for let him go due to the accident. He also ended up with over 50 stitches from the cuts and pecks he got. Mr Koo on the other hand got all the chicken feed and worms his heart could desire. He also got a vet visit to ensure Kevin didn’t do anything major. The vet actually laughed and said he probably jumped with the kick and was basically doing a chicken version of the Bob and weave. 

Mr Koo lived another 8 years after all this. He often spent time either chasing hens, dogs, cats, rando’s who would come up on the porch asking for stuff. All the like. To this day, Uncle Eddie still misses his pet attack chicken.The kevinest Kevin I've ever known was my stepfather's brother-in-law. Kevin was in his sixties when I first met him, and I don't know how he had actually made it that far in life. There are many stories about him, but there is one that just stands out in my mind.

My stepfather, mom, and me were helping Kevin with a garden. The first day, my stepfather plowed the ground, while Mom and I were throwing out the rocks. It was really rocky ground.

The next day we were dismayed to see how many rocks were still in the garden. Mom made a comment about it seemed like there were more rocks today then there had been the day before, and Kevin overheard.

"That's because there are more," he said.

I was confused and asked what he meant. Looking rather confident, he said, "The rocks had babies."

At this point, I thought he had to be joking, so I said that it does seem like that sometimes. Kevin was not laughing, however, and he repeated his assertion that the rocks had had 'babies' the night before.

My stepfather heard all this, and he pulled Mom and me aside. He told us that Kevin was 100% serious. My stepfather had heard all this before, and he explained that Kevin genuinely believed rocks reproduced.

The rest of the day, Kevin decided to educate us about the mating habits of rocks. It was hard not to laugh, but it did give us a story to tell.

UPDATE: A few of you are wondering how Kevin thought rocks reproduced, so I figured I'd explain a bit more. He thoughts rocks could move, but they only could move a little and only at night. This was his explanation as to why you never saw it. He didn't  go into more graphic details as to how they actually mated though.Years ago, I was part of an online writing group that also included young Kevina.  Kevina had a penname that she went by in the group that had a fun mythological connection.  For the sake of this post, let's say this penname was "Hyacinth".  
One day, Kevina comes into the group chat complaining about her allergies and saying that it's all due to the pollen of a flower and how much she hates the flower.  We ask her what kind of flower it is and she says she doesn't know, but she'll send a picture.  The picture was of a Hyacinth.  All these years, she had apparently never googled Hyacinth nor looked up the flower.  As a result, Kevina made her nom de plume the flower she was allergic to.Years ago, in my youth, I worked as a volunteer for a church.  
This was a group of youth taking care of activities for younger people, those working towards their confirmation.  
These activities included a day long seminar on violence and how to avoid it, every year.  

One day, Kevin, a tall, lanky dude who is always smiling, approached our priest, excitedly telling him: "I recently had a situatuion straight out of the anti-violence training!"  
Kevin is one of our most senior guys, having taken part in that training at least 5 times by that point.  

Our priest asks "So what happened?"
Kevin: "A neonazi was behaving aggressivly towards a turkish looking man and his young son, on the bus."   

This was -exactly- a situation from the training, emphatising deeskalation, defusion and a peaceful resolution.  

"So what did you do, Kevin?!" our priest asks exitedly, eager to hear his work taking root in a young mind.

"I punched him so he fell down, then me and a couple other people kicked him 'till he rolled out the door, the busdriver closed the door and drove off."

Never seen the light fade faster from our priests eyes.I hired Kevin at the suggestion of his ex-wife, one of the servers I was close with. He started out great, but his behavior started to turn from laziness to outright malevolent stupidity. 

Kevin was one of those cooks who, instead of unwrapping a plastic-wrapped container, would just punch a hole through the top and leave it that way. You can easily get plastic in peoples' food and the health department will absolutely write you up for doing this. I reminded him countless times not to do it, but every time he'd get so much as a salad, he'd act like we were in a huge rush and do it again. I'm sure he convinced himself that he'd take care of it later but he'd forget every single time and I'd find it and have to give him the same talk. 

A common theme of Kevin's work ethic is that he'd try to take shortcuts that he thought I wouldn't notice. He would make an absolute mess during his prep work if I wasn't monitoring him. But then I'd come in the next day and find tons of evidence of his utter laziness. 

Kevin would prep a lot of our sauces and most of the time, they went even remotely close to the way they should have come out. Bechamel sauces that should have been on the thick side and were supposed to be rich and flavorful ended up as basically... milk. I'd ask him "what the fuck happened to your sauce?" And he'd always respond that he followed the EXACT recipe in the book. Well here's the thing, Kevin. If you followed the exact recipe IT WOULDN'T LOOK OR TASTE LIKE THIS. 

Any time there was something on the prep list as *optional if you have time* he would just cross off, then ask to leave early. 

On certain days when I wasn't opening, Kevin was responsible for starting the fire in the pizza oven. This is an involved process. You stack fire logs in a Lincoln-Log structure and stuff the bottom with cardboard and newspaper. We always had tons of cardboard and newspaper around. If, say, you show up late and need to get it blazing faster, we keep a bottle of super cheap vegetable oil which you can use. 

Then I heard rumors about what Kevin was doing in the mornings he opened in my absence. He was taking our CLEANING RAGS, dousing them in EXTRA VIRGIN OLIVE OIL, and using them to start the fire. Our kitchen rags are not only super important and valuable, but our cleaning service CHARGES us for every one that's missing and has to be replaced. EVOO is not only more expensive, but LESS effective at this particular application because of its low smoke point. It doesn't burn as hot. 

And on top of all of this, several people saw him do it and warned him that what he was doing was incredibly stupid. And he would say "don't worry about it just don't tell u/dreadway90". When two different people told me about it, I went to the GM and we had the biggest rage-laugh of our lives watching camera footage of Kevin doing this. 

I called Kevin and told him that despite the GM and I being furious with him, that he wasn't fired and that his pay rate wouldn't be cut. However, his hours per week would be cut from 40 to 30. So we could have on someone who, ya know, doesn't do dumb shit like that. He whined and bitched but he agreed. 

Until the next day. I had planned a nice day off with my mom, who was leaving the country for two weeks the day after. He informed me that he had no choice but to resign immediately so that he could find a better job. I pleaded with him to just give me ONE day. I tried to explain to him that not putting in your two weeks notice is a really bad look. But he said "it doesn't work that way! Most restaurants want you to start immediately!"

I left that job for a couple years and they hired him back. He tried to do the rag thing again and got fired.Link to post 1: [https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/oe35sp/the\_amazing\_tale\_of\_kkkevin/](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/oe35sp/the_amazing_tale_of_kkkevin/)

This is a sequel to the first part of the story listing the many many incidents involving Kevin. 

* Kevin was hired as a cook for a pizzeria in a train station. Kevin, once again getting his ideas from TikTok, tried to cut out the middle part of the pizza to save for himself, like Richard Watterson Style. Kevin was caught immediately and given a second chance. He was then caught doing the same thing the next day. He got fired
* Kevins parents signed him up for guitar lessons. Kevin sat on the guitar and broke it.
* Kevin lack of geography skills is legendary. Unlike most of his classmates, who at least have a basic grasp of European countries and city's, Kevin is completely useless, no matter how many times it is explained to him. He thinks Europe was the capital of Paris, Antarctica is in Russia, Africa is a city and much more
* Speaking of geography, Kevin thinks that Switzerland is an island. He lives in Switzerland. He goes on holidays to Italy by car every summer. Yet he is adamant that Switzerland is an island, no matter how many maps are shown to him.
* Kevin thought Cars was based on a true story
* Kevin believes in aliens, and frequently sends pictures and videos of '' UFOs'' he spotted on the class groupchat. These usually of airplanes, helicopters, stars and on a few occasions, streetlights.
* He was convinced that his house was haunted, so he hid in his kitchen at night with his phone to film the ghost. At 6 am, he saw a figure, panicked, and threw his phone at the figure. It was his older sister getting ready for work. Kevin broke his phone.
* He somehow got hired as a cashier for a supermarket. In Switzerland, there are two major supermarkets, Coop and Migros. He got hired at Coop and was supposed to start the next day. He then went to the local Migros and tried to start working until a manager told him to go away. He then did this the next day. Unsurprisingly, he got fired from Coop for not showing up.

This is all I can really remember right now, I might post more after the summer holidays when I see him again So my brother(14m)took this IQ test seven years ago and his IQ was supposed to be really high. but he has no common sense and he’s an idiot. but because the IQ test was high he thinks everybody else is below him and that everything that he says is right and it makes for some pretty stupid words. Here are some of the best things he said.

1.  The time he slapped me because I didn’t agree with him that Peru is a series of islands of the American Coast

2. The time he tried to convince everybody that he went sky diving when he was four

3. He saw this fun science experiment online and he decided he would try it out with his friend long story short he was burned their house to the ground

4. He’s smart enough to pass his grade but he doesn’t like his teachers so he fails their classes this year he graduated with a .4 GPA (i’m not exaggerating) and he only graduated because of coronavirus so it’s a literal miracle that he passed.

5. His complete lack of privacy for everyone else but him like a couple days ago I woke up to him watching TV in my room because Mom was watching a show that he didn’t like. I was asleep naked Plus I have a tiny TV and it looks like it’s only on a monitor his ass was right next to my face. You may be asking why didn’t he use his TV if I had one well I saved up to buy it.

6. He gets around a lot and he has no social skills I’m actually unpopular in my grade because he wrong every single person there my girlfriend broke up with me after they learned about him being my brother.

7. He thinks he’s entitled to everything I get even though I earned most of it as mentioned before I have a TV and he doesn’t because I saved up for it and he thinks he can use it whenever I’m using the TV in the living room to play games he thinks he can just my room get comfy and binge watch shows.

more but I don’t want this to get really longAlright, in my life I have seen some very very stupid people, but my god, this one takes the cake.

Kevin is one of my classmates in school. I've only known him for a few months now, but he has done so much shit that I would have to make around a dozen posts to list them all. So I'll just list some of the recent ones.

* Kevin wants to join the KKK. He has no clue what the KKK is but he wants to join. Every time we try to explain to him what it is and why he cannot join it, he just ignores us and walks away. I'm pretty sure he thinks it's like the Freemasons or something
* Kevin is constantly telling people that he's Albanian or Serbian in an effort to seem cool (don't know why he thinks being Balkan will get people to like him). He is 101% Swiss/German-pale-as-fuck-mayo-is-spicy white boy. He will walk up to Serbian girls and tell them he is also Serbian, then yell at them in badly pronounced curse words when they tell him to fuck off
* Kevin is 5'6 but keeps telling everyone he is 6'6. Not online, in real life. He once walked up to me, who is 6'1, and told me he was taller than me. ????????
* Kevin wants to become a famous rapper, he does this by making bad lipsync videos on TikTok. He is convinced that some producer will see them and make him a star
* Just like the original Kevin, this Kevin has set fire to a cutting board multiple times in cooking class, only he denies ever doing such a thing and claims the teacher is trying to get him expelled. Not sure why a burnt cutting board would be grounds for getting expelled.
* Kevin once broke his ankle while trying to make parkour videos for his ''famous'' Youtube Channel, then told girls that he broke it saving his mom from a house fire.
* Kevin acts like he's above class rules because his parents are rich. Kevin gets told to stay after class almost daily.
* For some dumbfuck reason, Kevin thought that hedgehogs and pigs were the same animal.
* He once smashed his dads Iphone with a hammer because he saw a TikTok where someone did the same thing. 

This is just some recent ones, there are some that are far worseIt's a long one. (Plus the Edit makes it longer)

2-3 years ago I started reading all these Reddit stories: Revenges, Dramas, NiceGuys, Entitled Parents, Antivaxxers, Karens and Kevins. I thought to have the (mis)fortune to be spared encounters with the latter two, but here is the one exception - in the place I would have expected it the least.

I am now studying Medicine abroad in Europe in a former city of the Soviet Union with good reputation. As an international study course people from all around the world (mostly Germans an Swedes) there was an open and including culture on campus (all before covid).

However, our little study group was perhaps the dumpster for some of the students that didn't really fit anywhere else - this was due to our smaller than average group size. I made two close friends there and we didn't really socialise much with the rest (got better in later semesters). Most in our study group fit that "weird, but lovable" trope, with maybe some creepyness(I don't even know which Reddit Forum I would post the creepy guy), annoyance, friendliness and fun thrown in. The person I am about to speak today is the most friendliest, happiest person you and I will ever meet.

Now University is not a place you would expect a Kevina, especially not abroad in a country she has never been, doesn't speak the language of or has no connection to. But not only was she going to study medicine, but also started a month late. This did not raise any red flags, as our group was still disjointed in the early days and we got some new faces in the preceeding weeks - and maybe the admission process took just longer - who knows? Honestly, I didn't know. I didn't care. I remember something about her and her father(not sure how much involved he was in the admission process) not understanding the uni starts a month earlier than the unis in most countries? Not sure who messed up there - I never met her father.

In the first week she was there with us, she obviously joined the rest of the study group to the cheap restaurant across the street from the Uni. The few first things I learned from her came from this restaurant visit. She had just graduated (within the last year) and this was her first time being without her parents etc. So far, nothing out of the ordinary. She told us that so far she has not cooked for herself since arriving here. That's fair - money for delivery/restaurants were no problem for her and insecurity about cooking isn't uncommon if you are without any prior experience. You might have noticed how much I am trying to give her plausible deniability.

Because the flow of the conservations led to her telling us how she attempted to cook some rice.

She comes from a Asian country known for rice consumption (India) - but she was young, had no prior cooking experiences etc. No big deal. I would have to look up minutes, water content, etc. myself back then (at her age/experience level that is - now I know). No amount of Kevin stories can immunise you against the surprise/confusion you will have once you hear a story like hers in person: you would be like - "huh? but, why?". Now, when a normal person wants to cook some rice but has no idea how - asking for help or googling a tutorial might be the sensible and correct thing to do. She has her iPhone - she surely is be able to do this. But no, she explained how she put rice in a pan - no water, not even oil, nada. She burned her dry rice black. Yeah. Understandable how that would make it easier to order food delivery. I didn't really think much of it except for it being a funny story a person could have in a lapse of mind, or during ignorant first attempts at cooking - I have some funny stupidities in my cooking history as well.

Except for the occasional class participation I didn't have many interactions with her, I kept mostly to my small circles of friends and wasn't interested in expanding it too wide.

During our First Aid test we then had to show that we know how to do chest compressions. She was among the last to perform - so had plenty of people to imitate if she so wanted. But it was a test under direct supervision of the teacher - benefit of the doubt is given, nervosity is a thing after all. She forgot all the things: no call for ambulance, no checking of consciousness and/or breathing (as far as I remember) and chest compressions starting at the stomach area... The teacher corrected her a bit, but after a while I was wondering if she lets her compress until "the ambulance she didn't call arrives". Either not or she gave up after a while. Well, the course was very lenient and I assumed at first she was given a pass - but it later turns out she didn't. She was the only one of the class and possibly the semester that failed the First Aid class. There is also a theoretical/written part, but the teacher wasn't in the room so cheating was a given. No one cared for First Aid enough to study properly. (I already had 3 first aid courses in the 24 months before that and had no intentions to learn it again.) It is possible that she was given a pass for the chest compressions but failed the written part - idk.

This is about the extent I learned of Kevina's moments - until over the course of the next semester I learned more details. I was opening up a bit more to the other students in my study group - we had lost most of the "dead weight" and were now a study group with good enough social cohesion and unity. (Dead weight were like people who only attended 3-4 classes the entire semester, had only one course with us, ghosted us in the third month etc. / Again, we were the dumping ground for such students.) In a social event I ended up talking to one in my study group (let's call him Ivan) who had more stories to tell about her. Oh boy.

Well, first of all there is a sequel to her cooking attempts. Now I'm trying to retell the story as accurate as I am able to. I have heard the story once from Ivan and once from her as I once came across her in the mensa (she repeated the first semester, was not in my study group anymore). Sometimes after her first failed attempt she tried again. She had learned from her burned corpse of incinerated rice that water is needed to cook it. He told me, that she did not remove the plastic the rice came in (plausible deniability: some rice can be nought in these packages and maybe she just made a mistake or his retelling is sorta inaccurate), but that somehow translated in her cooking breaking the pot itself. (This is more likely a product defect than her cooking). She did confirm that the lid of the pot was cracked - and she sort of took blame for it? Something in her expression was there that makes me think she believes having done a lapse of judgement the plain story didn't convey properly.

I'm not sure if I have ever broken a pot/pan, but I wouldn't think twice over it. Probably happened to me already and I just forgot about it. Accidents happen, products can be faulty - irrelevant and in no way indicative of her Keviness.

Other stories Ivan told me: In the chat Ivan had with her they were talking on how to ride from the Uni to the Hospital (First Aid classes). She mispelled "tram" as "tramp", which was a funny mishap, until he noticed that is how she pronounced it as well. I still call the tram tramp now, one of my favorite inside jokes. Well, it is not the tramp, but the bus that goes directly from Uni to the hospital. But she seemingly did not understand it. She kept asking him "when does the tramp come?" (he appearently didn't correct her on the tramp thing - or if he did, he failed) and him answering "we are taking the bus, not the tram". Fed up after repeated questions Ivan went full meme and said pointing both hands at the road: "BITCH DO YOU SEE RAILS?" ok, unwarrented (but funny) outburst aside - she didn't let that stop her. But now understanding they are waiting for a "Bus" thing. She didn't know what a bus was. Okay... She then proceeded to ask him repeatedly for any unordinary larger vehicle (even cars) if that was their bus. (It was a major bus station tho, I don't understand how he struggled to explain it to her??? Honestly, half of this probably comes from \*his\* inpatience with her, not her Kevina antics.)

She also went through 3 iPhones in her first semester. She has a spare one ready in case one breaks. Daddy/Mommy pays. These individual phones have probably seen more screen use than my singular phone that semester - and I'm a Youtube addict.

EDIT TO ADD: Alright, I talked to Ivan he told me stories I forgot about.  First two corrections:

1. I might have confused the Rice story regarding the plastic bags. It might be not two different stories after all from what I can guess (he wasn't there when she told the first rice cooking attempt story). The plastic bags were likely a part of the first story. Which makes her first attempt even worse: she burned rice plastic bags without water or oil in the pan - burned plastic ain't nice.
2. The Tramp Story happened \*after\* not before First Aid. He was also not in the mood to explain to her what a bus was therefore didn't even bother. After First Aid wanting to go back to the Hostel the questions about the Tramp and the "Bitch do you see rails?" was uttered.

Now to new stories:3. Ivan said there is a proverb "too dumb to boil eggs". Well...First time is hard for everyone. Boiling Water? Check. Eggs? Check. Nothing out of the ordinary After 10 min Ivan asked about the eggs. Ten. Minutes. He figured, well they will be hard-boiled now, but still edible. She refused: "No, it's not doen yet." - "What/Why?" - "The shell is still there." - "But you are supposed to peel it off after..." - "No, it's fine." - "Ok, whatever". Well, after 20/30 minutes of cooking Ivan who left the room came back and said "the eggs are mush now, just coming out of the shells mush". She said "Okay, then they are done now."Suprise surprise: she didn't like those eggs.

4.She orders Hamburger, takes a bite and decites she doesn't like the meat. Takes out the patty, eats the rest. Well, maybe she has never eaten one before. (Ivan doesn't believe she never had a burger before.)  At another place food is ordered and she asked if they can order a burger for her. The same thing happens again: takes a bite, doesn't like beef, throws it away.

5. On a trip to the supermarket Ivan met up with Kevina. She needs to buy food. Ivan is already annoyed for her inviting herself to his immediate surroundings, but she has a right to buy food he reckons. She asks where Chicken is and he gives her directions. Well, she eventually comes back with a food product (he doesn't remember exactly what it was, but it wasn't chicken) and asks: "is this chicken?". No. She comes back with a portion of chicken breast. It has a chicken drawn on the wrapping. "Is this chicken?" Well, yes? FFS Kevina, leave me alone I want to shop.

6. I already mentioned her parents just throwing money at her and missing half the time. Well, Credit Cards when used abroad typically have a fee. She bought something for 4€. The Fee was 20€.

7. She used a Russian Tinder rip-off (Badoo?) and was chatting with 3(?) men. One of them was Russian so she asked Ivan to chat for her - but she became paranoid and clawed into his hand. Ivan goes fuck it, gives the phone back. New boyfriend comes to the city, Ivan met him and first thought he was older than the new boyfriend, but nope - new guy is 10y older than her. They have been a couple for 2y now. Either he is like her, likes her enough to not care and/or loves her for her parent's money. Ivan does not know, but is happy not to be her object of desire anymore. Yes, Kevina was into Ivan for a long time. He was not into her.

EDIT OVER.

(Edit2: I removed a part that in hindsight I believe is just not appropriate or that relevant, it's just too sad and really shouldn't be in public I think. I was trying to hard give as many examples as possible but it's better to keep this post on the funnier/positive side.)

&#x200B;

I do have a really negatice opinion about her family tho. They are either as compromised as her or do not like her enough to be decent parents. Sheltering a kid to the point she doesn't know how to cook and ride a bus is bad enough, but to then just send her away across the continent into a high demanding academic pathway without any restrictions or warnings about dangers she might encounter? I honestly think they just want to boost her profile "she studied some medicine abroad" and marry her off or something. (They are wealthy enough for that to be a viable strategy.) I don't know enough about Indian culture or society to make such statements, I only see what their parenting resulted in - their motives are irrelevant for me.

Kevina is to this day the friendliest and happiest person I have met and conversed with. I hardly doubt anyone can take that gold medal from her. (She is only rivaled by one psychiatric patient I interacted with, but that is a different story.)In my extended family, as in most, there's a Kevin, who's married to a Kevina. You know, the regular stuff.. Unfortunately, I can't tell many stories about them, as I don't meet them often, and my brain developed a spam filter because of them. But one story is so wild, so Kevin like, than I think I'll remember this bs till the day I die.

Kevin and Kevina are 70ish years old, and they have two daughters and four grandkids (who are my cousins). That means that, luckily, I don't share any genetic material with them. Before we get started, I should note that I'm a third year biology student in uni, which means, that although I'm very lacking, I still know more than the average Kevin about evolution. Although, in this case, anyone (I hope) would be able to see that Kevin is, oh, so wrong.

After he had a couple of glasses of wine, Kevin started loosening up and talking. He often likes to "put me in my spot", my guess is because he has an inferiority complex that a 18yo is already more successful than he ever was. So after a couple of drinks, he spots me, and calls me. My brain lits up with red warning flags, but seeing as how I'm an atheist, argument loving pos, I put on a smile and answer "yes?". But nothing prepared me for what's about to come.

"Hey FailingUpwardsInLife, you know evolution?"
"Yes..." Oh no
"So you know how people say that humans evolved from monkeys?"
"Yes..."
"So that's only half true. If you look at monkeys, they're hairy. And if you look at men, they're also hairy, and have body hair. That's proof that men evolved from monkeys. Women, however, don't have body hair. So they evolved from aliens."
... What? I couldn't even say a word. This Kevin has a wife, two daughters, as well as one female granddaughter. How can he think that women have no body hair?? Also, how can men and women be different species??
"Actually," I try to put some sense into him, but he cuts me off.
"I know, it's hard to believe. But it's true! I also have proof"
"Proof? What is it?"
Now, I'm a logical person. If he presents me with some concrete evidence I might even consider this... Lovely theory. But no.
"Women are very different from men. For example, women can multi-task, while men can't".
Seriously? That's your proof??

I spent about 10 minutes trying to explain how evolution works, and that this isn't doctor who, different species can't reproduce. But all for naught. Imagine how biology would get better, if we use Facebook as a legitimate information source!

(I apologize for any and all English errors, it's not my first language)I have an aunt who has, over the years, become increasingly anti-science, anti-medicine, and anti-education. She is against sex change operations (correction: gender affirmation surgery), blood transfusions, and IVF because they are "not of God" and has hinted that she suspects IVF babies have no souls. If you confront her on this belief, or any insulting belief of hers, she'll just deny it though. She is a cancer survivor and had to have her uterus removed due to it. She now claims she was young and foolish and now would reject cancer treatment. She promises to reject any medical treatment whatsoever (but likely won't stick to that promise if push comes to shove).

My Mom believes the idiocy all began when her father died and my aunt got on Twitter. Soon my aunt became obsessed with the Mandela Effect and it was a gateway to other cultish conspiracy theories and now she is a Covid denier and has given be a lot of contradictory stories on why Covid is either not real, or the government let it spread so they could impose curfews, or it was made in a lab in Winnipeg. what have you. Though my Mom claims this nonsense all started recently, I maintain it was there in some form all along. I should have seen it coming over ten years ago. Here be a story of a covidiot in training:

in high school I was telling my aunt what I had learned in school about blood types. She asked me for what practical purpose she may need to know what blood type she has. I explained that if she is in an unexpected accident and needs a blood transfusion, the doctors need to know her blood type to know what is safe to give her. She declared then it was irrelevant to her because she wasn't going to be in an accident. as if this is something you can just choose to not have happen to you.I have this friend, who's the Kevin of my story. He's a 20 year old man, who lives on the Hispanic side of our town. Well I'm talking to him about my food, and he talks about how he made quesadillas. How he added cheese, rolled it up, and cooked it. I ask what he means, and he said "You know, rolled it into a tube. You ever have a quesadilla?" Kevin has apparently never been to taco bell, seen a taco bell commercial, or eaten a quesadilla.When I was about 11 years old I, for some reason, decided to check if the coffee machine was still hot after my mother had finished her morning coffee. So I put my whole hand on the part that keeps the coffee hot when it's in the pot. To my surprise it was still hot and I quickly ran to the sink to cool my hand under the cold water. This revelation should have satisfied my curiosity....but about 10 min later *I did it again*! Again, it was still hot and my hand now flaming red and hurting like crazy. I swear I wasn't a dumb child, I just had a dumb moment xD Luckily my hand wasn't hurt too badly and I don't think  my parents ever found out.Yesterday, I was talking to someone in my camp group and for anonymization purposes let call him bchristian. Here’s a list of things he said during our one week stay at camp.
 1. One of our group members (who hadn’t ever expressed any interest and frankly wasn’t interested) who was Japanese “knew all the animes and manga because she was Japanese”.
 2. Silver and white cars aren’t painted, just the metal used during manufacturing. 
3. A park named wurster park was pronounced wurst park. 
4. Anyone who has even a small percent of foreign heritage knew the language from birth.
 5. Oppression against Jews didn’t exist during the time of Nazi germany and it was all a scam. 
6. Tried to say you’re only the gender you’re assigned biologically (transgender doesn’t exist) and there’s no such thing as not having a gender. 
7. If women don’t want to be raped they shouldn’t wear “sexy” clothing. 
8. Harassed a bi person telling them they’re actually only heterosexual and they’re making it up for attention.
 9. Tried to punch a kid because he corrected him about a math question. 
10. Harassed girls because they wouldn’t date him. 11. Harassed more girls because they wanted to have careers when they were adults, and MANY more things that are blatantly wrong/stupid. (Edit) forgot to add the principal one, but that one’s pretty self explanatory.


Edit: keep your bigotry to yourself and refrain from posting it in the commentsSo after everyone seemed to enjoy my other post, I’ll continue making them until you get tired of them. Once again, 100% kudos to Strongbadjr for opening this can of worms. So here we go!

As I mentioned before, I come from a family that is deeply rooted in the trucking industry. This story is from my uncle Eddie who was the dispatcher for a decent sized dump truck and equipment hauling outfit near our home town. The Kevin in this story was a new hire with nearly zero dump truck experience. Now it may seem like dump trucking is easy, and once you’re used to it, generally, it can be. Yet anyone who has operated a dump truck for any decent length of time will tell you an experienced operator is invaluable. 

Kevin was the son of a friend of the boss with about 3 years over the road experience. While he did know how to get from point a to point b and back, he was hard headed when it came to instruction. On his first day, Uncle Eddie had assigned Kevin ride with Joey who was a 5 year veteran with the company. By lunch time, Joey was back at the yard asking that Kevin get off his truck. Uncle Eddie walked out where Joey stood with two other men and asked what the issue was. Evidently, Kevin saw fit to fart in the truck every time it would hit a bump, then proceed to laugh hysterically. Uncle Eddie just let out a snort, as did the other men. Joey didn’t find this funny at all and threatened to call the main boss. Kevin was removed from the truck and put under the patient wing of an older gentleman named Frank, who thankfully, lost his sense of smell in Vietnam. 

Flash forward a year and Kevin is still attempting dump trucking. When at all possible, Uncle Eddie puts Kevin on extremely simple tasks. Need 8 loads of dirt dumped in this large field? Done. Need gravel dumped in one big pile? Done. Anything else, Kevin complained. On one job, Eddie had him follow Frank down with a load of sand to spread across a spot on the ground for a pool. The entire time Kevin was on the phone with Eddie, groaning about everything. Keep in mind, this was a 30 year old man.

&gt; Kevin: “Ed, Franks driving too fast” 

&gt; Eddie: “okay, Kevin”

&gt; Kevin: “Ed, Why can I just dump dirt?” 

&gt; Eddie: “We need you on this job Kevin” 

&gt; Kevin: “yeah but I don’t want to have to”

&gt; Eddie: “Hate it for you, Kevin”

&gt; Kevin: “I’ll call the boss and he will yell at you”

&gt; Eddie: “wouldn’t be the first time, won’t be the last”

The next day, Kevin goes straight to the boss’s office. He comes out with him in tow, and approaches the window where Eddie put his dispatch orders. 

&gt; Bossman: “Ed, Kevin tells me you were mocking him and have previously made fun of him with others. Is this true?”

&gt; Uncle Eddie, toward Kevin: “First off, how is me needing you on a job mocking you? And second, when exactly did I make fun of you?” 

&gt; Kevin: “When you put me on a job that’s clearly below me, then saying I hate it for you when I simply voiced my concerns wa-“

&gt;  Uncle Eddie cut him off “You do realize this past year I’ve had to go out of my way to ensure you had the simplest of jobs, right?”

&gt; Kevin: “No you didn’t but whatever. You still made fun of me with Joey when my tummy hurt”
Both the bossman and Eddie looked at each other and back at Kevin. 

&gt; Eddie: “Tummy? Really?”

&gt; Bossman: “I’ve heard enough. Just let me know if we have any further issues.”

Uncle Eddie said at that point, he knew he was definitely going back over the road. Office drama, stupid customers and whiny drivers moaning about their “tummies” made him realize how bad he had the itch. Besides, he had just the perfect job for Kevin before he left; Ms Karen. (Obviously not her name). 

Ms Karen (MK) was notorious among the drivers for being, well, a Karen. She was the owner of several acres of real estate and often sought the services of the company for her dump trucking needs. She had recently made her biggest investment yet, a 3 building, 3 story apartment complex. It was touted as having all the amenities: Pool, a gym, in home laundry, basketball and tennis court. It was really going to be top of the line. 

During the final days of construction, all of the electrical and internet lines were attached to the buildings. At the same time, the company was also helping to pave the parking lot. Anyone who has worked on or near a paver can attest how hot this work gets. Kevin was placed on the final crew to finish the last end of the parking lot. Karen, ever the watchful, came out to see the finalized product and to inspect anything she might not like. Immediately she noticed Kevin, munching away at a slim jim in his truck with music blasting. She proceeds to call uncle Eddie at the dispatch office to complain. 

&gt; Eddie: “ABC Dump Trucking, can I he-“

&gt; Karen: “your driver looks like an idiot”

&gt; Eddie: “excuse me, what?”

&gt; Karen: “this stupid driver you have in the blue dump truck looks like an idiot”

&gt; Eddie: “I’m sorry, who is this?”

&gt; Karen: “Ms Karen from XYZ Realtors. The one who’s paying for component drivers, not mouth breathing idiots”. 

The phone then goes quiet. 

&gt; Karen: “oh no...NO STOP HIM NO!!! -random men screaming in the background-“
Loud buzzing noises commenced followed by a thunderous crash. 
Karen began panting. Karen began seething. Karen began screaming. 

Yet above all that, what did Uncle Eddie hear? Kevin in the background declaring “Don’t get mad at me, it ain’t my fault the bed of the truck didn’t go down when I drove off”. 

Karen began yelling what could only be compared to, and I quote Uncle Eddie on this, “a f*cking Balrog mating call” toward Kevin. Uncle Eddie grabbed the bossman, hopped in the company truck and hauled as much a** toward the job site. When they arrived, everything was in shambles. Kevin had pulled down every single power and internet line for the complex. He also tore down the upper half of the utility pole, which was attached to the main line. 

Upon seeing the boss, Kevin ran to him immediately like a kid who knew he done goofed. Thankfully the bossman wasn’t having any of it and fired him on the spot. One would think that upon encountering these state of affairs, you just grab your things and leave, right? Nope. Not Kevin! He demands to be rehired on the spot. He was told to pound sand.

Karen was heard yelling at everyone she could, so the bossman and Eddie walked toward her direction. Kevin, still not taking the hint, followed closely behind. As soon as she saw the boss, she got in his face, finger out stretched, wagging it and telling him how much he now owes her. The boss was listening to her rant when she noticed Kevin. 

&gt; Karen: “You. Do you realize how much money this cost me? Time? Effort?”

&gt; Kevin: “From where I was in the truck, all I could see was your hand on your hip and your finger wagging at anyone who would listen. Don’t seem like that requires much effort, I’m just saying”. 

The boss and Uncle Eddie wanted so bad to laugh. The boss later admitted that was the only time he half considered giving Kevin his job back.This happened today at school. Kevin is a good friend of mine who only acts like a Kevin rarely. He is normally smart but this time he wasn't.

We had a history assignment due in 3 days, Kevin decides to plagiarise the essay we had to write. He tries to be smart and opens a YouTube video about the topic (why the Weimarer Republik failed) and decides to copy the whole transcript/subtitles and paste it in a word document. Doesn't seem that bad right?... Aaand he doesn't proofread it. Just sends it in.

He comes to me after handing it in and told me what he did. I ask him if he never proofread it? He said he didn't, I knew he messed up... Why? Because he didn't cut out the 

"don't forget to like share and subscribe to the channel for more uploads "

May he rest in peaceMy mother loved to people-watch. She was terribly curious, but far too polite to ask questions about things she noticed that were none of her business.  


Mom was a homecare worker for the elderly and many of her clients lived in the same apartment building. Originally the building was only for older people, but eventually the rules changed to allow all ages, which is when Kevina moved in.  


My mom would sometimes encounter Kevina in the laundry room or while taking trash out to the dumpsters. She seemed like a nice enough middle-aged lady, but mom felt something was a bit odd about her.  


She noticed that the plumber had to visit Kevina's apartment a lot. A whole lot. Way more often than normal. A ridiculous number of times. Kevina complained about the building's plumbing whenever she crossed paths with my mom, but mom had been working in that building for years and knew the plumbing was actually quite dependable. And so was born a mystery.  


Like I said, mom enjoyed people-watching, and for about six months Kevina was her favorite show. She'd catch little bits here and there, an annoyed plumber stomping out of Kevina's apartment carrying his tools, or a glum Kevina complaining about the plumbing as she started her laundry.  


Mom also noticed that, on the rare occasions when Kevina took her trash down to the dumpsters, it was always ridiculously tiny bags of trash. More mystery.  


Well one evening mom picked me up from daycare and was absolutely full of giggles. She'd finally solved the mystery, and just *had* to tell someone.  


Turns out, Kevina had been flushing her trash. Nearly *all* of her trash. She thought the toilet was a Magic Go Away Machine for literally anything. Kevina only threw trash in the dumpster if it was physically too large to fit in the toilet.  


Mom was entirely baffled. If Kevina had had literally any reason to not know how toilets and trash cans worked in our area, she would have been understanding and helpful. But nope, Kevina was a local.I been lurking on this sub for awhile. I work and live near a total Kevin. Today he said something and I just had to finally make my first post here.

To set things up, I’m 29 and Kevin is 21. We work together as housekeepers and live in the same apartment complex. I had helped him get a place when his parents wanted to kick him out or so he told me. I later learned that his parents wanted him to stop living like a pig in slop and he refused. Anyway back to the reason for this post. I am amazed sometimes that Kevin is alive or even able to live on his own and pay bills. 

-He impulse buys like a lot. He lives off a diet of fast food, KoolAid and candy. He’ll buy something, regret but has lost the receipt so he can’t return it. His latest purchase was a mystery box which was full of junk.

-He’s still seeing a pediatrician. Kevin says he’s been going to this doctor for years and doesn’t want to see another one. Even after he was recommended to another doctor to deal with his medical condition.

-He pays for car insurance but doesn’t know what coverage he has! His car broke down two weeks ago. Kevin says his parents will let him know since the bill goes to their house. Surprise! They haven’t told him. In fact he’s been bugging them to fix his car. 

-He pops diet pills like the ones you get in Walmart. Says they will keep the weight off so he  doesn’t have to diet or exercise.

Those are some examples. Today we were talking about covid and how a new patient from South Africa came in with the new strain. Kevin says “We should take better care of our states!” He went on a small rant about how the government doesn’t take good care of the Southern states. I was so confused! Kevin thought South Africa was part of the US! Why?! It has white people!

I tried to explain that South Africa is part of Africa but he wouldn’t listen and kept explaining how cause it is populated by white people, it’s part of the  United States! Even threw in how Elon Musk is an American! I gave up after 10 minutes.

So in case you didn’t know South Africa is part of the United States. Honest Kevin truth. If you want to hear more stories of my Kevin, I’ll post it.Not sure if dog Kevin’s are allowed but this dog reminded me of this sub. So I work at a pet store cleaning out kennels and taking care of dogs and sometimes cats, a few months ago we got this mostly white female Alaskan Husky that’s been a giant pain in the ass for everyone since day one. She’s managed to figure out how to break out of the kennel by squeezing her way through a hole she creates by pushing against one side of the door, unfortunately for Kevina she tends to get stuck more often then gets free i once started my shift to find her half way through the kennel door and stuck, this causes a problem since the whole she gets through is so tight she can choke, luckily we have a latch on the doors that stops her most of the time. Earlier this week someone forgot to put the latch the previous night and she managed to get out, she found a power cable for an air filter and chewed right through it (luckily it wasn’t connected so she’s fine) and poop in the area for sick dogs. She also cries for help anytime she gets stuck and will run out if you do help her.

Edit: oh shoot sorry not an Alaskan Husky it’s a Siberian Husky not sure why I thought Alaskan100% credit goes to Strongbadjr for opening this can of worms. If you haven’t, make sure to check out his stories on here. Also I’m on mobile, so I am terribly sorry. Here we go!

First off, a little backstory. I’m from a family with a lot of involvement in trucking. A few of us ended up as drivers, married drivers, dispatched drivers or loaded trucks for a living. This particular story is one my aunt loves to share from when she was in a long term relationship with a trucker back in the 80’s-90’s. 

My aunt dated this guy we will call Jay for the better part of 20 years. Neither of them believed in marriage and were virtually inseparable. As such, my aunt often would go out with him whenever he left on a trip. After a while he had his own small fleet of about 4 trucks who would run in a convoy between several customers he had. One of his drivers was the Kevin in this story.

Kevin was a cocky ba*****. Admittedly, he had been driving around 20 years at that point, which was around 12 more than Jay at the time. He always bragged about how “I’ve ran more coffee through the pisser than you have diesel fuel through an engine!” Whenever he would meet a new driver. Just a real overall a**.

Jay hired him simply because Kevin could do one thing better than make an a** of himself, he could run. Any trucker will tell you, back before electronic logging of drive hours, paper logs were the name of the game. Kevin had it down to a science. 4500 miles a week on average. You might be wondering, if he’s so great, how is he a Kevin? Well I’ll tell you. Part of Jay’s conditions for hiring a driver was that driver had to know how to at least perform basic maintenance. Jay would compensate them on a per hour rate, stating he would rather pay his own than some scumbag who will rip you off. 

Jay had noticed that during each of Kevin’s weeks out, he was claiming increasing amounts of time spent on maintenance. So one week, he decides to give the truck a good once over himself. Surprisingly he found nothing wrong. The fluids were all good, tires checked out, hoses and brakes looked great. So what the hell was Kevin maintaining? He decided to ask when he came back the next day.

Kevin shows up ready to roll the following morning and he and Jay have a chat. It turns out Kevin wasn’t fixing anything. Each day you’re required to do a pre and post trip inspection on your truck. Kevin was charging Jay for this and any time he did anything related to the truck. Needless to say, Jay was pissed. A cursing match ensued followed by Kevin going home unemployed.

A couple of days passed and my aunt gets a call from Kevin’s wife begging for a second chance for her husband. My aunt speaks to Jay about it, who decides he will discuss it with Kevin. A few beers, a hand shake and a hug with apologies and all is well. Jay then tells Kevin he needs him for a trip to Maine (we all lived in Kentucky) hauling two loads of manure up in a end dump trailer, then picking up two van trailers hauling paper back. 

The whole trip up, Jay is about to strangle Kevin. Jay would be leading the convoy, then Kevin would blow past him. He would eventually slow enough to where Jay had to pass him, but would repeat the process. This wouldn’t be much of a problem except Kevin’s trailer didn’t have a tarp, this bits of manure would pepper Jays beloved Kenworth cab over truck. It had the chrome, the chicken lights, the fancy paint and now bits of sh*t thanks to a sh*thead. 

Fast forward a day or two and they’ve dropped the manure trailers and are rolling to pickup the paper trailers. Jay is leading the way down this country road when he locks up his brakes hard. A moose and calf are attempting to cross the road not 15 feet from where he stopped. Kevin, being the genius that he is, hops out of the truck and strolls up beside Jays truck. Surprised by this, Jay tells him to get his ignorant a** back in his truck. Kevin is about to say something snarky when a massive bull moose walks out from the tree line. He tucks tail and sneaks back into his truck as to not unleash the fury of this Dino deer when he gets the greatest idea ever! Why not use the air horn to scare it away?!

This obviously did not go as planned. 

You see, it was the rut. This particular moose had claimed this particular road as his own. Two cab over Kenworth trucks were not only on his territory, but had the audacity to honk at him for 10 seconds. 

As Jay would later tell my aunt, hell was unleashed that day. As the bull happened to be sniffing the pavement next to his truck, Jay saw Kevin grabbing the air horn in his mirror. The bull immediately jumped to the side and kicked Jays headlights in. He then turned back and charged, antlers down, into the front of the truck. This one hit destroyed the entire windshield and dented the radiator. He then proceed to kick what was left of the grill into the radiator, destroying it. He finally finished with destroying the driver side window and mirrors before trotting off like nothing happened.

Thankfully Jay was physically okay. Financially it was a bust since one load canceled then all the extensive repairs. He decided to take Kevin’s truck and sent him home in his. Luckily Kevin knew enough backroads as to avoid an inspection. He still got fired though. After everything, Jay just couldn’t overlook the nearly 10-15K lost. His wife understood and thankfully so did Kevin.  After that, he took a local job hauling building supply and his wife was much happier. 

I’ve got several other stories if anyone wants to hear them. Again, I do apologize for being on mobile. I’m doing my best, I promise!Alright, so, gather by the fire, get your warm milk and cookies, and let me tell you all about the story of how I forgot timezones were a thing. 

Fair warning that this is a bit short 

So, it was about 2 in the morning and I was on a roleplay server as usual. A friend that I was roleplaying with said that he had school, but me being the dumb little kevin that I am, I thought that he meant that he needed to go to bed. I didn’t realize until about 8 messages later that he meant that he needed to get ready for school. And that, my dear children, is how I realized I was a Levin through and through. Although, this wasn’t the only time I had been a Kevin though, but that story will be for another time-I work at an ice cream shop in Germany and we do get some weird customers, although this was my first encounter with a real Kevin.

On a quite busy, sunny day, Kevin comes in with a few friends. The transactions with them go over  normally, without problems and they all go outside to wait there, as he approaches the counter last.

Me: "Hello, what can I get for you today?"

Kevin: "Hey, erm.. do you guys have any vegan ice cream without any milk? I am vegan."

We get this quite a lot, so I immediately point out the first row.

Me: "Our fruit ice cream is completely vegan, so you can get any of these flavours if you like."

Kevin looks at the flavours offered in the row and takes a look at our price list.
"Could you do any of those as a milkshake?"

I look at him quite flustered and say "Erm our MILKshakes unfortunately do include milk, sorry."
I think nothing more of it, as he maybe has been to a shop offering milk alternatives before.

Kevin: "Okey, Well, then I would just take a scoop in a cone, please. Is your yogurt ice cream vegan?"

I look at him in disbelief. "Erm No, sorry, as I said, these fruity flavours in the first row are vegan, the others are not. They contain milk."

He gets a bit irritated but finally nods. And I kid you not, he starts asking for other flavours he wants to get, NONE of them in the respective vegan row. He asks for Chocolate Chip, Nutella and another yogurt flavour, which has a cherry sauce on top.

It goes back and forth,  with him pointing out a flavour and me reiterating that none of those are vegan.

The conversation finally ends, with him telling me that "It's fine, I will take yogurt then."

Even after me once again explaining that it is not vegan, he just shrugs and says "It's the one that I want."

I never wanted to end a transaction this badly. 

Thanks for reading!Hello, everyone and welcome back to another edition of Kevin in a Big Rig.  If you haven’t already, please check out all previous posts in this series before continuing; particularly parts 2-7 in order to get up to speed on the story so far.  So many of you have been BEGGING for the conclusion of the First Kevin (FK) saga and have been anxiously watching Reddit and YouTube waiting for the Grand Finale.  I know it seems like I have been intentionally tormenting you with cliffhangers, but I can assure that I am simply trying to balance narrative content and maintaining a manageable length.  Finishing with cliffhangers allows me to provide a quality story without tying up hours of your time.  But, this time, there will be no cliffhanger.  That being said, I suggest you start reading with a full coffee cup and an empty bladder because this is gonna be a long one.

And so, to put an end to the suffering, lets get into Kevin in a Big Rig Part 9: Nuclear Winter.

Backstory: this installment begins immediately after the events in Part 8.

It wasn’t long after leaving that truck stop in Wisconsin that I began regretting my decision to push on.  It seemed as if the storm had been watching us since we left Lewiston and decided to lay a trap for us once we crossed back into Minnesota on that remote two-lane highway.  Every moment that passed brought heavier snowfall, falling temperatures and winds that threatened to push the truck into the ditch and leave us stranded.  Even as the sun went down and the sky turned to pitch black, there was no sign that the storm was inclined to show mercy.  On the contrary, it seemed dead set on punishing me for the Hell I had unleashed upon the company a few days before.  Karma can be a bitch like that.

I’ve learned that, during times of life-threatening conditions beyond the control of mortal humans, people have one of two reactions.  Many, unable to cope with having their fate in hands other than their own, become overwhelmed with anxiety and give in to irrational panic.  Those who are unwilling to simply resign themselves to whatever fate may have in store will stop at nothing until they find a way to cheat fate long enough to make an escape.  That night, I knew that giving in to fear would mean more than likely end in our deaths: at the very least, we would be stranded in the middle of nowhere until someone dug us out of several feet of snow.  Maintaining control; of both myself and the truck, was non-negotiable if I wanted to see the next morning.  Since fear and panic would serve not purpose, I disengaged the emotional parts of my mind and relied purely on instinct, skill and training.

As the night wore on and the conditions steadily worsened, I could feel my control of the situation waning with each mile that passed by.  The increasingly heavy snowfall limited visibility to a couple of dozen meters and the wind hammered against the trailer as if it were the sail of a tall ship.  The narrow roads offered very little margin for error and  the strong wind gusts required precise corrections in order to keep all 18 wheels on the asphalt.  The headlights, to their credit, did their best to light the way forward, but with the combined onslaught of dense snow both falling from the sky and being blown in front of the truck, they hampered visibility almost as often as they assisted.  As visibility oscillated between meters to inches and back within the span of seconds, I had to rely on instinct and timing to keep the truck between the ditches.  At times, the snow was so thick that even the beams from the headlights disappeared completely underneath a blanket of white powder.

To say that I wasn’t tempted to abandon the trip and take my chances with keeping FK out of the seat would be a complete lie.  I don’t know how many suitable parking places I passed that night; many I very nearly took advantage of only to change my mind at the last second and push deeper into the storm.  When I passed a small Mom and Pop truck stop that, in spite of the frozen tempest, was still open and offering food, shelter and safe harbor, I was convinced that I had gone completely insane.  Who in their right mind would forgo sanctuary when the odds were so heavily stacked against him?

That would be me, apparently.  Each time the temptation of seeking shelter crossed my mind, I was immediately reminded that we were well off the beaten path as far as Safety was concerned.  FK, completely oblivious as to what was waiting for us, wouldn’t think twice before diving head-first into the storm until he received an order to shut down that I knew would never come.  His needlessly heavy braking, teeth-rattling gear changes and inability to drive five minutes without taking his eyes off the road to check his notebook would slash our chances of making it through the night from remote to non-existent.  The only way to keep FK out of the driver seat, short of killing him, was to make sure my backside didn’t leave it.

For me the entire night was an unending exercise in keeping my growing fear in check.  Before that night, the most terrifying situation I could remember being in was the time I was doing my solo cross-country flight as part of the training for my pilot’s license.  That day, I found myself alone in a small airplane, dodging an intense line of thunderstorms while being almost completely lost.  I mention it here because, during that long snow-laden Hell, my mind kept going back to that day of dodging thunderstorms.  I made it out of that nightmare alive and arriving at my destination before the storms overtook me by sticking to my training: keep calm, avoid areas of limited visibility, use everything I had to find the runway and get on the ground as quickly as possible.  Strange as it sounds, remembering that brush with death at the hands of Mother Nature brought me some small amount of comfort: I made it out of that death-trap alive, so I could surely make it through this one.

Driving through a blizzard isn’t a skill they teach at CDL school.  However, the ability to operate in limited visibility, on slick roads and high winds are all concepts included in the training.  I had faced all three challenges before that night in a truck: this was simply the first time I had to deal with all three at once.  Fortunately, all three problems required the same solution: slow down, maintain a stable speed and avoid rapid changed in speed and direction.  It was something that my instructors at the school as well as my trainer had emphasized heavily: fortunately for me and FK, I paid attention in class.

I don’t know exactly how long I pushed through that ice-covered nightmare.  There were times when the truck felt as if it were about to give up and skid off the road only to oblige my corrections and keep going just a bit longer.  Each time I came upon a bridge or overpass, my sphincter would tighten up so quick that it felt as though my butt cheeks were biting holes into the seat.  Whenever the truck dropped into a small valley, the cross-current snow drifts resulted in a few, heart-stopping moments of complete blindness until the truck climbed out through the far side.  With each passing moment, a new threat presented itself; and each time, I did my best to push through.

Call it skill, luck, relentless stubbornness or divine intervention.  One guess would be as good as the other.  Regardless, with less than ten miles left until reaching the company’s main terminal, the blizzard had finally begun to tire itself out.  The snow continued to fall in heavy sheets, but the wind had abated to more manageable level and the visibility improved dramatically. As the remote countryside gave way to the outermost edges of the town, white and orange streetlights revealed what resembled a post-apocalyptic cityscape.  Every store, gas station and restaurant was dark and empty as if the entire town had been evacuated.

When I finally pulled into that terminal parking lot, set the truck brakes and put myself Off-Duty, I didn’t feel relieved or grateful:  in fact, I don’t remember feeling anything.  I sat in the driver seat for a good half-hour; smoking a cigarette in an attempt bring myself back from whatever trance I had fallen into.  I watched the snow through the windshield while trying to come to grips with what had taken place of the past few hours.  Winter had thrown everything it had at me and, despite even my own predictions, I made it out alive and in one piece.  I didn’t break out in tears; nor did I feel the need to shout in triumph.  I was simply exhausted; mentally and physically.

When the need to pee came upon me, I got out of the truck.  Being late at night, all of the offices and shops were closed, but the company maintained a 24-hour restroom and shower facility at the shop for drivers camped out at the terminal.  However, at the moment I needed to make use of the facility, it was closed for cleaning: that is, there was a Wet Floor sign in the middle of the restroom, a chain across the door and not a single living soul inside.  The floor was covered with melted snow and dirt much like that on the bottom of my boots.  No harm in soiling what’s already dirty, I think, so I go inside and relieve myself.

On the way out, as luck would have it, the shop assistant who had been assigned to clean that particular restroom came back from whatever had interrupted his job.  When he saw me, he apparently took my trespass on his workspace as a personal affront.

“Hey,” he said with tone that would make any Karen jealous, “are you stupid?  Can’t you read the fucking sign?”

I, not missing a beat, reply, “Would you rather I stand at the door and piss on the floor, asshole?”  I was not in any mood to deal with a bad attitude at that point.

The assistant gets into a huff.  “You damn drivers.  I get so tired of you’re shit…”

He never finished his sentence as I, a good deal larger than him, got right in his face, looked him dead in the eye and raised a finger in warning.

“Don’t fuck with me, Shithead.  NOT TONIGHT!” I warn him.  After the Hell I just went through, I had no intention of allowing some self-important peon to tell me I couldn’t relieve an empty bladder because my dirty boots would make his dirty floor even dirtier.

Back outside, I light another cigarette and stand beneath the awning; watching the snowfall through the lamplights.  Then, as is habit, I take out my phone.  I see an unread email: it must have come during the drive and I didn’t realize.  It was from my fleet manager and I suddenly was reminded as to why I had made that nightmare of a journey.  That email, I knew, would set the stage for the fight I had been waiting for.  Where, when, who and what would be involved would be outlined in that message.  For the past few days, I had considered every possible contingency of the meeting and felt more than ready.  In my point of view, I held all the cards and controlled the terms: any threats or attempts at coercion and they would quickly find themselves in a world of hurt.  I was ready for anything: and opened the email.

“OP, when you get to the terminal, move onto truck 3456 and meet with driver Bob ID 9123 (not real name).  Will send instructions in the morning. -FM.”

Ok, I wasn’t ready for that.

I wanted a new partner, true enough, but I had no idea they would move that quickly.  I didn’t know who Bob was or why I was being assigned to his truck.  Maybe he did?  One way to find out.

I go back to the truck.  FK had been asleep during the entire trip from Wisconsin to the terminal: just as well since any snarky comment from him during that blizzard might have been made with his last breath.  Now, he was wide awake and pouring over the computer.

“Where are we?” he asked

I go straight to the bunk and begin packing my gear.  “Main terminal.  FM called me earlier and told me to get here right away.”

“What’s the deal?”

At this point, I could have let him in on what he might expect.  However, I believe that finding oneself in a fair fight is a sign of poor tactics.  “I don’t know.  But I’ve been assigned to another truck.”

FK said nothing: he had been completely taken by surprise and had no idea what he was likely in for.  Then again, neither did I: I expected to go a few rounds with Safety the next morning and now I’m packing my bags for a new truck.

FK simply got out of the truck and I never saw him again.

I packed my belongings, left my key in the glove box and left the truck for the last time.  A few moments later, I’m knocking on the door of a new truck.

“Are you Bob?” I ask the driver when he answers.

“Yeah,” he said rubbing his eyes since I had just woke him up.  “Are you OP?”

“That’s me.” I reply and climb aboard.  “Sorry to wake you up.  We just got here.”

At first, this doesn’t register with him.  Then, he realizes what I just told him.  “Wait, you drove through that shit?!”

I take a deep breath.  “Yeah. I wouldn’t recommend it, if you’re curious.”

“You must be nuts,” he said.

“You have no idea.  I guess we’re partners now,” I say.

Bob screws his face at me.  “No,” he said, confused, “my partner is waiting for me in Pennsylvania.  I was supposed to leave out yesterday afternoon, but FM called and told me to wait for you.  I figured you’d know what the deal was.”

I give him the basic rundown of what happened with my now former co-driver, how I reported him to safety and now relayed back to the main terminal.

“Damn, man,” he replied, “sounds like rough gig.”  Understatement of the year, I think.

The next morning, the weather had broken.  The sky was dull and threatened to bring more snow, but the wind had dulled to a gentle breeze.  As soon as she was in the office, FM gave me a call.

“Hey, OP,” she said, sounding a bit nervous, “where are you guys at?”

“Sitting in the yard.”

“Wait,” she replied, sounding a little confused, “you made it in last night!?”

“Sure did.”

“What in God’s name possessed you to drive through that storm?!?!” 

I take a deep breath.  “It would be best if I didn’t elaborate on that point.”

She wanted to press for more information, but decided not to.  “Uh huh…Did you meet up with Bob and move to his truck?”

“Sure did.  What’s the deal?”

“You and Bob are gonna take a load to the terminal in Pennsylvania.  His co-driver will meet him there.  I’m gonna have you pick up another truck and we’ll go from there.”

“Ok…” I respond, cautiously.  “Am I gonna meet my new co-driver up there, too?”

“No.  We haven’t found you one yet.  Just check in with me when you get there and we’ll see what happens.”

“No problem.”

We hang up and I fill Bob in on our new marching orders.  The company’s terminal in Pennsylvania was about a day and a half with two drivers.  Fortunately, Bob had already picked up the load before the storm hit so all we had to do was to get rolling.  Since the truck was permanently assigned to Bob and he had just finished his stint with his trainer, I offer him the first drive shift so he can get used the truck.

As we head out, I got to see the full impact from the previous night’s storm.  About twenty four inches of snow had fallen in just under twelve hours.  Every five minutes, we saw cars, spun out and abandoned, in ditches and center medians.  At nearly every overpass we came upon there was at least one vehicle that had lost control and collided with the barrier.  There were even semis jack-knifed and abandoned where they had hit deadly patches of black ice.  Severe winter weather was common in this part of the country and even the local residents didn’t fair well.  When I saw the carnage from the very storm I traversed, I realized just how much danger I had been in: and how lucky we had been that FK had not been the one driving.

“Holy shit,” Bob said after we passed a semi that had left the road and was now laying on side, “you drove through this?”

I take a deep breath.  “Yep.”

For being an inexperienced driver, Bob knew his stuff.  For the first time since I finished my time with my trainer, I was riding with someone who actually knew what the hell they were doing.  I had known Bob for only a few hours, but I felt more comfortable with him at the wheel than I ever did with FK; and I told him as much.  We top off the tanks at the first fuel stop, I grab a bite of breakfast and head back to the bunk to rest up for my night shift.  The rest of the trip to Pennsylvania, I’m happy to say, was uneventful.

When Bob and I arrived at the Pennsylvania terminal, we say our goodbyes and I go sign out my new truck.  I move aboard, store my belongings and log in to the computer before sending a message to FM that I’m ready to go.  An hour later, she sends me a load: pick-up the next morning from a nearby shipper with delivery in Missouri.  She says to expect a diversion back to the main terminal along the way, but she will let me know for sure before the time comes.  I confirm the instructions and set the computer aside.

For a long time, I sat in the driver seat and looked around the truck.  I was all alone, FK was a thousand miles away and, for the time being at least, I had won a battle with management before it had even started.  And then, for a reason I can’t fully explain, I started to laugh.  Whether it was out of relief of simply submitting to the absurdity of the situation, it felt as though a huge burden had been lifted off of my shoulders and things were beginning to look up.

I ended up taking the load all the way to Missouri alone: in fact, I worked solo for the next two weeks and all I can say is that IT WAS HEAVEN!!!  I felt in complete control, never had to worry about waking up on the shoulder of a highway, not getting an hour of sleep before being drug out of bed to help FK out of another jam and no more having my head bounced off a cabinet because of a hard brake check.  It was what I had hoped trucking would be and I was enjoying every minute of it.

After a few days into my solo period, I get a surprise phone call from the last person I ever expected to hear from; FK was reaching out.

“Hey, man,” FK said, sounding less confrontational and, unless I was mistaken, anxiety, “what are you up to?”

“On my way to Texas; running solo.”

“Cool.  I need a favor.”

“Ok…”

“Can you call Safety and tell them I said I had been in coma for 21 hours?”

“What?” I say, shocked, “you told me 21 days….COUNTLESS TIMES!”

“Look, man, this is important.”

He then goes into a long, sob story.  According to him, he and his wife went through nasty divorce.  His wife had been granted full custody of their two kids.  He also said that he had been to court and the judge ordered him to come back in a year with gainful employment or he would be sent to jail.  (I assume that it pertained to spousal or child support, though I don’t know for certain.)  He signed on with the company because they were the only place that would hire him.

“Well,” I reply, “doesn’t sound like something I can help with.  But if Safety calls, I’ll see what I can do.”  Poor bastard had no idea who put him in that position.  I hung up and never heard from him again.  I went about having the time of my life.

Not only was I having the time of my life, the fact that I didn’t have to waste so much time correcting FK’s mistakes meant that I was able to make my pick-ups and deliveries on-time, stay on course and complete my loads without a single issue.  In fact, I didn’t need dispatch for anything more than sending load information.  I didn’t even talk to FM for a week and a half before she called me out of the blue.

“Hey, OP!” she said, sounding a little curious, “How’s everything going?”

“Hey, FM.  Everything’s going fine.  What’s up?”

“Oh, nothing.” she replied, relieved and now sounding rather chipper, “I haven’t heard from you in a while.”

“Well,” I say, trying to make it clear I was joking, “no offense, but I haven’t needed to call you.”

“That’s good to hear.  When you and FK were together, he was calling me about once a day; needing directions, getting lost…”

“Well, I’m not FK.”

“No…you’re not.  Anyway, I’m gonna work on getting you home for a few days.  I found you a co-driver and I’m gonna have you pick him up when you come back to work.  He doesn’t live too far from you.”

I’ll admit, I was disappointed by this news.  I was thoroughly enjoying being on my own, but I also knew that solo assignments didn’t last long.  The company relied on expedited freight; loads with tight deadlines that required two drivers to make on-time delivery.  Running solo was only allowed as a short-term measure to allow trucks to keep working until a second driver could be found.

A few days after the phone call from FM, I go home and spend four days sleeping in my own bed, sitting on my couch and watching my TV.  Sounds pretty boring, I know, but after three months of Hell with FK, there was nowhere else I wanted to be.

The four days passed all to quickly and I was assigned to head back out on the road.  I met up with my second co-driver, we’ll call him NG for New Guy.  Like Bob, NG had just completed his month with a trainer and was ready to be a co-driver, while less experienced, was still competent enough driver.  There’s not much more I can say about NG: he and I were only partners for a couple of months before he decided to leave for a better job.  He wasn’t under the same contract as me and I didn’t blame him for leaving, so we parted on good terms.

By now, you’re probably wondering “What happened to FK?”, “When did you and Safety have the Battle Royale?”, “How much damage did the nuclear email actually do?”

Truth is, I was asking myself those very same questions for the two and a half months between the last time I saw FK and the time NG went on to greener pastures.  I decided not to pry, thinking my little nuclear attack probably painted a target on my back and discretion was the better part of valor.  After all, I got what I wanted: FK was long gone as far as I was concerned and, no matter what he did, he was someone else’s problem.  Was I curious?  Sure; just not enough to stretch my neck and find out.

When NG left, I found myself back in the same position I had been in before: no suitable co-driver was available.  By this time, the company had begun to crack down on solo drivers and I was routed back to the main terminal until something could be figured out.  The day I arrived back at the main terminal, I meet with FM to go over my options.  Before that, however, she pulls me into another office; with the Safety Director.  When I see the name plaque on the door, a cold chill ran up my spine.

It wasn’t the battle I had been waiting for.  In fact, the reason they wanted to meet me had nothing to do with the nuclear email: they offered me a promotion to Lead Driver.  At first, I wasn’t sure that I wanted to deal with more idiot drivers after barely surviving FK, but the only other option was to bounce from truck-to-truck until a permanent co-driver could be found: a prospect I found equally uncomfortable.  I asked for a little time to think about it and they oblige.  I gave my old trainer a call to get his advice.  My trainer and I stayed in touch to this and became good friends.  He suggested I go for it since I would be the boss and could, within reason, boot a bad student off the truck if he proved too dangerous.  I hadn’t considered that and ultimately decided to take the job.

Later that afternoon, I was back in FM’s office getting paperwork ready for my new job.  While we were waiting for Safety to approve the promotion, I decide to ask.

“What’s FK been up to?” 

FM buries her face in her hands. Those five words had reopened a nasty wound.  Trying to control her frustration, she told me what happened after I left with Bob to Pennsylvania.

While I was sent on what was a vacation by comparison, FK had been tasked with completing the load we had picked up in Lewiston.  However, in typical FK fashion, he got lost almost as soon as he left terminal.  He had gotten so far off course that the GPS locator on the truck couldn’t even be found by dispatch.  It took him an entire day to get back on track only to do the exact same thing twice before finally making delivery two days late.

The next day, they sent him another load assignment, but had to cancel it because he couldn’t find the pick-up location; despite the fact it was less than a mile away.  It was at that point the Safety decided to pull him back in until they could get to the bottom of the situation.  When he got lost AGAIN on the way back, they had him leave the truck in a truck stop and catch a ride with another truck.

Why did they send him back out after the nuclear email?  While I never got a solid confirmation, the rumor is that the Safety department used it as an experiment just to see if my claims had any merit.  Needless to say, they find out real quick I wasn’t bullshitting them.  If they didn’t believe that FK was a menace before, they couldn’t deny it now.  The question was what to do with him.

They pulled FK in for a meeting to get to the bottom of the issue.  When asked about why he kept getting lost, he maintained that he was “following the company route.”  They then asked about why he couldn’t find a shipper less than a mile away, he said he was “waiting for the company to send directions.”  

As the meeting wore on, FK became more and more worrisome.  In his opinion, it was the job of the dispatch office to tell him every move to make: something that utterly impossible since one dispatcher was often charged with dozens of other trucks and couldn’t be expected to babysit each of them.  Drivers have to be able to work out issues for themselves and think on their feet when problems arise. FK wasn’t able to be independent and whenever the situation required it of him, he ended up in trouble.

Everything that took place lead to one irrefutable conclusion:  FK was either medically or mentally unfit to operate a commercial vehicle.  They had dug into the claim about the twenty-one day coma, but found no mention of it in his paperwork.  Despite the fact that two credible witnesses provided corroborating accounts, it wasn’t in his file.  When they questioned him, he denied it at first but a brief investigation discovered the truth: it WAS a twenty one day coma.

How did FK manage to slip through the cracks, get a CDL and go for four months before being caught? In simple terms, he lied.

In order to get a CDL, one must have a DOT medical certificate.  Part of the process of getting that certificate is completing a rather lengthy questionnaire about medical history, drug or alcohol dependency, illnesses, medical conditions etc.  One of these questions asked the applicant to describe any brain or neurological injury or condition.  Another, more generic and subjective question asked if the applicant had any other condition that would interfere with the safe operation of commercial motor vehicle.  FK, like all other new hires, received a DOT physical soon after he arrived at the training facility where he filled out the questionnaire form: a form that is controlled by the Federal government AND, per regulation, the company retained on file.

As it happened, FK had NOT told the medical examiner about the coma.  When they asked him about it, he had tried to backpedal and say it was twenty one hours, but when they checked his medical records (I don’t how they did this without violating confidentiality laws), they learned that it was, in fact, twenty one days.

And with that, FK’s fate was sealed.  He had LIED on a government document and obtained a medical certificate and CDL through fraudulent means.  After realizing this, the company had not choice but to report the incident to the Department of Transportation.  The DOT, in turn, revoked FK’s medical certificate; rendering his CDL invalid.  This was also reported to the DMV of the state that issued his license and, per state law, the state also revoked his CDL: the company had no choice but to fire him.  FK had sabotaged his own driving career on day one.

FM, after telling all this, admitted she had her doubts about him early on due to an incident tht happened just before he and I paired up.  He was running solo and was supposed to deliver a load in Indianapolis.  For whatever reason, FK couldn’t find the receiver and, according to GPS pings, actually drove around in circles for two full days before someone noticed and asked what was going on.  When they finally had the issue straightened out, they noticed that, during the entire two day period, FK was less than two miles from the delivery point; driving around in circles.  FM had hoped that another partner would straighten him out, but when it was clear that wasn’t happening….all she could do was apologize to me.

But the story doesn’t end with FK destroying his own career.  A made a few friends in the company’s head office who where there when the nuclear email hit and, over a period of several months, I was able to piece together the full story and fallout of the nuclear email.  Bear in mind, it is mostly secondhand information, but they claimed it to be true.

After being informed of FK’s fraud, the DOT wanted to know how someone like him could slip through so easily.  When asked how the issue was discovered, the company showed my email to the DOT who, in turn, went ballistic.  The company, hoping to avoid being prosecuted for negligence, cooperated by conducting an internal audit of the company’s policies and procedures.  They found several serious shortcomings in many departments right down to the recruiter who processed and approved FK’s application.  Apparently, the application was approved BEFORE a basic MVR (Motor Vehicle Report) was completed.  The MVR showed no fewer than four accidents on FK’s record where he was at-fault within the past three years: one was enough to disqualify him.  However, it was later discovered that recruiters were often encouraged or coerced to overlook such things and simply get people to sign up and get them to the training facility.  Apparently, this was to take advantage of a government hiring incentive, despite the fact that drivers weren’t offically “hired” until after completing CDL school.

Additionally, the Hours of Service Compliance Department, who’s job it was to monitor driver logs and handle violations, had failed to act whenever FK (among many other drivers) violated the HOS regulations.  The reasoning for this, so they claimed, is that they were overwhelmed with correcting errors in driver logs made by improperly trained drivers.  As a result, they were only allowed to issue notices of noncompliance when the computer flagged consistent violations.

Even the Safety Department found itself under fire when it was revealed that their own people were telling new drivers not to make use of important safety features on the truck; namely, engine brakes.  This became such a concern that, according to rumor Safety Director himself sat in on a new-hire orientation and, upon hearing the presenter actively discourage the use of engine brakes, removed the presenter from the class on the spot and demanded the orientation course be overhauled as soon as possible.  In the end, it came down to the Safety personnel being reminded that they were not drivers and had no business giving their opinions in place of facts.

The last department to take a major hit was Training.  After reviewing the company’s accident history, it became very clear that many new drivers were not properly trained in several key areas.  In order to shorten their time at the training facility, the company preferred to teach students the bare minimum to pass the CDL test and rely on Lead Drivers to fill in the gaps.  The problem with this system was that their was very little in the way of a standardized rubric by which a student driver’s skills could be assessed: essentially, Lead Drivers were left to their own devices when training students.  Whether or not the student passed or failed was, for the most part, dependent on the Lead Driver’s subjective assessment.

There were other issues that were uncovered during the audit that are quite technical, but suffice to say, the company had a LOT of problems that needed to be fixed and quick.  Despite this, the DOT agreed to withhold prosecution under the condition that the problems were to be fixed within a set period of time.  I heard rumors that a few people were fired due to negligence, but I have way of confirming that.  I can only assume that things improved because the company is still in operation to this day.

As for me, I finished out my eight-month contract as Lead Driver.  When the contract was fulfilled, I leased a truck under the company’s Independent Contractor program in order to make more money (that was the idea, at least.)  I did that for several months before growing tired of their mismanagement and left to work for another company.  I drove long-haul for another year before deciding to move into sectors that allowed me to have more of a life outside of a truck cab.  Today, I’m fortunate to work for a fantastic outfit that really appreciates its employees and allows me to be home every night and on weekends.

As for the ultimate fate of FK, I can’t say with any real certainty.  Despite everything, I don’t hate him.  I hope he was able to get the help he needed and turn his life around.  If so, then at least some good would have come of everything that happened.

And with that, the saga of FK comes to an end.  For those of you that have followed this story since the beginning, I honestly hope that you don’t find this ending a disappointment and worth the time and torturous cliffhangers I have, albeit reluctantly, have subjected you to.

On a serious note, while I used humor to lighten the tone of previous episodes, I would be remiss if I did not remind you that these stories are all true.  And the three month period in which the bulk of this story takes place was anything but humorous.  If reading about the trip through the blizzard terrifying, imagine feeling that way each night before you went to bed and you would have some idea what I really endured seven years ago.  But the nightmare is long over and sharing these stories with you wonderful people has helped me put to rest a dark chapter of my life that I wasn’t aware still haunted me.

If you haven’t done so, please check out my man Rob over at YouTube channel Karma Comment Chameleon.  Rob has covered this entire series and his narration is top-notch.

Until next time, dear readers, remember:  If someone offers you a Kevin, JUST SAY NO!!I was going to try to write some yesterday but Kevin’s antics kept me busy… I’m babysitting again tonight, oh joy! I’m writing tonight with very little sleep right now. Sorry if anything is out of place. I’m also using text to speech tonight so I can watch the monitor and in cab monitoring system. Unfortunately I can only see how Kevin is driving in real time and see if he tries to stop or change his route. 


Quick run down from the previous post. Kevin refuses to really work, when he does it’s only in certain states. Kevin’s wife Karen tries getting him loads and fails miserably. Karen somehow gets Kevin to agree to bring her OTR (over the road) with him. Kevin’s brother in-law reminds Kevin that this is a horrible idea and by the time he realizes this it’s too late.


The only good thing she’s done would be she’s forcing Kevin to take loads to other states. Other than the unrealistic requests from Kevin and Karen they’ve been tolerable but that’s going to change very soon and the fuck ups will just start coming back to back. 


Kevin’s now been OTR with Karen for about two weeks now. Other than the few outrageous requests from Kevin and Karen it hasn’t been too horrible. Each request has been given a huge go fuck yourselves and pay for it yourself. First request, Karen requests a hotel room for every 34 Kevin has to take. For those that don’t know what that is it’s a reset. Legally he has to take this time off to get more time back afterwards. Ready for the second request? Karen requests a spending account for clothes, personal items, etc. She doesn’t want to wash her laundry because everyone else is using them and she doesn’t know who has used them. The final request Karen has given is for Kevin to get a newer truck and for us to pay his payments. Yeah… She wants the benefits a company driver gets but wants Kevin to get the pay an owner op would get… NOPE!


Load wise things have been okay for the most part. He’s taken whatever has been offered without much attitude or smartass remarks. That is until he gets sent to Marion, OH. He’s downright refused and when Karen asks about why he will not tell her. She gave him an ultimatum to either take the load or she will go home. He takes it unrelentingly at that. Karen and Kevin are literally giving each other the silent treatment all the way from Knoxville, TN to about Cincinnati. Anytime he’s not driving he’s been on his phone refusing to show Karen. At one point she’s able to grab it but there’s nothing there. Take note that Karen isn’t very tech savvy and doesn’t know about hidden apps or apps that say one thing and end up being something else. 


Eventually while they’re in Cincinnati Kevin starts getting texts and phone calls from an unknown number. Of course he isn’t answering and by this point whenever they get showers he’s making her go take a shower by herself instead of sharing the shower. Karen is extremely hurt, rightfully so at this point. They’re not talking, he’s sleeping on the top bunk now instead of sharing the bottom bunk together. Karen starts going through their cellphone bill and none of the numbers or phone calls show up on her account. The last call was to dispatch. Remember how I mentioned that Karen wasn’t very smart with phones? Well, Kevin is using hidden apps and has a google number linked to his phone. Karen’s apparently still clueless about 3rd party numbers. Karen is literally calling me every day, multiple times a day swearing up and down that Kevin is sleeping with me or someone else in the office. She goes back to leaving nasty reviews, texts throughout the night, calls the employee number. Dispatch is spending more time with her dumbass than actual drivers. I love dealing with stupid people but after awhile it turns into a chore with Karen. I’ve literally had to block Karen from calling any office number and had to threaten legal action in order to get her to stop. 


At this point you’re probably saying “he’s screwing someone else, it’s obvious!” Well, you’d be partly right and partly wrong. You see, Kevin isn’t smart enough to balance one woman let alone two. I’ve had better conversations with a wall than Kevin. I still have no idea on how he got his CDL. Because of Karen we’ve had to change our rules on rider policies. No one is getting paid enough to play Dr. Phil or couples counseling for Kevin and Karen. A few days after the Cincinnati incident Greg starts volunteering information about Kevin. He’s not cheating on Karen like I stated earlier, at least not sexually. Kevin apparently has a Domme, for those that don’t know what this is it’s a kink. Domme means a female dominant, he’s a submissive boy who likes being told what to do. Apparently this has been going on for a few years now and Karen has absolutely no idea. Nobody has had absolutely any idea of this. She’s in Knoxville and each time he’d drive thru they’d meetup in his truck and she’s spend the entire time beating the crap out of him and whatnot. They apparently never had sex and he’d pay her to do these things during his downtime. Whatever, I really don’t care but if you have to hide it then there’s a problem. This isn’t the only reason he didn’t want to travel to other states. This one is probably the most extreme out of the others. But don’t worry, Karen is going to eventually find out. 


Not long after Greg shares this information Karen starts blasting Greg’s phone for answers since nobody else is sharing anything with her. It takes a couple days until he will actually share any information with Karen. Greg being the great brother in-law that he is calls Kevin immediately and starts telling him that Karen knows something. Kevin, the genius he is tells Greg to tell her that she wouldn’t believe him because it’s too crazy of an idea. Kevin is a great example of all Kevin’s out there. He thinks he’s smarter than everyone else and that Karen will believe anything that he says. 


It’s been roughly five days since Karen has called Greg. Greg decides to call Karen back and tell her what’s going on. He tells her where to find things in his truck to prove what he’s saying is right. Karen waits until Kevin goes to take his shower to search the truck. While searching she finds a ball gag, camera, paddles and ropes in the truck. Karen has seen the ropes but assumed they were for his loads. She doesn’t realize that he has special straps in the back to keep things from moving around. I mean, Karen is a housewife and not a truck driver so it’s to be expected. Kevin comes back into the truck roughly an hour and a half later. Karen waits for him to get in and lock the truck before ambushing him. Once he’s in the back she starts screaming and throwing anything and everything on the truck at Kevin. She shows him the camera and asks for a divorce. Kevin being well Kevin starts denying everything and telling Karen he was setup and it must be photoshop. For once Karen doesn’t believe Kevin that someone could photoshop everything and put it on the camera. I applaud Karen for sticking up for herself because he’s done some stupid shit in the past and let it slide. 


The next morning Karen calls explaining what has transpired and I offer to pay for a ticket to get her back home if she can get an Uber to the airport. Karen agrees and leaves Kevin early in the morning while he’s asleep in the truck. It would be three more hours until Kevin realizes that Karen has left for good. He’s apparently calling her phone, Greg and then eventually the office where someone tells him that she’s on a flight back home. 



For the next post we’re going to touch more on Kevin’s kink and what Karen decides to do with this information. I will also discuss a few other reasons on why he refused to travel to other states. They’re not as juicy as this reason but I’ll discuss them. If I have the time I might include it all into one massive post so I can get to “Kevin and the government load”. I have a bunch of Kevin stories but I’m trying to stick to the most interesting ones.    Sorry, I’ve never been much at writing but I’ll try to keep the mistakes to a manageable level. 
   Back in high school I went to a vocational school to learn a trade. I was going through a redneck phase and subsequently met kevin there. We became good friends quick. I was a bit of a rambunctious kid but I loved the trade so I stayed focus in class. Kevin was an idiot. Just writing as it was. As much as I liked being a dumb kid I was the smart one who would keep him in check to not get in as much trouble. 
   
   Our 2nd year we were tasked with teaching the 1st years a little of what we learned to help out the teacher. Kinda weird looking back at it. We were fully new to our trade but teaching as well? I was my teachers favorite so he tasked me with training the girls of the program because I could keep the horny other guys in line. Well I would let kevin in with us. Him and this girl quickly hit it off. I was a third wheel a lot. Of the course of their relationship I noticed they were bad for each other. They brought out the worst in each other. Kevin would do dumber shit and the girl would just be crazy. I slowly backed away from kevin. 
    
   A bit later I get a call from kevin. They broke up and he needs someone to help him get his stuff back from her place. He had been accused of being aggressive with her. That’s all I knew. Alright I am a responsible person I can keep these two away from each other and help mediate. I knew Kevin a couple years now. He was an idiot but I never seen him act in that way so I didn’t know what to think. I drove to Kevin’s and hopped in his truck. We head to her place. I didn’t know where she lived so I just rode with him. We pull up in front of her house and he floors it and starts doing donuts in her parents lawn. Fuck me im thinking they he peels out and we take off. Mind you her dad is a cop and his cop car was in the drive way. As soon as we are out of the neighborhood I can see the cop car hauling ass behind us lights on. He starts running and we go a couple miles before he pulls over. We have 3 cop cars behind us at this point. We both get pulled out slammed to the floor and handcuffed. We get placed in the back of different cars. I’m freaking out trying to explain that I was just under the impression of picking up his personal shit. I show them texts and ask the dad to ask the daughter if she thinks I would do that. She fortunately tells her dad that she believes Kevin would do that to me. At that moment her dad informs me that they have an order of protection against Kevin. I then cut contact with Kevin. 
    
   A couple years later I’m at a bar and I run into Kevin. I hoped he had grown upon those years since. I am incredibly drunk and we catch up. He tells me he has an apartment right around the corner I can crash at. I agree since I was over an hour away from home and Uber would have been crazy expensive. I crash on the couch. I wake up to the front door opening. It’s about 3am. Kevin is letting in two prostitutes. He says I got you one as well. I quickly sober up. I scream “wtf man! What if they were bait for cops?” I quickly got the fuck out of there! And I vowed to never talk to him again! 
   
   I have kept my vow 5 years now. I just recently learned that Kevin later on was arrested for soliciting a prostitute and some drug charges since then. I’ve been told I dodged a bullet many times when being his “friend” but being kevins friend is playing Russian Roulette with 4 of the 5 chambers having a bullet!This is a pretty short story amongst many at my 4 years of working at a gourmet chocolate shop. I tell this story to a lot of people because I always get asked how working at that store was. Working at a chocolate store seems fun to the average person I guess. This took place about 3 years ago.

I was working the register one afternoon by myself and this guy comes in with his wife. 

We sold a variety of chocolate — including vegan, nut free, and sugar free — for those with health issues/prefer not to eat animal products. 

Well, this guy saw the big vegan sign we had that clearly described what our vegan chocolate is made of. We had a lot of informational signs for all the different types of chocolate we had. 

I guess he just didn't want to read the information on the sign because the next thing that came out of his mouth was, "so I know that vegan is a vegetable, but what kind is it?" 

I thought he was joking at first since he had this big goofy smile on his face so I laughed. The smile kind of faded into a questioning look, like he was expecting me to answer his question. He just stared at me. So did his wife. I stared back because I was completely taken aback at the realization that this guy was being serious. 

I had no idea what the hell to say to that. I didn't want to correct him because he would look so stupid no matter how I'd phrase it. 

So I just... Awkwardly stared at him and nervously laughed. "Yeah... Um, I'm not so sure what it is myself." I mostly said this so he didn't look like an absolute idiot and to hopefully diffuse the conversation.

Well, it worked because they ended up buying an entire pound worth of just vegan chocolate. While I was ringing them up, the guy turned to his wife and said "Vegan is SO good in chocolate." 

They paid, and left. I was basically standing there absolutely confused at what the hell just happened.

 There's some poor guy out there in his late 30's that genuinely thinks vegan is a vegetable. I think about him still sometimes, I wonder if he ever figured out what it really was.This is a story about me, I'm the Kevin. The best way I can describe myself is like Patrick from SpongeBob, a person who is incredibly dumb but has strokes of genius at times. I only have a few short stories and I still work at this place. I'm the Dishwasher/food prep and currently training to be a line cook.

Story 1: 

I'm about 5 months into this job and I know the lay of this place, where everything goes, what is expected of me. Today however, my brain did a windows 95 reboot for some reason. I'm washing dishes and I have a clean rack of a few mixing bowls. I walk over to where they are supposed to be stored (there are 3 other bowls already there mind you) and just stop and stare at the mixing bowls. My coworker, Z walks over to me and asks what's wrong. I turn and ask him "Where do the mixing bowls go?" He looks and me in disbelief and points right where I'm staring. He laughs a little and walks off to the walk in to grab something. Now I know brain farts happen a lot, but I proceed to do this another 5 times that night, I just completely forget where everything goes, mind you half of this stuff is at eye level and you can clearly tell where its supposed to go. I do this with the pans, a few plates, salad bowls and with the burner tops and hoods (burner tops go over the burners, even an ameba can figure that out, but I somehow didn't that night, as for the hoods, they prevent grease from going into the HVAC and they're cleaned once a week. They all go over the flat top, grill and sauté area, where smoke from cooking food is produced). 

&#x200B;

Story 2:

This happens a few nights after the first story. My coworker, Z jokingly tells me the freezer needs to be mopped. Now anyone who even passed kindergarten will know that water freezes when it gets cold. Not me. I fill up the mop bucket, grab the mop and head for the freezer. The freezer has a constant temp of -10F. I begin to mop the solid metal floor and get annoyed at the fact that the mop head keeps freezing to the floor. So I use more water, and Z comes into the freezer to begin restocking his side of the line, but by this point, I had turned the freezer into a skating rink. Ice is at least 1/8" thick. Z laughs and hands me a small meat tenderizer to chip off the ice. S also has a laugh. I proceed to freeze my ass off for the next 20 minutes. So, did I learn my lesson after that? No, because I asked Z and S why the mop water froze to the floor, they explained basic physics to me and the 3 states of matter. I proceed to explain why there are 4 states of matter (Solid, Liquid, gas, plasma). They still don't understand how I can be so stupid and so smart at the same time. 

&#x200B;

Story 3:

Alright, cut to more recently in the times of COVID, it's March 2021, the kitchen is slow and I have nothing to do. Nothing on the speed rack to prep or portion, no cleaning to do, so I go ask Z what to do. He tells me to go across the street to the other restaurant to get a left handed spatula. Mind you I have been here for 2 years now, I should know this by now. I say okay and head across the street. Just them, the KM from my place runs out and tells me to get back in the kitchen. When I get back, Z is laughing his ass off and I proceed to ask him, "What's the difference between a right handed spatula and a left handed one?" The KM sighs while Z laughs even harder. They both explain that spatulas are ambidextrous. It finally clicked in my 17 y/o head. We all have a good laugh about it. 

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Those are 3 of my top Kevin moments in the Kitchen and I'm currently trying to be an astronomer. God help you if you are on a spacecraft and I'm the captain.One time she put a marshmallow on the stove to see what would happen and it started on fire and instead of putting the fire out or running outside she ran upstairs and waited for her parents to come home she was 16....

When I had my child her and her mom came to visit I had an emergency C-section after some complications and her mom was talking about how she still has pain from hers and she asked can I feel the pain. Then, I said I have dressing on my incision as that's what they called the wound Vac and gauze and she straight up serious asked if it was French or Ranch....this chick thought when I said dressing on my incision she thought I meant I had salad dressing on my incision and she was serious about it... She was 22 at that timeKevin reads cat in the hat
Kevin sees a blue fish but thinks of a bat
Kevin hears a turtle but thinks of a mouse
Kevin is dumb but he owns a house:)So this just happened a minute ago. This is about my Kevina of a grandmother, and now she'll probably be fined 500 dollars. 

\-Context-

My cousins went out camping without my grandma and I decided to accompany her at the house. 

Now, onto the story. Kevina was about to BURN orange peels??? (idk religious stuff I guess???) I tried to warn her about the alarm, butttt SHE STILL BURNT THE ROTTEN ORANGE PEELS. When the alarm went off ,Kevina started acting like a chicken whos head got cut off. I had to turn it off by Kevina telling me to FRANTICALLY CALL MY MOTHER. I couldn't type the code to turn the alarm off, because my mom is a secret Kevina??? She forgot to tell me a number, and so the alarm has beeped for more than 5 minutes.

Guess how surprising that was, finding out that my mom is a Kevina! (Its devastating) Now Kevina might be fined 500 dollars. Someone's getting in trouble with my U (uncle).

I don't really blame G because she was living in another state before but I wonder why, WHY didn't U NOT teach G about fire safety???? She was living in U's house for A YEAR. 

So Kevina is now telling her Facebook friends her story, while she's drinking her beer. 

Now I smell like SMOKE.  >:(I am the proud new owner of a Toyota Tacoma pickup truck. I saved for years and did lots of research and decided this is what best fit my needs.  For those not in the know, the Tacoma is very well known for outstanding reliability. It's not uncommon for people to drive tacomas well into the 300,000 mile range. 

*Climbs down from soapbox*

I didn't tell Kevin about any of this. I didn't even mention that I bought a new truck. I'm not the braggadocious type.

First time Kevin sees my truck He asked why I bought a Tacoma. I summed it up with the reason stated above. I made no negative comments about any other brand of vehicle

Kevin acted surprised. "Don't you know that all that stuff about them being reliable is just liberal propaganda?"

I asked him what purpose that type of propaganda could possibly serve. 

He told me that most people who drive american-made trucks are Republicans. And the liberals are trying to destroy the conservative way of life by flooding the market with cheap, low quality vehicles to take business away from American manufacturers. 

Dang liberals got me again. /sLet me give a little background information before I go into any details here. This story has taken place at the beginning of COVID-19. There’s a lot that’s transpired in this story and it’s a real shit show. I’m typing all of this on my phone so please excuse any punctuation mistakes that I’ve made as I’m writing this in between lunch and after dinner. This will probably be three or four parts, possibly more if I can find the time to write it all out.


My husband and I own a small trucking company. He’s still driving OTR until we get around ten to fifteen more drivers. I deal with dispatching, customer calls, payroll and general calls/emails. We have two other office people that work from home. We currently have eight drivers now. Six of the drivers were people we’ve worked with from other companies. The other two were referred to us by another driver… Kevin’s brother in-law Greg. We do not have contracts with certain companies and all of our loads come from a load board that anyone anywhere can view. If you own your own truck and trailer you get 90% of the fee, if you rent from us you get 75% which is still a decent amount. The average load pays $2.50-$5.50 a mile. The average is $3-$3.75 a mile right now. 



Kevin has been working for us for about five months now during this timeframe. He works four to five days at a time and goes home for about a week. He averages about $2,500 a week when he does work but that’s before expenses. After expenses he brings home $1,200 and complains every single time. “You underpaid me! I have proof!” He never provides said proof and just gets his wife Karen to blow up our phones, leave bad reviews, etc. Every time we pay him I have to provide literally six pages showing what he made and how everything was calculated. Every single time, he swears it’s wrong and why does everyone make more than him. He’s the only employee who takes more time off than everyone else, he’s renting a truck and trailer from us and he refuses to travel past Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia. There are more than enough loads to keep Kevin moving but because he refuses to travel anywhere else the loads are paying pretty shitty. 


Kevin’s wife Karen works from home for some call center. All she does all day is answer calls, email customers and miscellaneous paperwork. Kevin’s wife has convinced him that she can get him bigger paying loads than we can. She’s using Uber freight for loads and find her husband loads but they’re to other states he refuses to go to. No surprise, Right? She asks Kevin why he won’t go anywhere else and he doesn’t tell her why. Only Greg knows why apparently and will not tell anyone why. (I promise you it’s juicy.) They used to team drive for a couple years until Greg came to work for us. We’re a solo company and it’s only because our insurance company doesn’t allow team drivers. But, we’re allowed to do rider policies though.


Kevin is still holding refusing to budge for his wife. So she stops helping him and he’s forced to come back to us. This lasted about six weeks and he was losing even more money working on his own. Who would have thought it’d cost more. I mean insurance, fuel and maintenance isn’t cheap. His wife has now stopped harassing us and leaving bad reviews. She’s forced him to stop complaining about his pay. I guess Karen  isn’t so bad. Kevin has been back working for about two months now. His wife, Karen has threatened to leave him if he doesn’t get his shit together and work more than he has. She even told him that she wants to come on the road with him. What Kevin doesn’t know is that Karen has already filled out her rider paperwork. It just needs poor Kevin to sign it and bring her up to the office with him for a background check. Four days later he shows up with Karen to get her on the truck with him. She’s very excited to see the open road. That’s at least what she’s said in the office. I gladly process the paperwork in hopes that maybe this gets his ass into gear. 


Karen calls Greg after they leave asking him for advice about living on a truck. He’s flustered and gives her the basics and then hurried off the phone. Kevin is still in the office with me and Greg calls him and just lays into him “WTF do you think you’re doing? If you didn’t want a divorce then expect one now because she’s going to find out and leave your sorry ass. You need to come up with an excuse for why she needs to stay home or you need to tell her now because she’s going to make you travel wherever now!” I’m fully intrigued after hearing this conversation. I’ve kinda figured what is going on. When my husband was a student his trainer got fired for playing with the lot lizards and refusing to pay them. 


I ask Kevin what’s wrong and he doesn’t say anything. He’s white as a ghost and storms off. I figured that he either had changed his mind about bringing Karen OTR, coming clean to Karen or was going to church to repent whatever sins he’s made in his marriage. Kevin’s wife is extremely religious so it wouldn’t surprise me whatsoever. Apparently Kevin was still on board for taking Karen with him and he’s still sticking to his “I’m only willing to drive in these areas”.


I’m going to post more Tuesday or Wednesday when things slow down during the week. I could probably post a slew of stories about Kevin. He’s still somehow still employed with us and I don’t even know how. Desperation on our part? Maybe, but COVID-19 has played a big part in the reasoning. 


I’d almost forgotten about Kevin and his wife until strongbadjr started posting about Kevin. Sure he isn’t the Kevin that I’ve been dealing with?With the recent anniversary of the passing of Michael Jackson, there was a post about MJ on Facebook.  Kevin decided this was a good forum to go on a tirade about how terrible Michael Jackson was and how he had no talent. And how he only listens to good music like screamo. 

Someone attempted to explain the difference between opinions and facts to Kevin. But of course Kevin wouldn't have that. 

Kevin went on to explain that Michael Jackson's music is actually a psychological trick. Because people are forced to listen to it on the radio, they get Stockholm syndrome and end up thinking that the music is good. It also explains how Michael Jackson just came out of seemingly nowhere and was instantly a huge sensation. (Lolwut?)

I posted a link to the Wikipedia page on Stockholm syndrome hoping that Kevin would realize that what he was saying was nonsense. Instead, Kevin thanked me for backing him up. *Facempalm*I knew a Kevin when I was teaching abroad. Actually, I knew several, but this one stands out. He is the outlier who causes us to say "common" sense rather than "ubiquitous" sense. Anyway, This was a few years ago so some specifics (such as dialogue) have a margin of error, but it's essentially correct.

Note: most of the folks who came to teach were fresh out of college and many had never been abroad. There were common mistakes that folks would make as a result of culture shock and learning how to adult for the very first time. Kevin's behavior was well outside of the normal range.

&#x200B;

1.) Newly hired foreign teachers needed some basic assistance to get their bearings--banking, public transit, etc. I took Kevin to a grocery store as a part of this orientation. When a week later I took another new hire on to buy food, he flew into a rage that I hadn't invited him. He genuinely thought I was going to escort him around town for the entire year of his contract. He actually complained to our boss about it, who was as mystified as I was--only in her second language.

&#x200B;

2.) He wanted to buy a hamster at the grocery store (think Mal Wart-style big box). He had not received his first paycheck, so he could only afford the critter, not the cage, food, etc. When I pointed this out, he said that he could keep it under an upturned mixing bowl for a few weeks and feed it leftovers from work. After several minutes of fruitlessly trying to persuade him that this was not a great idea, I had to threaten to leave him alone at the store, sans phone, language skills, or even the address of our apartment building to get him out of there without a fuzzy.

&#x200B;

2.5) He did buy a couple of hamsters the next week. They died because he forgot to feed them. Only universal scorn from our coworkers at his absent-minded cruelty (I may have said something to a few people...) convinced him not buy ~~other victims~~ replacements.

&#x200B;

3.) I was approached by a fellow foreigner in our neighborhood asking where she could find a laundromat and a motel room. It transpired that this was momma Kevin, who was told our address and to "take the bus" (no route number, no other details) in order to find us. We were three hours from the major airport. She had been traveling for 27 hours and had not yet made contact with her Kevling. 

&#x200B;

3.5) He couldn't understand why his mother wanted to take up his free time for the week that she was there--exclusively to visit him. At his request. And at great expense.

&#x200B;

4,) When I finally left the country, Kevin wanted to buy my towels. I had been there for 6 years, and so had my towels. He wanted to buy them for about twice what new ones would cost. He said it was because he wanted a memento of me \*shudders\*.

&#x200B;

5.) We had a shared teacher's office where the boss would have food delivered daily for us. There was tons of fantastic street food for quite cheap, so it was pretty common for colleagues to load up on snacks or pastries to share at work. After seeing this behavior (which he had a great deal of trouble understanding), it finally clicked that sometimes people made stuff at home or bought snacks nearby and shared them "just because."  His attempt at joining in was to buy a jar of green olives and accost anyone walking by his desk by thrusting it into their face. He was quite upset at the end of the day because he hadn't had a single taker. There were roughly 20 employees saying no. He refused freebies from others for a few months out of spite.

&#x200B;

6.) He was in the country to teach English to middle schoolers. He didn't know what a verb is. I gave up trying to explain it. He was assigned to teach the TOEFL (yes, to middle schoolers, but that's a whole different story...)

&#x200B;

7.) He was insistent on taking a trip to North Korea while he was in Asia. He is American. He couldn't understand why we couldn't help him book a flight.

&#x200B;

8.) He was amazed that grocery stores carried Coca-Cola and Frosted Flakes. He would tell every new foreigner he met about it as a conversation starter.Hello everyone, I'm a professional cook of almost twelve years. For a summer back in 2015 I was a line cook on a taco truck. Briefly, we employed a Kevin who had some of the worst instincts I have ever seen in anyone working foodservice. 

Our first gig with Kevin in our employment was at a beloved local brewery in my state with a beloved local band (J. Roddy Walston & the Business) headlining. Immediately upon opening we have a massive line, but we're all professionals and we know how to handle this. Keep the line flowing naturally, make sure that once someone actually orders their food and pays, that their food is ready within ten minutes or so. 

Kevin is new, and we don't really have much for him to do other than just be a gofer. But Kevin decided to take some initiative and, unbeknownst to all of us, walks up the entire line and takes EVERYONE'S order ahead of time. He then walks up to the window of the truck with a stack of food orders nearly a foot high like he's a golden retriever returning a stick.

Now there are several dozens of people who have ordered food who will now be waiting upwards of 45 minutes for their food and haven't paid yet, and several items are limited quantity. Our chef experiences a BSOD of epic proportions as we now have an unending line of tickets, some we can't make and will have to comp because we don't have the supply. After getting the ass-kicking of his life from chef, Kevin gets so frazzled that the only idea he has to rectify the situation is to... DO THE SAME THING AGAIN. Chef walked off the truck and left me and my wingman to somehow finish service with negative profit from the entire gig. 

One time we were in a historically LGBT neighborhood and he saw his friend on the street walking by and he decided to quote "The Hangover" and scream at his friend "PAGING DOCTOR F****T"

Every single time we stopped for gas on the way, he would smoke cigarettes. At a gas station. Next to the pumps.

But what finally got him fired was when we were at a festival gig and chef caught him going through the money drawer. His excuse was "oh I really like these old bills so I was switching mine out with the old ones"I was the Kevin.

When I was little I was watching football with my family. 
I asked how those yellow lines get there.

My dad said a guy runs across the field really fast and paints them.

I accepted this as the correct answer because, why not. 

Years later at a super bowl party when I was trying to impress a girl we were talking about how cool it would be to work for the N.F.L. 

Of course the guys wanted to be coaches and players and the girls wanted to be cheerleaders. 

I spoke up like nothing was wrong and said I want to be the play line painter guy.

No one knew what I was talking about.

So digging .myself a bigger hole I explained what it was.

The room paused and everyone started laughing. I was super embarrassed and needless to say. I lost friends that day.Are there any positive stories about Kevins? Or we only talk about the shit ones here? I know a few Kevins who are good dudes.Hello once again, everyone and thank you all for tuning in to another episode of Kevin in a Big Rig.  I know many of you are wearing out the edges of your seats and the refresh buttons of both Reddit and YouTube waiting for this installment and I am bringing these stories to you as quickly as my schedule will allow while maintaining the quality you deserve.  

As always, if you haven’t already, please check out YouTube channel Karma Comment Chameleon.  I know my cliffhangers have been torturing poor Rob for a while and I’m sure a Like and Subscribe from you will help his suffering.  He puts out quality Reddit-based content everyday and never fails to disappoint.  Having my stories posted to his channel is truly an honor.

And for those of you who have a love/hate relationship with the cliffhangers, I refer you to a quote by the late Bobby Womack: ‘’Leave them wanting more, and they’ll always call you back.” It worked for him and it worked for Scheherazade.

And now, you can call off the angry mobs and reseal the Pit of Eternal Kevins. I present to you Kevin in a Big Rig Part 8: Brake Check.

Backstory:  This story takes place immediately after the events in Part 7: Flashpoint.  After making me dodge a bullet from Safety after FK’s petty little phone call, he decided to continue along Interstate 90 eastbound through Montana.  The winter storm that had forced us to shut down had slowed and moved south during the night; leaving us running along the its northern edge.  We hadn’t seen the last of it.

After sending the email that I hoped would seal FKs fate, I tried to get some sleep.  It wasn’t easy; going over the possible scenarios and contingencies to which launching such an unexpected attack would lead.  I didn’t expect a quick resolution or that I would be taken seriously at first.  That was fine: if I, a lowly truck driver, wasn’t enough to get a trucking company to stick to their “Safety First” policy, then I had some bigger guns play with.  I need only to bide my time, give them a fair chance, but give no quarter should they try to hide from their responsibility.  If management had any sense, they would play ball and get this moron off the highway.

I woke up again around mid afternoon.  FK was still driving but, knowing he would be out of time soon, I decide to get up and see what new mess FK had gotten us into.  I pull on my boots and, expecting nothing, I check my phone.  To my mild surprise, there’s an unread email from my Fleet Manager.

“Ok,” it read, “Will forward this to Safety. Thanks”

“Uh huh,” I say to myself.  “Passing the buck and covering your ass.  Smart move.”  At least one person did the right thing: let’s see if the rest follow suit.  I close the email and head up front.

To my relief, FK was on course and with enough fuel to get to the next fuel stop.  I say nothing to him; he says nothing to me.  Awkward?  I was BORN awkward: bring it on, Skippy.

I take the truck computer; scrolling through the messages to see if anyone from the company had sent anything  related to email bombs I had dropped on half the company.  Again, nothing.  They were either ignoring me outright, which would be very bad for them in the long run, or I had unleashed a demon from the Safety department who demanded a blood price for everyone letting FK go that long.  In any case, there wasn’t much I could do until Safety made their move or decided NOT to move.

I set the computer down, lit a cigarette and took out my phone again.  I forwarded the nuclear email to my then-girlfriend; telling her that, if anything happened me, she was to get this to a lawyer, press charges for negligence, gross misconduct, whatever and sue this company into bankruptcy.  I also BCC her to all future emails so she would have them, as well.  Dramatic? Maybe, but I wasn’t going to let this get swept under the rug.

Next, I checked the weather and see the storm had moved to the south.  Although the weather was clearing, the temperature hovered barely above freezing during the day and dropping quickly at night.  With the ice and snow from previous storms, this presented a dangerous situation.  Ice would thaw during the day, allowing safe travel but would refreeze into black ice after sunset; making driving unsafe.  Icy roads meant more slow-downs and shut-downs from Safety; making this trip even more torturous, nerve-racking and tempting to smother FK in his sleep, bury him in a shallow grave and claim he simply wandered off.  Tempting, but after the email I had sent, it would look a little TOO suspicious.  (I watch Law & Order)

FK drove for about another hour before the computer alarm signals that his drive time is running low.  Lucky for him, our next fuel stop is only a few miles away.  We get to the truck stop and FK, claiming his poor leg is hurting him, leave me to handle the refueling while he goes inside.  I top of the tanks, give the truck a quick once-over and go inside myself for supplies to get me through a hard night of driving.

As it turned out, that hard night only lasted about three hours as the frozen roads forced another shut-down; just as I predicted.

This went on for about two more days; slow-going due to Safety-mandated slow-downs during the day and shutdowns coming at night when the roads froze over again.  I barely said a word to him, but FK, thinking that he had subjugated me with his little “anonymous” phone call, regaled me with his tired, old stories.  Car wrecks, jailbird nephew, 21 day coma, how he was going to cut the engine brakes out of the truck….I began to sympathize with Bill Murray’s character in Groundhog Day; everyday was simply a repeat of the last.

Adding to the frustration was the lack response to my email to Safety.  I was getting the feeling that they were actively ignoring me, but I stayed true to my word; sending them daily updates on FKs actions.  Most of the updates were simply repeats of previous issues, but one would think that if a peon was willing to take the time to their job, they would at least send a “Thank you”.  By the end of the second day, I start planning to go even higher; wondering how I would go about sending a Certified Mail to the company CEO.

Around early afternoon of the third day, we made it down the eastern slope of the Rockies through Bozeman, Montana.  The roads were clear and dry and nothing from Safety telling us to stop.  I was driving at the time and couldn’t help but feel relieved.  Montana is a beautiful state, but in that instance, it was Hades.  In my mind, I imagined William Shatner saying, “Warp Speed, Mr. Sulu!” and gun the accelerator down the Interstate; headed for Wyoming.

I manage to get us as far as the Port of Entry in Sheridan, Wyoming before running out of drive time late that evening.  I go inside, check in with the Wyoming DOT and get a weather update (WyDOT POE staff are awesome people).  They tell me that the roads are clear between there and South Dakota.  First good news in a while.

I show them the paperwork they ask for, stop by restroom and head back to the truck.  In the dark parking area, I see the hood of the cab rolled open and FK shining a flashlight underneath.  Odd, but I think he’s just checking the oil or looking for fluid leaks.  Its a bit of a walk to the truck from the office; the POE has a large parking lot and most of the closer spaces are taken up by other trucks staying for the night.  I expected FK to be done in a few seconds, but by the time I get to the truck, he’s still underneath the cab.  I can see a pair of pliers in his hand and suddenly become concerned.  There was nothing wrong with the truck and no reason he needed any kind of tool: not that he should be trusted with one in any case.

“What the hell are you doing?” I ask.

FK, not having heard me approach, nearly jumped out of his skin.  “Oh, I was looking at something.”

“What?” I ask in my not-messing-around tone.

“I saw online how you can disable the jake brakes.  I was gonna try it.” he replied.

I wasn’t mad; I was just absolutely fed up with this.  “Get in the goddamned truck, you dumbass.  And if you try that shit again, I’ll make sure Safety and Maintenance get the video.”

He starts sulking, but closes the hood.  I climb inside, send another email update including how he just tried to disable an integrated safety system on the truck (this is a MAJOR No-No; equal cutting the brake lines on a car).  For a split second, I was tempted to let him hang himself with that stunt, but decided not to because, given his track record, the truck would likely explode with me in it.

FK finally pulls out of the POE and gets us going again. I settle in the bunk because I really didn’t want to talk to him anymore.  It takes a while to get to sleep; partly due to FK’s poor driving and partly because my brain is busy planning out strategies for my inevitable battle with FK and Safety.

FK drove through the night, managing to get through Wyoming and South Dakota just shy of the Minnesota border.  I wake up late the next morning and check my email: nothing.  *Keep digging yourselves in a deeper hole,* I think while getting ready.  I was beginning to think they weren’t taking me seriously.

Then, when he hears me stirring behind him, FK yells back, “Dispatch wants us to head back to main terminal when we deliver.”

“Oh,” I say, legitimately surprised, “Did they say why?”

“No,” FK replied before impatiently getting out of the truck.

\*And so it begins…\*I think to myself.  After Chicago, two of us will drive back to the terminal, but only one of us will leave.  I was determined that, no matter what, I would not continue with this fool after this battle with management was over.  I had been tossed around, frozen, chewed out by customers and management, deprived of sleep and driven to the point of insanity over the past three months and I was not going to put up with it any longer.  If they tried to pull that “you two need to get along” crap, I would forward everything I had on them to OSHA, DOT and any government agency I could thing of.  It would take no time at all to find enough dirt to bury the entire company and send half the managers to jail for negligence.  (I would convince my friends and family to buy stock in competitors first, of course).  Fire me, and I wouldn’t stop until I owned every truck in the fleet to soothe my “mental and emotional distress”.  As for FK, they would have to dig up half the shoulders on Interstate 80 to find his shallow grave; that is, if I felt gracious enough to dig one instead of making him dinner for a pack of coyotes.  I had nothing to lose at this point and I was ready for a fight.

I settle into the driver seat and set up my GPS.  It was then that I notice something…odd.  On the steering wheel there are two sets of controls; the left side had the cruise control and the right was the activation button for the engine brakes.  These buttons were the recessed type with a protective rubber blister and back lit with an LED so it can be seen in low light.  The engine brake switch was damaged; not worn or dirty but cut away.  I look closely and I can clearly see what I had been afraid of: the tell-tale cuts from a knife blade.

It wasn’t some accidental snag or wearing away from use: there were clear, distinct lines marking where the rubber blister had been cut away.  The button itself was, fortunately, still intact and functioned: I pressed it and the indicator light came on.  It was immediately clear that FK wasn’t able to remove the engine brakes (they were integrated into the engine) and tried to make it so I couldn’t turn them on.  Too bad for him that the truck’s designers decided that the engine brakes were important enough to warrant protecting the ON switch.  All FK managed to do was give me one more  nail for his coffin: clear proof he had tried to tamper with the truck.  I snapped a photo and emailed it to them; explaining this was not like this when I went off duty and made sure the knife marks were unmistakable.

FK comes back on the truck after a bit.  I don’t mention the switch at all, but without being prompted, FK demanded, “Don’t use those jake brakes!”  I say nothing at first, but when we leave out, I make sure they engage on the way out of the parking lot and DARE him to say anything more about it.

I drive all through Minnesota without stopping.  Each time I have to reduce speed, I make sure to use the engine brakes.  They weren’t as loud as older models, but it did make a distinctive sound when the truck was coasting.

I knew it was pissing him off and there was nothing he could do about it.  Any more damage to the steering wheel and or suspicious damage under the hood he would have to explain why he damaged a perfectly good truck to disable a safety device.  Little did either of us know that the next message that came from the computer would change everything.  It was from the Fleet Manager: “OP, URGENT! Call me ASAP!”

“Uh oh,” I say, “sounds like all Hell just broke loose.”  The company did not allow cell phone use while driving; even hands-free was prohibited and I wasn’t giving FK anything to use against me.  I decide to wait until the next fuel stop to make the call.

I get to the truck stop, refuel and go inside the store to place the call while taking the legally-mandated 30 minute break.

“Hey, FM, this is OP. Driver ID 9876,” I say.

“Oh… yeah….” she replied,seeming very hesitant.  “OP, what the hell is going on?”

There’s no point in playing dumb at this point.  You can’t launch the professional email equivalent of a nuclear warhead and play innocent.  “You got my emails.”

“Yeah, I did,” she replied, “and so did every department head in the company.  Safety has been going apeshit over this.”

“I really didn’t want to,” I say; only a half-truth, “but FK is getting more and more dangerous and I can’t stay in this truck with him anymore.”

“Actually, its FK I need to talk to you about.”

“Ok. What’s up?”

“Well, in your email, you said he had memory problems and he said he had been in a coma for 21 days.”

“Yeah…”

“Are you sure he said 21 days?”

“It was 21 days,” I reply; leaving no room for doubt in my tone.  “He has told that same story everyday for three months and it’s always the same: 21 days.”

“Yeah, I thought so.  He told me the same thing.” she claimed.

WHAT...THE…FUCK????  She KNEW about this?!?!  Are you kidding me?!?!  I wanted to blow up right there, but I managed to keep my cool.

“What’s going on?” I ask calmly.

“I’m not sure.” she replied.  “Safety wanted me to ask you because it struck them as odd.”

“It was 21 days,” I repeat; just to drive home the point.

“Right.  Alright, Safety wants you guys back here right now.  We’ll get someone else to run the load.  You just get here so we can get this mess straightened out.”

I was tempted to probe for more information, but I had the feeling there was nothing left to say.

“Alright.  I have enough hours and fuel, so we should get there tonight.”

“Good deal,” she replied, “We’ll talk tomorrow morning,” and hangs up.

It takes a few seconds to process what just took place.  I had expected that the emails would cause a bit of a stir, but to have a truck divert nearly 200 miles to relay a load was unheard of!  Well, I got there attention, at least.

I head back out to the truck: FK was still sleeping and I had no intention of waking him up to tell him of our new orders.  I program the new route into the GPS and verify it with the atlas.  The company’s headquarters was only 200 miles or so way, but getting there would take us well away from the Interstates and any other major highway.  It was shaping up to be a long trip along mostly narrow, two-lane highways south through Wisconsin, Nebraska and Iowa: Idaho all over again.

I then check the weather and realized then that I had royally pissed off someone in  past life.  Remember that winter storm we hit in Idaho and Montana?  It was back! Only now, it had eaten its Wheaties and bulked up into a full-blown blizzard.  Almost the entire route from the truck stop all the way to the company’s main terminal was in its sights and it had itchy trigger fingers.  The National Weather Service had issued alerts for the entire area with predictions of heavy snow, high winds and white-out conditions.  Sounds like fun, right?

Under normal situations, I would have to taken one look at the weather radar, said “Fuck that noise!” and told dispatch I wasn’t even about to attempt that run.  They could simmer for a couple of days.  Unfortunately, as was the case with FK, nothing was ever normal.  I had to factor his stupidity into every decision I made and this one was had a very big issue.

The issue boiled down to the company’s weather shut-down system.  For whatever reason, the shut-downs only pertained to certain highways; primarily Interstates and major US Highways between designated towns, mile markers, boundaries etc.  It did not, however, pertain to geographic areas like cities, counties or states.  Instead of “All trucks operating in THIS part of THAT state, you need to shut down,” they were more like “Any truck on such-and-such highway in such-and-such state between mile markers X and Y, shut down now.”

The problem with this company’s system: it didn’t issue shut-downs for secondary routes like two-lane highways.  In bad weather, the decision to shut-down was a judgement call on the part of the driver and the decision was NEVER questioned or punished: Federal regulations made it VERY clear that the driver made the final decision as to when and if the trip would continue.  I understood that: but FK, on the other hand……

And as for FK’s precious “Company Route”? There wasn’t one.  The company-assigned routes were only generated for trucks under a load assignment.  Being diverted like this meant we had to figure it out ourselves.  I had no problem with it, but FK...he’d probably take a wrong turn into a ghost town where we would become the inspiration for a new horror movie franchise.

“Gimme a break…” I plead to any higher power that may have been listening.  I had just gotten the word that the hornets nest I threw into the the company’s garden party was starting to sting some important asses and now, I’m going to get taken out by the ghost of Frosty the Snowman.  I would have gladly waited it out, but FK, being the little sycophant ass-kisser he was, would think that, if Safety didn’t tell him to shut down, he didn’t NEED to shut down.  Blinding snow, icy roads, no visibility…it didn’t matter to him: he was a COMPANY driver and the COMPANY told him what to do.  Slow down? Shut down?  Only if the COMPANY told him to.

FK hadn’t killed us this far, not for lack of trying, but this was just too much.  I made up my mind at that point:  no matter what, FK would NOT sit in that driver’s seat at all that night.  He wouldn’t drive the first inch during that storm even if I had to kill him.  If he took over, he would surely head down the highway at full-speed, run head-first into a total white-out, slam on the brakes and send us both on a one-way trip to the afterlife.  This little bastard had been dragging me through Hell for so long and he was not going to get another chance to kill me.

I took a deep, ragged and exasperated breath.  I had two choices in front of me: literally kill FK or tackle the blizzard-ravaged back-roads myself.  Rock, meet Hard Place.

Its been nearly seven years since that day; looking at that phone screen with the route plunging into the storms radar image.  Even now, I often wonder if I made the right decision.  I don’t know how long I agonized over it, but when the decision was made, it wasn’t with absolute certainty.  But one thing was clear:  there was only one way both of us would make it out of this sub-zero hell alive.

“Fuck you, FK,” I say to myself as I fasten my seatbelt, release the brakes and roll out to meet the blizzard head-on.

“Fuck…you. After everything you’ve put me through, I’m still trying to save your worthless life.”

And this is where Part 8 ends.  I do apologize that this post has been so late in coming.  This week has been crazy busy for me.  I’ve had to work longer hours than usual at my job so writing time has been cut down.  Not to worry, as I am still determined to bring these stories to you for your enjoyment.

I know many of you are eagerly awaiting to see the fallout from the nuclear email and how many bodies hit the ground before the dust finally settled.  So much happened during this time and it would be criminal to leave out crucial details that take away from the story.

Part 9, which I will try my best to have posted this weekend, will be the conclusion of the FK saga.  Did FK manage to avoid OPs wrath during the blizzard? Did OP make the right call?  How did FK even get a license being so stupid?  All questions will be answered in Part 9.

Once again, if you haven’t already, please check out Rob over at YouTube  channel Karma Comment Chameleon.  Rob does a phenomenal job telling my stories and those from many other Reddit users, so a Like and a Subscribe is the least you can do for his efforts.

Until next time, remember: Only YOU…can prevent Kevinism.I grew up across the street from a Kevin, in his mid thirties when I met him. He had begun drinking as a 14 year old. With all that alcohol over twenty plus years, he was very...Kevinish. 
The most memorable Kevin story is when he received a letter in the mail about a misdemeanor charge. That’s another story. On the letter it mentioned that he would be sentenced to  anywhere from  72 hours in jail to 30 days. He showed my mother the letter and told her super seriously “I think I’ll take the 72 hours.” Imagine thinking you have your choice of jail sentencing.

The letter, by the way, was a result of one too many DUIs. Kevin was drunk beyond belief while driving (without a license, mind you.) and got pulled over. When given a breathalyzer test, Kevin’s blood alcohol level was over twice the legal limit. Dumbfounded, the cop asked; “Kevin! How the heck are you walking?!” Kevin’s response? “I’m not. I’m driving.”I just wanna start off by saying that the Kevin in this story is in school, so am I, and I am sorry if the story doesn't belong here!

So, recently Kevin has been constantly getting up during class to get hand sanitizer. (And constantly gets yelled at for it). And what Kevin does is he takes off his mask as he is walking back to his desk (IF he even has it on) and wipes off the excess hand sanitizer he has on his hands. He just got told to not do that, because the teacher doesn't know what is in it and didn't want him breathing in anything unhealthy. And he also gets up, grabs one of those cleaning wipes, and he wipes down his laptop, desk, and his mask.

Next, Kevin plays basketball in gym all the time. I sometimes play with the guys and this event happened two days ago.

We were playing with odd numbers and then one of the players on our team went to join the other team because we had 4 and they had 2 (Kevin and I being on the team with 4 players). But Kevin wouldn't let the guy leaving our team to go because "He is captain and we HAVE to listen to him." We all tried to explain that his logic is wrong and it doesn't matter because that's not how basketball works, but of course Kevin knows more than the people who would know if he is wrong or not. 

I often get in yelling matches with Kevin because he starts yelling at me that I am stupid and know nothing and a lot more. and he says that, with an average of at least 50% in most classes...Hello again, everyone, and welcome to another episode of Kevin in a Big Rig!  As always, a big thank you to everyone who has followed this series this far; either on Reddit or through the YouTube channel Karma Comment Chameleon, have been so generous with your support, encouragement and kindness.  I know I say this a lot, however, it never feels like it’s enough.  

Also, another big shout out to Karma Comment Chameleon and the effort Rob dedicates to bringing these stories to a wider audience.  The fact that someone would deem these stories worthy of such effort is gratifying beyond what words can express.

And so, what so many of you have been waiting for, lets get into Kevin in a Big Rig Part 7:  Flashpoint

Backstory: these events take place over the span of a couple of days immediately following the events in Part 6: Breakdown. The three-day breakdown had forced dispatch to call in another truck to rescue the load.  I had figured as much since the load was considered high-priority and, with an even more serious winter storm than what we faced in Nebraska bearing down on us, dispatch wanted to get the load to its destination as soon as possible.  That left myself, FK, a repaired truck, an empty trailer and precious little time before we become stranded again by Old Man Winter.

Almost as soon as we get the truck out of the shop from FK’s fiasco on Snoqualmie, dispatch sends us a load.  It was to pick up in Lewiston, Idaho that same evening and deliver in Chicago.  I was relieved as this put us heading away from the storm and, with luck, would keep us ahead of it.  When I plotted the route, however, I was abruptly reminded that while the Patron Saint of Truckers might protect those who call upon him, he also has a very morbid sense of humor.

Lewiston is a mountain town along the Washington-Idaho border.  From where we began, it would take the better part of a day travelling through remote areas with little chance of assistance if something were to happen.  And because I hadn’t suffered enough, the only way in to Lewiston was south along US-95 and DOWN another steep mountain grade. That was worse than Snoqualmie.  How bad?  Well, if Snoqualmie was a Black Diamond ski slope, Lewiston would be a triple-Black Diamond, skull-and-crossbones level and require a signed waiver of liability and clearance from a psychiatrist.  And, just for kicks, FK would be driving us there.  Upon realizing this, I texted my mom, told her I loved her and that I was probably going to be dead in the next few hours. (She thought I was drunk.)

For the first few hours, I stayed in the bunk trying to get what little sleep I could.  FK’s horrendous driving did not help matters as I was constantly being woken up by my head being slammed into a cabinet by his excessive braking.  I finally had to use my jacket as a makeshift cushion and keep my head from suffering a concussion.

The truck drove on and on and on.  Sleep, when it came, was fitful and fleeting.  The jarring of the brakes and the whine of the over-revving engine foretold of an impending fate so terrifying as to make Edgar Allan Poe wet the bed and Stephen King buy a nightlight.  As the sky grew dark and the cold air began to bite, I decided I had slept as much as I could, pulled on my boots and went up front.

I looked out of the windshield and saw what I had been dreading: the warning sign for the steep drop into Lewiston.  The highway on which we made the decent was also the town’s main thoroughfare: fall off the cliff, roll into town.  Any loss of control here and a lot of people besides us would more than likely be killed.  I just hoped that, if I did die that night, it was quick, painless and FK would join me so I could beat his ass for all eternity.

FK started down the grade; picking up speed too fast at first, but thanks to being empty, speed control was much easier.  Still adamantly opposed to engine brakes, he maintained his speed through downshifting and heavy braking; much like he had attempted to do on Snoqualmie.  When he finally managed to stabilize his speed, I lit a cigarette because I think all people doomed to die deserve one last smoke.

But it wasn’t my last smoke; or my last day on Earth.  Despite everything, FK managed to get the truck down the mountain and into the town without it ending in a fiery crash.  I let out a breath I didn’t realize I was holding and take a long drag of my cigarette to calm my nerves.  We were safe for the time being.

FK manages to get us to the pick-up (after getting lost, of course) and we change out while we are being loaded.  I sit down in the driver seat and program the route into my GPS.  Getting back to the Interstate was going to be tougher, I saw, as it was more remote wilderness, mountainous terrain and little chance of help in an emergency.  Adding to the difficulty was the fact that the storm we were desperately trying to outrun was catching up to us.  Fortunately,  it wasn’t long before we get fully loaded and head to a local truck stop to top off the tanks since it was nearly 150 miles to the nearest truck stop.  I refuel the truck while FK goes inside the store.

After a several minutes, both fuel tanks filled and FK still inside doing God-knows-what, I pull the truck out of the fuel pumps and pull around to the parking area.  I dash inside, grab some food, drinks and smokes and come back to the truck to find FK STILL isn’t back yet.  I begin to fantasize about what’s keeping him.  Stroke? Brain aneurysm? Abducted by aliens? (they do tend to take the dumbest people, after all).  But, alas, the hope was fleeting as I soon see him hobbling his way across the parking lot towards the truck; carrying a plastic bag and looking like hobo about to ask for a dollar.

FK opens the passenger door and climbs inside.  “Hey, MotherF\*\*\*er”, he yelled angrily, “why’d you move the truck?”

I point at the “All Trucks Proceed To Parking When Fueling Complete” signs hanging near the diesel pumps.  “Because I can read, Dickhead," I reply.

“You know I have a bad leg.  It hurts to walk that far.  Do that again and I’ll kick your ass.” he threatens weakly.  If you recall in Part 2, I mentioned I was at least one foot taller and 100 pounds heavier than FK; so his threat was more comical than menacing.

“Oh really?” I reply, “You wouldn’t lift a foot above my knees before I rip that gimp leg off and beat you to death with it.  Sit the fuck down and shut up.”

He mumbled something, but I didn’t hear him as I released the brakes and pull out of the parking lot.

The climb up the mountain was slow and painstaking.  Snow was just starting to fall, but not yet heavy enough to be a serious concern.  FK, riding shotgun, was grumbling about his leg, the cold and whatever else he felt like complaining about.

I get to the top of the hill and press on; trying like Hell to stay in front of the storm.  FK remained up front, though he had moved past griping and onto bragging about his future plans.  Apparently, he had high aspirations for his trucking career. In a few months, he was going to become a Lead Driver (the title the company gave to driver trainers) and “work his students like \*racial slur\*” (his words, not mine.)  

He also planned on becoming an Independent Contractor by leasing a truck through the company and making a lot more money.  This would also allow him to run a little side-business with his nephew who, according to FK, was some major player in prison chapter of the Aryan Brotherhood.  He claimed his nephew could set him up running contraband out of Mexico.  I paid very little attention to him as I’m more concerned about the winter storm that is almost on top of us.

We start going down a hill; nothing serious but enough that I take my foot off the accelerator (I never trust cruise control in a semi).  This causes the engine brakes to engage and, on cue, FK takes it personally.

“If you were my student,” he said, trying sound pretentious, “I’d fail you for that.”

“What the fuck ever, man.  At least I can go five minutes without getting lost.” I reply, not missing a beat.

“Don’t use those things on my truck!” he demands.

“I’m not, dumbass.” I shoot back.  “This is the COMPANY truck, remember?”

Just then, we start down another hill; this one a bit longer but not overly steep.  Again, I release the accelerator and the engine brakes reengage.  This was, apparently, the last straw for FK.  He reaches down, unbuckles his seat belt and reaches over towards the steering wheel.  The activation button for the engine brakes is on the right side of the steering wheel.  I see his hand and slap it away.

“Cut it out, dick head.” I tell him.

He tries again, this time getting out of the seat and towering over me while reaching for the engine brake button.  This is EXTREMELY dangerous as its dark, we’re on a narrow road and visibility is reduced because of the snow.  I don’t have the luxury of handling this diplomatically, so I grab him by the shirt with my right hand and literally THROW him back into the passenger seat hard enough that his head bounces off the window.

“If you EVER pull a stunt like that again,” I tell him, “I will break every bone in your body and leave you to the buzzards.  You’re not a Lead Driver and this is not your truck.  Sit down, buckle up and shut up.”

FK obviously hadn’t expected that reaction: apparently, he was living in a fantasy universe where he was the trainer and I was the student.  I suppose that knock to the head was enough to bring him back to reality (or as close as he could get) since he buckled his seat belt and went about copying the company route to his precious notebook.

A couple of hours pass in silence.  The snow begins to fall heavier and accumulate on the ground and stick to the road.  The wind had begun to pick up and was rocking the truck side to side.  It felt like an eternity since we had seen the last town, car or even abandoned building.  I had just started to begin thinking that maybe we hadn’t survived the downgrade into Lewiston and this was my own personal Hell when, far in the distance, I see the lights of a town.  I check the GPS and, sure enough, its exactly where we are to rejoin Interstate 90.  I was less excited about being on the Interstate as I was about the prospect of finding shelter from the approaching storm.

As we make our way through town, I keep my eyes peeled for a truck stop, Walmart, gas station, anything that might offer a safe harbor for the night.  But, to my increasing dismay, nothing.  To make matters worse, the town appeared to be deserted; even the 24 hour convenience stores were dark and empty.

Suddenly, a few miles before reaching the interchange, a message comes across the computer.  FK takes the computer and reads it.

“Its a weather alert.” he says, “It says we have to shut down.”

“Of course…” I say, still looking for somewhere to park and finding nothing.  “Keep an eye out for a truck parking spot.”

We get closer to the interstate and find nothing.  Even the gas stations with truck diesel lanes are clearly posted “No Truck Parking”.  My only alternative is to get back on the Interstate and keep going until I find somewhere to shut down.  I’ll admit, this is the last thing I wanted to do but my hands were tied.  FK, however, simply could not understand the situation.

“Why are you getting on the Interstate?” he asked, “Safety told us to shut down!”

“Yeah, but there’s nowhere TO shut down.” I reply.

“You HAVE to stop,” he insists.  “Safety will write you up!”

“Where? On the side of city highway?  You really think that’s a good idea, Jackass?” (looking back, I now see how ironic this question was.)

FK gave up; apparently being thrown bodily against a window one-handed takes away your nerve.  “Well, if Safety says anything, its on you!” he says.

“I’m fine with that.  And I’ll tell them the same thing I’m telling you: you can’t just stop in the middle of the fucking road.”

I take the on-ramp to Interstate 90 eastbound.  I keep my speed at around 45 MPH (72 KPH) since, knowing we shouldn’t out here according to Safety, I can at least use the fact that I was driving at a greatly reduced speed to say “Yeah, I know, I should be shut down.  But there’s nowhere TO shutdown so I have to keep going until I FIND a place to shutdown.”

I plod along Interstate 90 through the Idaho Panhandle and find nowhere to park.  The truck computer is going crazy; dinging every few minutes with messages wanting to know why we are travelling through a shut down area.  I can’t send any reply (since I’m driving) and FK is content to let ME deal with it.

I drive well into Montana before I see salvation; a Truck Safety Rest area.  It’s little more than a super-wide shoulder on the side of the highway, but its reasonably safe, legal for us to use and, more importantly, it has enough room for us to get into.  I guide the truck into a parking spot, shut off the head lights and pick up the computer.  I put myself Off-Duty and go about responding to the messages.  All but one are automated messages about the shut down notice and the fact we are operating in one.  The one non-automated message is from the night dispatcher.

*You are operating inside of a shut-down area.  Please shut down as soon as possible.* the message asked.  “What the hell did you think I was planning, dickhead?” I say to the screen.

I reply, *Could not find safe and legal parking spot when alert received.  Was forced continue on until a safe and legal parking area could be found.  We are now shut down.*

Intentionally used the words “safe and legal” in my reply because, according to the company’s own driver handbook, a truck that receives a weather shut down notice must “find a SAFE AND LEGAL place to shut down until the notice is lifted”.  That was their own policy verbatim; I was just following it…SAFE AND LEGAL!  I decided to go back to the bunk and sleep; it was pretty obvious we were going nowhere until morning at least.

The next morning, I’m awakened by the sound of the truck brakes releasing.  I jump out of my bunk and check the computer.  Safety had released the shutdown and implemented a 45 MPH limit for the area.  FK took it upon himself to take the first shift so I crawled back into the bunk.

A couple of hours later, I’m woken up by my phone ringing.  I check it; unknown number, but the area code matches the company headquarters so I answer.

“Hello?” I answer.

“Hi, is this OP? Driver ID 9876?” replied the voice.

“Uh…yeah.”

“This is Ken (not real name) from Safety.  This call is being recorded .  We had a report that you willfully violated a mandatory shut down area last night.”

Son…of…a…bitch.  FK tried to turn ME into Safety.  AFTER the stunt he pulled with the engine brakes.

“Well, Ken,” I reply, “I suppose that depends on your definition of ‘violated’.”

“Did you continue to drive after receiving a notice of the shut down?”

“Yes,” I answer truthfully.

“Can you explain why?”

“Well, Ken, if you refer to Company Driver Handbook; such-and-such page, such-and-such paragraph you will see that it clearly states that, and I quote, ‘Upon receiving a shut-down alert, the driver must park the truck as soon as it is safe and legal to do so.’ End quote.  Now, as I told the night dispatcher, I was not in an area that provided SAFE and LEGAL parking and, therefore, was FORCED to continue on until SAFE and LEGAL parking could be found.  However, I was well aware of the dangerous road ad weather conditions and elected to proceed at a speed no faster than 45 MPH (72 KPH) and shut down at the nearest SAFE and LEGAL place available.”

For a few moments, Ken was quiet, but I heard the tell-tale tapping of a computer keyboard through the phone.  “I see.  Well, looking at your route I see that there was very little in the way of parking or facilities.”

*No shit, Sherlock*, I think to myself.  "That was my assessment of the situation as well," I confirm.

“Well,” he continued, “we received this report from an anonymous phone call and we had to follow it up.”

*Anonymous, my ass.  “* Am I being written up for this.”

“Not at this time since, as you say, you were trying to get to a safe, legal parking area.  We may look into this matter further at a later time.  However, I would like stress that you take care in the future.”

I managed to hide my rage when I respond, “Always do. Thanks!” and hang up.

For a few moments, I started at the bunk ceiling in furious disbelief.  Anonymous phone call? Yeah, that was bullshit since there was only one person who knew I had driven at that time who would have made a phone call.  FK, the rat fink bastard, had tried to grass me up on the sly.  Only he made one critical mistake: he underestimated me.  I knew the Safety policy; apparently better than the Safety department themselves and I had probably saved my job and career by doing so.  No doubt the little shit thought he won by his little ass-kissing exhibition and he would no doubt try again when he realized it didn’t work.  But he wouldn’t get that chance; oh no.  Run game on me, little man, and I’ll show you how it’s played.

I open my phone’s email app and go to the saved email draft I had been preparing for so long.  I attach the photos of the computer logs, double-check for missing issues, add in about the incident where he tried to grab the steering wheel while I was driving and plug in the email addresses of the relevant department heads.  I also make one addition to the end of the email; letting them know that, seeing as how the issue was habitual and on-going, I would continue to provide daily updates via email on FK’s infractions and unsafe actions.

Why email, you wonder?  Well, in the eyes of the law, an email is considered an official document.  By using email, I could use it as proof that I communicated the issue to the company.  If the situation progressed to the point where legal action became necessary, the emails could be used as evidence that the company was made aware of the issue, but did nothing: that is negligence.  I knew it and they SHOULD know it too, I thought.  Well, they claim to put safety first; so lets see.

I give the email a final once over.  It's ready, I think.  I move my thumb up to the SEND icon and….freeze.  For a moment, a tiny voice of doubt pipes up.  

“Is this the right thing to do?  You could put yourself in the firing line with this.  Even if you pull it off, it could ruin FKs life.  Is what he did so bad to really be worth that?”

For a moment, I almost consider not going through with it.  Just ask for a new co driver and….

That thought was interrupted by my forehead banging off the cabinet….AGAIN.  FK and his piss-poor driving….

“Nevermind,” I tell myself decisively, “Fuck this asshole.” and hit SEND.

There was the slightest bit of regret when I saw the status of the email change from SENDING to SENT.  Oh well, too late now.  No turning back. The missiles were in the air.  Nothing left to do but wait.

And that concludes Part 7: Flashpoint.  As always, I want to thank each and every one of you for all your kind support and encouragement over the past couple of weeks.  It means more to me than you will ever know.

Also, if you havent been listening to YouTube channel Karma Comment Chameleon, Rob does an excellent job retelling these stories and is well worth your time.

I hope to have Part 8 posted later this week.  Until then, my friends, remember: Friends don’t let friends become Kevins.I'm not sure if my professor was a Kevin or just a narcissist so I'll let you decide for me. 

I was getting my undergraduate degree my final semester with this awful awful professor. 

I had his ecology class Tuesday & Thursday. He had assignments due right before class every day. We had reading assignments and then have to answer questions, write a paragraph response etc. Pretty standard. However he wouldn't open the assignment until he felt like it sometimes an hour before class sometimes 5 minutes and sometimes he'd forget entirely. (We knew the chapter and what to write days prior) He said since the reading was due at class time we should have it done and him opening it whenever he wanted shouldn't matter because it should already be done. He figured we could just log on when he opened and turn it. I had work right before class and often got in trouble for checking my phone to see if this yahoo had decided to open my assignment yet so I could turn it in. We didn't get notifications when new assignments were created so there was no way to know he'd opened it without logging on the site and checking. He also never accepted late work no excuses, especially ones revolving around his screw ups. 

I was out of town and the homework was to watch an incredibly stupid Netflix documentary and write a page on it. I begged him to tell me which documentary it was going to be so I could do it early. He refused. I watched it while on vacation wrote my page and tried to turn it in. The assignment never opened as far as I could tell but when I got back he said he'd opened it right before class as usual and since there was internet everywhere I had no excuse to have late work.

A common phrase he used once a week. "This class is not a democracy its a tyranny and I am King." 
 
Once he assigned us to read chapter 16 but never unlocked it in the online textbook. When we got to class and no one had done the homework he said. Well you should have been smart enough to know when 16 wasn't unlocked you should move on to 18 which I decided would be a better homework for today's lesson. We complained and he did cut us some slack that time and made the 18 homenwork due an hour after class that day. Of course I had back to back classes and he wouldn't allow us to have laptops open during his. 

The university had a campus wide devotional on Tuesdays before his class which everything closed down for. So he viewed Thursdays before his class as his because "I know you don't have any classes then so I can use that time for this class" like I said prior I had work before his class on Thursdays. You can't fault him too much for this way of thinking because a lot of teachers tried that same thing except they listened to reason while he insisted we were his for that time. 

He was colorblind and marked me down on my PowerPoint presentation because he didn't like the brown color I'd used for my slide and it would look better green. It was green, and slide colors were nowhere to be seen in the grading rubric. 

We had a field trip in a cabin up the mountains. We had to study the local fauna and take detailed pictures and quadrant lines of various sites. He said food and water would be provided for our overnight stay. However after hiking for 6 hours one way we ran out of water. We kept working and on our way back he hiked so far ahead I could not even hear him. Some students weren't in the best shape so I sat on the trail and waited for the end of the line of students so I knew no one would get left behind. We arrived back at camp as the sun was setting. There was no water at camp either we'd entirely run out. I've never been so thirsty in my life. I was eyeing mud puddles in evny and ate the last three grapes sucking every bit of moisture I could from them. The professor had been back at camp for hours according to him and made fun of us for being so slow. We got a pot and tried to boil some water since everyone was severely dehydrated but it was so small we all got a few sips from it. Our professor tried to lecture us on being prepared for any situation.  

A helicopter came to pick us up (As planned not an emergency rescue). The teacher has us load all our gear into a net which they took before any passengers. It was late and night was coming along with a fog which if  it reached our camp not allow the helicopter to pick us up. We sent all our food and supplies down first all while nature threatened us to be stranded for another night. Our teacher said "we could always hike down it's only a 8 hour hike but for you slow pokes probably 10." The helicopter came back for us 4 passengers at a time while the fog rose closer and closer to us. Finally I was on that last flight with my professor. One of the students had arranged her roommate to meet us at the landing site with a pack of ice cold water bottles which we all needed. The teacher had his wife pick him up and we were left to carry all our gear back to campus a few miles away. 

We had a designated 3 hour block for our final exam. The last test section in the whole school. Everyone finished in an hour and a half and he stopped us from leaving saying. "I have you until 4pm and if anyone leaves early I will fail them." Then he began to lecture and insisted we take notes on the back of our tests. 

Finally the true moment of horror where I realized how bad it really was. 

He took two weeks to go to Hong Kong... I can't remember why. While he was there he met a former student. The student had a family, a wife and three kids. He was working for a successful company and making good money. 

Our professor came back and started class telling us that in Hong Kong he'd had a glorious epiphany. His students were real people! They didn't just disappear when they left his class they went on to lead real sometimes successful lives! They weren't there just for him to teach and then gone. He talked for about 15 minutes about everything he'd learned about how we actually exist outside his class and I wanted to scream. He truly thought himself so important and us just filler for his glorious life.When I was in my late teens and early 20s, I had a friend and later roommate who was a total Kevin. Back when blogs were new and there was a beta of a new search engine called Google that people said was pretty good, I had the idea for a service like Twitter just so I could post his most recent dumb quote on my Angelfire site. I didn't have the technical chops to pull it off at the time, unfortunately.

Kevin planned to join a collage ROTC program and then join the Army, so he could quickly climb the officer ranks and retire before he was 40. However, a marijuana habit wound up killing all his ambition. And by marijuana habit, I mean kicking a marijuana habit. That's right, this guy lost his drive AFTER QUITTING SMOKING POT.

Kevin and I became roommates right after I turned 18. He worked at a sandwich shop making minimum wage. He decided to use his small amount of money after his share of bills to rent a stereo system. This was one of those massive cabinet systems where a full grown adult can fit in each speaker. However, Kevin was very polite to our neighbors. He kept the volume on it so low that you couldn't hear it in the next room. This system cost him $120/month!

Kevin did not like to do laundry, which I can't fault him for. He had a lot of clothes (more on them later) and kept his dirty laundry in a stolen shopping cart. If he ran out of clean shirts, pants, or even underwear he would pull them from the cart and re-wear them, and when he ran out of clean socks he pushed the entire cart to a nearby laundromat and spent an entire day washing them.

Kevin was a very large guy at about 6ft4in, but he was also very round. His man-breasts were so large he probably should have worn a bra. Of course, due to pride he wouldn't and would double on his t-shirts instead for support. When that stopped being sufficient, he began tripling them.

Kevin and I both smoked the same brand of cigarettes and would take turns buying cartons which we would both take packs from. Kevin decided one day that he was going to stop smoking. The only thing that changed was that he stopped buying cartons when it was his turn. When I got irritated at this he didn't understand the problem, or that he hadn't really quit if he was still smoking a pack a day. He got mad when I began hiding MY cigarettes from him and he decided he was going to "start smoking again".

Kevin ate a lot. A LOT. When we would go to the nearby local Italian restaurant "Joes" he would order 4-5 entrees. I would get a pasta and a slice. He wanted to split the bill 50/50 and didn't understand why that didn't work for me. Then after he ate all his food he would try to EAT MY FOOD. I bet he still has a scar on the back of his hand from my fork.

Kevin dated my sister for a while. When they broke up he had trouble finding another girlfriend. His solution was to join a fairly conservative church to meet women and then got mad at how few of them would "put out".

Kevin did not have a car and rarely drove. I am only aware of two times he did. One time he borrowed a brand new truck from a coworker. He stripped the second gear. The other time he "borrowed" a car from a girl he was dating while she was asleep. He returned it less than thirty minutes later with the front bumper in the back seat. He claims that the bumper must have fallen into the seat while he was inside the store buying smokes.

I bought a PalmPilot at one point. (Think a primitive smartphone but with no ability to make calls or, at least on most models, get online). He borrowed it once and spent hours playing solitaire. He stated that "I don't understand why people spend $1,000 on a computer just to play solitaire when they could spend $200 on one of these!" When I pointed out that a deck of cards was $1 he looked confused and asked what that had to do with computers.

Kevin eventually moved out and I stayed in that apartment. We were still friends and he came over often. Every time he did he began opening the fridge, freezer, and every cabinet I had, looking through them. When I would ask what he was doing, he would invariably say "I'm just looking for a glass of water."

Kevin was not bright but was able to speak just well enough about any subject to make you think he was. However, he was a very good friend. At one point, another roommate that lived with us for a few months and had rage problems got mad at me for something I did in a video game and rushed at me like he was going to attack me. I am almost 6 foot but have no muscle. No matter, Kevin saw what was happening and in the two seconds it took for this guy to get across the room, Kevin had jumped up out of a beanbag chair and tackled him into the wall, leaving a hole in the drywall the size of a large pizza. I wound up paying for the damage but had no regrets. Any problems I had and wanted to talk about, Kevin would listen to without judgement. He may not have understood what I was talking about, but he let me speak. All in all, despite all these things, Kevin was one of the best friends I ever had. We lost contact almost 20 years ago. I miss Kevin.

Kevin, if you're reading this, PM me. Lets get a beer and catch up.So, this is another story about my friend - The Kevina.  She is twenty one years old and believe me... she doesn't realize that certain products from the store need to be heated first to eat them. Actually, she says she could do that, but she's too lazy to heat food and she totally doesn't need it. She also claims that cold will taste exactly as good as warm. 

For example, you can buy pre-prepared dumplings (pierogies) in the store. They are not frozen. You can eat them like that, but you will admit that it is quite disgusting and any normal thinking person will think of cooking them or frying them first.  I suggested to her that pierogies would taste better if she would at least cooked them, but as I said, Kevina is 100% sure that unprepared, cold food taste the same as cooked and warm.

Yesterday she wanted to eat some cereals, but her highly sweetened cereal was gone so she decided to eat some of my oats and muesli.  While you can eat muesli simply with cold milk, the oats should be warmed up. You should add hot water or hot milk and give the flakes a moment to soften.  

Kevina took herself a full bowl of oats and just poured cold milk over them. She immediately stated that oats were simply disgusting and would never try them again. What really makes her Kevina is not that she tries to eat everything raw, but that she doesn't even think about warming/cooking something first. She considers it an unnecessary process for which she is too lazy anyway.

 And now the hall of fame. Kevina has a special, separate tea that is brewed in cold water because, as she says, waiting for a few minutes is way too long and why would she do that, if she can bought herself a special tea (probably highly chemical product) that will brew in cold water.  She even poured cold water to instant noodle  and complained that the noodles are hard for a long time.Hello again, everyone and welcome to another episode of Kevin in a Big Rig!  The popularity of this series has grown by leaps and bounds over the last week and a half and all I can say is…WOW!!  I can scarcely believe the amount of support and encouragement I’ve received  from all of you and I can’t begin to tell what it means to me.  The only downside I’ve encountered is that I have to take extra care so that these stories don’t completely suck!

I’d like to give a big shout-out to the viewers and subscribers of YouTube channel Karma Comment Chameleon.  I read all comments on both Reddit and YouTube and your kind words of support are all the inspiration I need to continue this series.

And with that, lets get on with Kevin in a Big Rig Part 6:  Breakdown.

Backstory: this story takes place about a week after the events of Part 5.  FK and I made our delivery in Salt Lake City without incident and took another load north to Seattle, WA.  We had picked up another load that was bound for the East Coast when yet another disaster struck.

I had made the initial pick-up in Renton, WA and headed east on Interstate 90.  Since I had driven half the night before the pick-up and into mid-morning, my drive time for the day expired around Tanner, WA and FK and I switched out.  Ahead of us lay , barren and mountainous terrain and nearly 3,000 miles of highway across the northern states of the lower 48.  Combine that with the ever-threatening winter storms, FK’s horrible driving skills and a dwindling supply of tolerance on my part, I was beginning to wonder if FK would kill us both before I could get rid of him.  

At the end of my drive shifts each day, I had been religiously copying the information from the notes I had taken into an email on my phone.  I addressed it to my Fleet Manager and the company Safety Director.  Using my most professional and courteous language, I outlined everything I had witnessed over the past two and a half months.  I had reached the point where I didn’t want revenge or compensation; or even demand he be fired.  I just wanted to get away from him.  But, in order to do that, I needed a valid reason so management would be convinced.  One reason? How about a hundred?

FK took over and proceeded east along Interstate 90 towards Idaho.  As was my habit by this point, I rode shotgun upon first leaving out at first.  I’m still in the jump seat when we reach Snoqualmie Pass.

In my opinion, there are three critical skills that all drivers must learn if they want to last long enough in the industry to make any real money: navigation, backing up with a trailer and going DOWN a long, steep mountain grade fully loaded.  Going UP a mountain might be slow and arduous: going down can quickly turn deadly.  If a driver doesn’t control the speed during the decent, he will find himself behind the wheel of a runaway death machine.  To make the situation more difficult, the brakes of the truck can overheat and completely fail if overused; making the loss of control inevitable.  If you’ve ever driven through mountains and seen Runaway Truck Ramps, that’s exactly what they are for; a pre-selected crash scene.

Most trucks now have a feature called engine brakes; more commonly known to truck drivers as jake brakes. Unlike the typical wheel brakes, engine brakes cause the truck to slow down by restricting airflow in engine.  This causes the engine to add resistance in the drive train and serve as a sort of drogue chute.  Also unlike wheel brakes, engine brakes will not overheat or fail from overuse.  When used properly, they can make going down a mountain grade far more efficient and safe.  

The use of engine brakes also happens to be one of the issues FK and I disagreed upon. 

While I had been properly instructed by my trainer on how to use the engine brakes effectively, FK was adamantly opposed to them.  He wasn’t shy about voicing his disapproval of my using them, but there was very little he could do about it.  His opinion wasn’t due to some rational reason; it was simply because the company safety department said so.  During post-training orientation, the course presenters often had made a major issue about how engine brakes “weren’t that useful” and that they “wish they didn’t come with the trucks”.  (I later learned that these presenters were drivers who mostly quit within 2 months.) I learned from my trainer, a 30-year trucking veteran, that engine brakes were a lifesaver. FK, being the sycophant he was, believed that anything the company higher-ups said was the gospel truth.

And there we were: myself, FK, a fully-loaded truck and the long, steep decline that was Snoqualmie Pass.  

“Yep,” I said to myself, “I am definitely regretting my life choices right now.”

FK starts down the pass.  He was in top gear and the truck begins to accelerate rapidly.  Since he’s not using the engine brakes, they only way he can control the truck’s speed without overusing the wheel brakes is to downshift.  In order to do that, he must reduce speed: shifting gears in a semi is a lot different than a regular car since a truck transmission will only go into gear if it and engine are at the proper speed for the gear being selected.

FK slams on the brakes; throwing everything in the cab that isn’t tied down forward.  He tries to downshift, but his timing is off. For a few, heart-stopping seconds, the truck is essentially dropping down the side of a mountain in a free-fall before FK manages to wrestle the truck into gear with another whiplash brake-check and a grinding protest from the transmission.  The engine revs up sharply as it fights against gravity and the excess speed for the gear.  FK, again, applies extremely heavy braking and grab the hand-hold above me and push myself back into the seat to cushion the jolt.

At this point, I look over at the dash tachometer; its reading over 1700 RPM; the normal operating range for this truck is between 1000 and 1500 RPM.  Slowing down and reducing the engine speed is vital at this point; even FK knew that.  He does; applying heavy braking AGAIN to slow the engine to just under 1500 RPM and the speed appears to be relatively stable.

Then, in move that I can only describe as Divine Stupidity, FK FORCES the transmission into the next lower gear.  And when I say forced, I mean the truck was actively fighting him as if it were an animal raging in a trap.  The gears of the transmission were grinding so hard I thought they would be worn down before we reached the bottom of the hill.  Eventually, however, FK’s stubborn determination won out and the truck went into gear

The truck SCREAMED in protest.  I glance at the tachometer and its showing close to 2000 RPM; way outside the operating limits.  Too much of this and the engine will literally tear itself apart, I knew.  What does FK do? Nothing.

“GOODAMNIT”, I scream at him trying; trying make myself heard over the tortured engine, “SLOW DOWN!!!”

“Don’t tell me how to to drive!” FK snaps back; apparently he believes this is normal.

“I swear to God, FK, if you wreck this truck…”  my sentence was cut off by yet another hard brake and I’m wondering if I can stab this little bastard, take over the truck and claim self-defense.

We went down that long, steep hill for what felt like hours.  The screaming engine begged for mercy and FK was completely oblivious.  At any moment, I was expecting the engine to explode in a fiery death; taking us to our own a few moments later.  But to its credit, it held on just long enough.

We get to the bottom of the hill and the stress on both the engine and my nerves finally dissipates.  At first, I think we dodged yet another bullet.  The truck seems to be no worse for the wear and I managed not to kill FK.

At that moment, the dashboards lights up more than the annual Christmas tree at Rockefeller Plaza.  Every warning light and alarm buzzer is going off as if we were in a movie helicopter that had just been hit by rocket.  I swear under my breath and begin looking on my phone for repair shops, truck stops or anywhere nearby where we can get help.  And then, as suddenly as it started, the dash goes quiet and the lights turn off.  It wasn't a relief; more of the eerie quiet.

“That’s not good.” I say, knowing this wasn’t some electronic glitch.

I go back to my phone; it’s the only thing I can do to keep me from snapping FK’s neck.  By some obscene stroke of luck, there’s a dealership service shop at the next exit.  It was just then that the dashboard lights and alarms make an encore appearance.

“I think something’s wrong with the truck.” FK said as if I hadn’t aready worked out that much for myself.

I give FK my hardest glare.  “No shit, Sherlock,” I reply, “You just fell off a fucking MOUNTAIN and blew the engine up.”

“Uh….what do we do?” he asked like a lost little boy.

I take this moment to highlight his stupidity.  “I don’t know, SuperTrucker.  You’re the one who knows EVERYTHING!   Why don’t you tell me?!”  To say my nerves were frayed at this point would be a gross understatement,

FK keeps looking between the road and the dash.  I can tell he’s lost, confused and clueless.  Just then, the engine derates; essentially limiting its speed and horsepower in order to prevent further damage.  Something is seriously wrong and FK is completely useless.

“Next exit,” I say, “there’s a dealership shop.”

FK nods nervously.  He rounds a bend and the exit comes in sight.  Despite the trucks reduced speed, FK is about to blow right passed; something he can’t very well afford to to.

“FK, exit now.” I say.

“Uh…here?” he asks, unsure.

“NOW!!” I scream; not even trying to be civil.

FK takes the exit, braking extremely hard again to get slow enough so as not to overturn the truck.  I can see the sign for the dealership and guide FK too it.  We pull in to the parking lot just moments before the truck dies.  Charmed life, I think.

I turn to FK and say, “You, send dispatch a message. Tell them where we are and that were checking into the shop.  I’ll go talk to the shop.”  He doesn’t get a chance to protest as I jump out and head inside.

The techs run a diagnostic and find a long list of fault codes.  I have to coordinate between dispatch and the shop (because the company maintenance overseer knew NOTHING about trucks and FK was completely useless) and find out that the truck will need to be in the shop overnight.  They reluctantly agree to spring for a hotel room, within walking distance, and we go check in.

FK and I spent about three days in that hotel while the truck was being repaired.  FK, by virtue of his short term memory problems, had completely forgotten about how it was all his doing.  He gave some speech about how dangerous engine brakes were, but I reminded him that HE was the one who was driving when the truck broke down.  He tried to pass the blame, but it didn’t matter.  I had a more important task to focus on.

If you ever needed or wanted to know how make a rigid corporate structure to act in your favor, you might wanna take notes.

I had been gathering evidence against FK for about two weeks before we broke down.  In those two weeks, I had been able to gather enough problems against him that would make a district attorney green with envy.  I divided my time between copying my notes to email and jotting down new items as the cropped up.  It was tedious as the list never seemed to go down, but eventually, the email was ready.  The only question that remained was who, exactly, would GET the email.

Normally, I would simply email my Fleet Manager like one would a supervisor.  The problem was such major issue would need nearly every department in the loop: the only problem was the company was strictly compartmentalized and often territorial.  It wasn’t uncommon to get messages from three or four department heads for one minor infraction.  For example, when I had to request fuel in Indiana, I had to explain why to the Route Planning Manager, Fleet Fuel Controller and the Planning Department IN ADDITION to my supervisory Fleet Manager.  Not only was this incredibly ineffective and annoying, it did provide insight into how the system could be manipulated.

For all its segmented nature, there was one department that had full authority over any other; that was the Safety Department.  Since every trucking company must take safety seriously, the safety managers are taken very seriously.  More often than not, a Safety manager held more power than the CEO and was the one department who could rally the others to a cause.

My plan was to send emails to the heads of every department that had jurisdiction over any of FKs violations.  Hours of Service, Planning, Human Resources, Driver Training…each department head would get the email.  In addition, my Fleet Manager AND the Safety Manager would get the exact same email.  With any luck, one of the emails would trigger and investigation; the findings of which would start a chain reaction.  At best, the Safety Manager would order every department to look into the matter.

What I was careful not to do was to come off accusatory or demanding.  My philosophy has been to assume ignorance before malevolence; that is, assume that company simply wasn’t aware of what what going on.  And if I demanded that FK was fired, I would risk coming across as bitter and spiteful; which would accomplish nothing.  No, my emails would be professional, concise, detailed and presented in a way that would say, “Hey, I found these problems and I wanted to bring them to your attention”.  The issues themselves would cause the panic.

It was during this breakdown that I put the finishing touches on my plan.  I dug through the company directory for the relevant emails, organized the documents and photos in the email and arranged the list of violations by the relevant departments.  If and when an investigation took place, all they would have do is look where I pointed.  I had nearly completed the email during the three-day downtime while awaiting repairs.

The day the truck was repaired, FK and I went to shop a few hours before the truck was released.  When the techs told us it was ready, I was surprised FK offered to sign it out and take the first shift of the day.  It was uncharacteristically generous of him; which I found suspicious but did not say so.  I decided to make a restroom stop before we left out.  

On the way out of the door, I walked by the service desk.  The tech who worked on our truck was finishing up the ticket an waved me over.

“Hey,” he said somewhat bewildered, “aren’t with that short guy with the limp?”

“Yeah, why do you ask?” I reply.

“Well, he asked a weird question.”

I take a deep breath.  I had a feeling what that question would be.  “Let me guess…he was asking about the engine brakes.”

The tech was taken aback.  “Yeah. He wanted to know how to disable them.  I thought it was weird because why would anybody wanna do that?”

I shake my head in disgust and glance to make sure FK isn’t in the room.  “Did you tell him?”

“Hell no,” the tech admitted.  “you’d be an idiot not to have them.”

I nod in agreement.  “By the way,” I ask, “what was it that was wrong with the truck?”

“There was some cracks in the turbocharger housing.” he explained.

“Uh huh.  And would keeping the engine at 2000 RPM all the way down Snoqualmie cause that?”  
He looked at me knowingly. “You better tell somebody about him if he can’t drive any better than that.”

“Oh, don’t worry,” I assure him. “I will.”

And that ends Part 6: Breakdown.  Once again, a big thank you to everyone who is either reading this story on Reddit or listening on YouTube being brought to you by Karma Comment Chameleon.  Your support means the world to me and I hope this story proves itself worth your time.

I will apologize in advance since Part 7 will be delayed as I will be unavailable during the weekend.  But hopefully I will be able to post it up early next week.

Until next time, this is Strongbadjr reminding you to help control the Kevin population; have your Kevins spayed or neutered.So, I work at a popular Midwestern pizza chain. Tonight, I had a guy come in to pick up his food.

"What's the name on the order?" I asked.

"I didn't give one."

"...um, you wouldn't have been able to place an order without a name." This is because our system literally won't accept and save the order without a certain level of customer detail, ESPECIALLY a name.

"I called and they didn't ask for my name."

"Okay, but there are only two orders on our heat rack and both have names."

"My order is the cheesy bread sticks right there."

"I need a name to give them to you." We sometimes get people who come in, claim they're there for a pick up, and leave with someone else's prepaid food. Or we'll ask if its for [name on the box] because its the only order on the rack, they say yes and just take it, leaving a confused customer to come in later. My management has been extra strict lately about checking for name and payment.

"But I didn't give a name on the phone."

I'm trying not to rip my hair out at this point and approach this from another angle.

"Okay, so, YOU placed the order? Or was it someone else?"

"Me."

"Can you tell me your name?"

"I DIDN'T GIVE A NAME! I TOLD YOU THIS!!"

I'm about to give up and call my manager over when this guy continues: "I GAVE MY NUMBER OVER THE PHONE AND MY NAME JUST POPPED UP!!"

Finally! A way out of this spiraling mess of a conversation! There was a phone number on both boxes as well as a name! "Oh?"

"Yeah! It's 555-555-5555!"

Gotcha! "Okay, order for KEVIN." I made sure to say his name loudly. "Next time, please just give us your name, KEVIN. It prevents people from-"

"Yeah yeah, can I also buy a 20oz mello yellow and 2 ranches."

"...sure thing, sir."

He paid and left. 

He was the Kevin with no name.So correct me if this doesn't belong here but here I go: so yesterday I posted in a smash group that I was upset that the hunter from monster hunter didn't get into smash, attempting to start a conversation about his/her possible moveset and the like.

&#x200B;

this one guy comments "because monster hunter isn't a character" so I agree and say I was talking about the hunter (your character) so he tires to tell me that the hunter isn't a character because they're completely customizable and are nameless therefore making the hunter not a character so I shot back by telling him that the definition for a character is literally a person or individual, someone hops in and says Steve (from minecraft) is no different and seriously tries to tell me that Steve is a defined character with character traits, at this point I can only facepalm

&#x200B;

I try to explain that Steve is a default skin just like monster hunter has default characters, he then tells me that Steve is recognizable (ill give him that) and that there's a consistent style about him and tells me that monster hunter doesn't have a consistent style so I tell him if the hunter isn't a character then why is Villager, inking, Mr. game and watch and Steve in the game, because all of them are defult skins and are customizable, he then went on some ramble and said Pikachu, Yoshi, and inkings are technally not characters and are species but are unique enough to be characters

&#x200B;

\*death by a thousand facepalms\*

&#x200B;

So preserving what few braincells I have left I basically tell him he's wrong and stupid so he says word for word "sometimes halfway into a debate with a person I realize that the person I'm debating with is just brain dead and I walk away, this is one of those times", I wanted to scream but instead I just reference the dunning Kruger effect and he laughed at me, probably thinking he's the big brain winner

&#x200B;

EDIT: I do have screenshots of thisMy first job was as a part time shop assistant. Kevina  was the assistant manager who aside from being openly racist was possibly one of the most insufferable, bitter, vain people I've ever met. She was also one of the stupidest too, here's my top 5 reasons why:

1. Shouted at me for putting a hot tea bag in the bin because it could start a fire.

2. Absolutely adamant "not necessarily" was pronounced "not nessi-celery", would get extremely angry if corrected 

3. Once put a tin in the microwave, made a colleague of mine clean up the mess

4. Would call me naive, young, and foolish despite being a whole 19 months older than me

5. Once had me attempt to scrub off the painted-on moss from an ornament, refused to admit her mistake when I showed her it was literally fucking paint

There are plenty of other really stupid things she did and said over the years, naturally. She really did wholeheartedly believe she was a goddess, completely blind to the fact she's little more than a caustic little Kevina on a power-trip, whiling away in a dead-end job. Truly a homage to the dunning kruger effect.Not the whole dorm mind, but definitely chunks of it.

I can only assume Kevin's parents sent him away to college to prevent him from destroying what was left of their own home. I vaguely knew him as one of my roommate's friends, but he quickly gained a reputation. By the end of the school year, it was just assumed that if something around the dorms was broken, it was Kevin's fault. I heard that the repair bills cost more than his first year of tuition.

The first week in the dorms, Kevin leaned against a large window. Lucky for him it was a ground floor window, so when it broke under his weight and he fell through, he was fine. The 300 other students living in the building obviously noticed the cardboard over the lobby window and quickly spread the story.

Maybe a month later I come home from class, go to push the Up elevator button, and... it's gone? Was an older building, with the older-fashioned elevator buttons that stuck out from the wall. The Up button was entirely missing, just a little round spot where it used to be. So with some confusion, I pushed the Down button to summon the elevator, got in, pushed the button for my floor, and went up to ask my roommate if she'd noticed the busted elevator button.

"Oh that was just Kevin" she says. "He was goofing around and tried to push the button with his foot, but instead kicked it off the wall. Admin's pretty annoyed at him about it." Cue 300 students having to take occasional trips to the basement, to the bemusement of the janitors, because we all had to push the Down button to go up for weeks.

But the most Kevin-ey episode was The Great Popcorn Fiasco.

One night, Kevin decides he wants popcorn after the campus stores had already closed for the night. Apparently Kevin was so insistent about wanting popcorn that somebody gave him a bunch of mini-sized bags of microwave popcorn. But what Kevin wanted was a whole bunch of popcorn right that second, so he came up with a plan.

I got to hear the details of the plan once the entire building was evacuated and we were all shivering out in the cold, waiting for the fire department to finish extinguishing flames from the upper floors and air smoke out of the entire building.

See, each floor of the dorm had two tiny kitchens, except the top (7th) which only had one. Kevin went up to the top floor, put a mini-bag into the microwave, hit the Popcorn button, and ran down the stairs. Put mini-bags in each microwave on that floor, hit the Popcorn buttons, ran down the stairs again. By the time he got down to the ground floor, the microwave on the top floor was on fire. By the time the fire department showed up, four more microwaves were on fire.Welcome back, everyone to another installment of the Kevin in a Big Rig Series.  I apologize for the delay as I know many of you have been anxiously awaiting Part 5.  However, the day after Part 4 posted and I sat down to make this update, I learned from another Reddit user that YouTube creator Karma Comment Chameleon had picked up my stories for a series of videos on his channel.  Upon, hearing this, I was completely taken aback as I never imagined this series would be worth a such effort.  That being said, it took a little time to process.  If you haven’t seen his video, I’ll include a link to the video below where he covers Parts 1-3.  I know how much work and time goes into making a video for YouTube and I feel the least I can do to repay the favor is to get the word out there.

[https://youtu.be/sEmovYsm\_6c](https://youtu.be/sEmovYsm_6c)

So, without further ado, lets get into Part 5: Shutdown.

Backstory: this story takes place only a few days after the events in Part 4.  FK and I were heading towards Salt Lake City, but the winter weather that had been slowly ramping up for the past month was only getting worse.  We had been fortunate up to this point that the snow and ice hadn’t caused any delays, but luck was about to run out.

This story begins one night in North Platte, Nebraska on Interstate 80.  FK, having driven the day shift, had parked the truck and we changed places.  Believe it or not (I sure as Hell didn’t) FK had actually learned from me and decided to not only stop at in a safe place, but at our designated fuel stop.  That meant we could get food, fuel and do a truck inspection.  This was one of the few times FK made a rational decision.  

While FK went into the truck stop, I refueled and inspected the truck.  After making sure the truck was in good shape, I take a look at the weather.  A massive winter storm had been building up and all predictions put it and us on a collision course.  The company safety department had sent several weather alerts and issued a few restrictions.  My personal rule is that shutting down early is more preferable to shutting down too late.  I discovered that Wyoming, the next state we were to cross into, was taking a serious pounding from the storm and several accidents were already being reported.  Thank God it was my shift this time or FK would have wadded the truck, and us, into a tight little ball in a ditch.

I knew we wouldn’t make much progress, but since the roads were still dry and the snow wasn’t yet falling, I figured I would be able to make it close to Wyoming before shutting down, let the storm pass and continue on once the roads were clear.  I had driven this route many times by this point and knew the best places to be stuck.  I set the GPS to take us to a truck stop just past the Wyoming state line, go inside for a quick bite and we head out.

It wasn’t long before the leading edge of the storm had caught us.  The further along I drove, the worse the weather deteriorated.  Snow flurries melted on the highway; only to be frozen by the rapidly decreasing temperature and larger, heavier snow began sticking to road.  In typical fashion for the safety department, their weather alerts were about two hours behind and where they had issued orders to slow-down or shut-down were for areas well inside the storm:  according to them, we could drive the speed limit and they wouldn’t say anything.  Fortunately, I knew better than to trust the judgement of someone nearly 1,000 miles about the weather I was looking at through the windshield.

I had made it about 100 miles when conditions forced my hand.  I had already had to reduce speed to barely creeping and the road was invisible beneath the snow.  After watching another truck, who was driving WAY too fast, lose control and end up in the ditch, I make to the call to shut down.

I pull into a rather large truck stop not far from the Wyoming state line.  By this point, the snow was so deep, the trailer bumper was acting like a snowplow and the tires were having trouble gaining traction.  I finally get the truck parked and tell dispatch we’re shut down.  As I set the truck’s idle control system, FK wakes up and asks “Are we still in Indiana?”

In case you’re not familiar with US geography, Indiana is a VERY long way from Wyoming.  We hadn’t been there for days.  

“We’re in Big Spring and we’re shut down.  We’re gonna be here for a while.” I tell him.

“Did Safety tell us to?”

“I made the call.  It’s gotten pretty bad.”

He mumbles that he will get us going once his 10 hour break is up, but I know Safety will issue a shut down; albeit later than it should be.  I grab a snack, pull the bunk privacy curtains closed and settle in.

I decide to make use of the downtime to work on Operation: Ditch The Dipshit. For the past couple of days, I had been writing down everything I could remember since day one with FK.  I jot down everything, major and minor, along with dates, times and locations.  Every missed turn, unnecessary detour and violation FK had made goes on the list.  My plan was to copy it all to email, but I wanted to make sure nothing was left out.

While FK was asleep, I decide to go through the trucks computer records.  I start by going through FKs Hours of Service log.  This is a legally required record that shows what a driver does every single day.  Since drivers can only drive a set number of hours per day, any violation would show on the log.  Best of all, these computer logs couldn’t be tampered with.  Every time he drove longer than he should have, I made a note.

The computer also keeps a record of abnormal truck activities.  One of these is called Hard Braking Event.  A Hard Braking Event is, as the name suggests, is an instance where the truck experiences excessive braking.  Remember how I said FK was heavy on the brakes?  Well, the computer agreed!  There were dozens; if not hundreds of these records filed during his drive shifts.  To be clear, it takes a VERY hard brake check to trip on of these events.  I use my phone to snap a quick photo of the computer screen.  I make my notes and climb back into my bunk for the rest of the night.

The next morning, I wake up and go to the front of the cab and check the computer for messages.  As I predicted, Safety had issued a mandatory shut-down for all trucks in out area.  Just as well; otherwise I’d have to duct tape FK to his bunk to keep him from trying to leave.  The storm was still dumping snow and the paved parking lot of the truck stop is packed full of trucks and the interstate, visible from our parking spot, is dead quiet.  No one was going anywhere.  Despite this, I breathe a sigh of relief:  FK might be stupid, but his sycophant attitude meant he wouldn’t dare defy the company.  We were safe for the time being. 

FK wakes up a little while later.  “Are we still in Illinois?” he asks.

“No,” I reply cautiously, “we’re in Nebraska.  Close to Wyoming.  Safety has us shut down.”

“Oh,” he replies and goes back to the bunk.

It was then that I knew something about FK was off; more so than I thought.  Twice in less than 12 hours, he has forgotten where we are.  Indiana and Illinois are BEHIND us by a few days at this point: there ‘s no way he could be that confused.

I try to put it out of my mind for the time being and decide to brave the weather in the interest of breakfast.

I grab some food and coffee and check the weather conditions to the west.  Wyoming DOT had shut down the entire interstate and over 200 accidents had been reported in the past 24 hours.  I talk to a few drivers who had come in from the west and their accounts match the reports.  Its pretty clear that we’re not going anywhere soon.  After about an hour, I head back out to the truck and decide to catch up on some sleep.  FK is fully awake at this point, messing around with the computer.  As I climb inside, he asks, “Are we still in Illinois?”

What?  He STILL doesn’t know where we are?  “No,” I explain, “We’re in Nebraska.  We got here last night and haven’t been in Illinois for three days.  You don’t remember?”  This was the question that answered far more than I thought.

FK explained to me that, about a year before, he had been involved in a serious car accident (one of many).  According to him, he ran off the road at a high speed.  He was hospitalized with a shattered leg (his bad leg now) and was in a coma for 21 days.  His doctors told him that being in a coma that long would likely cause some brain damage and it had.  He had difficulty with his short-term memory and would literally forget something he did 5 minutes before.  

This wasn’t entirely new to me as he had told this story before. In fact, he had told me COUNTLESS times over the past two months and it was always the same; bad car accident, 21-day coma and busted leg.

“Right.” I reply. “Well, the weather is pretty bad so get comfortable.  We’re gonna be here a while.”  I then climb back into my bunk.  FK, citing his bad leg, wants to try and find a parking spot closer to the store, but I tell him the lot is completely full and if he moves the truck, we could lose this spot.  Reluctantly, he decides to stay put.

In my bunk, I go over FKs story.  21-day coma, short-term memory loss, numerous car accidents….if I was asked to pick on person to deny a CDL, it would be FK and not because of the Hell I had already been through because of him.  Driving a truck is dangerous at the best of times: add a brain-damaged driver and the risk increases exponentially.  I knew that this company literally hired anyone who gave them a phone call, but what doctor in his right mind would grant someone someone with brain damage a DOT medical card?  I pull out my notes and jot down FK’s story as he told it.  

Later that day, FK wakes up from a nap.  I’m in my bunk and he asks, again, “Are we in Illinois?”

I sigh, defated.  “No, FK, we’re in Nebraska.  You’ve asked that three times already.”

“Oh, well.  I have bad short term memory.  See, I was in a car wreck and…” he repeats the same story again; practically word for word.

“Did Safety shut us down?” he asked.

“Yes.  So did WyDOT (Wyoming DOT).” I explain.

“Oh, ok.”  He goes quiet again.

We end up stuck for two full days waiting for the road conditions to clear.  By late morning on the third day, we received word that the road conditions have improved to the point where we can proceed.  By that point, FK had repeated his story another THREE times; each time, he was completely unaware he had told it earlier.  By this point, Ive decided there is something seriously wrong with this guy and he is a danger to himself and anyone sharing a highway with him.  I didn’t know if I can get him off the road at that point, but I knew I could get reassigned.  Our unexpected downtime had given me time to work out my exit strategy.

I volunteer to take the first shift; I figure if the roads are iffy, I have the better chance of getting through it safely.  This was a good call on my part as I counted no fewer than 20 accident sites in the first 50 miles: many of these still hadn’t been cleared and the vehicles were left in the ditch or median.  I manage to get a good distance into Wyoming before needing to swap with FK.  The weather had broken and everything between us and Salt Lake City was clear.

As FK started his shift, everything that occurred during our shut-down replayed in my mind.  The more I thought about it, the more it bothered me.  FK wasn’t just stupid; he was a ticking time-bomb.  It was time to get as far away from as I could.

Before I went to sleep, I take out my notes and cellphone and begin composing an email.  I address it to my FM, my Fleet Manager and CC the Safety Director.  It would take a while to finish as I planned to make sure they knew everything I had seen and experienced over the past two months.  Given the nature of corporate politics, I expected to encounter some resistance and being ignored, but that was fine; it would only make the situation worse for them in the long run.

And with that, Part 5 comes to an end.  I know there wasn’t much in the way of Kevin-type behavior in this one, but I hope that you at least have a better idea of the kind of person FK was.  In the next episode, FK’s terrible driving will do actual damage to the truck and my plan to get rid of him will be fleshed out.

Again, a big thank you to everyone for your kind words of encouragement and support.  I’d also like to say a special thank you to everyone who gave my posts gifts.

If you haven’t already, please check out the video by YouTube creator Karma Comment Chameleon.  His telling of these stories is far better than anything I could do myself.  And, if you’re wondering, he’s not paying me for this plug. Lol

Until next time, my friends, please remember:  Keep all Kevins at a safe distance and away from sharp objects, heavy machinery and flammable substances.I've met a lot of Kevins in my day, but this one, who I knew in high school, stands out particularly. He had a habit of deciding something and then making it his hill to die on, claiming anyone who disagreed with him, including teachers and the internet, were wrong or didn't know what they were talking about. To my knowledge, he did very poorly in most of his classes due to his absolute refusal to allow the random assumptions he made to be challenged. 

A few examples of his greatest hits include:

- Using power strips everywhere he could because he thought they 'saved energy.' I once saw four outlets next to each other, where one had a power strip with three things plugged in and the other three were empty. When interrogated about this, he claimed they only used one outlet and as such were more efficient.

- Stating that the reason mars was red is that it was 'still hot from the big bang.'

- Claiming that there was no such thing as a hypothetical question 'because people know about it.' When asked to elaborate, he told us to look up what hypothetical means.

- Once, a friend and I were talking about a time they fell off of one of those big tubes you tow behind boats, and they mentioned only taking half of a breath before going underwater. Kevin claimed that this was impossible because 'you can't have half an oxygen.' When asked what he meant, he followed up with the assertion that 'oxygen is an atom so if you split it in half it explodes.'

- Kevin was adamant that since the government controlled the mints that print money, it should only make hundred dollar bills and then just give them out to everyone. At least three people, on separate occasions, tried to explain the concept of inflation to Kevin. None of them succeeded.I (39M) ran a cafe for 12 years prior to covid. Thanks to many crazy employees, I barely turned any profit and ended up quitting the business, instead getting a better job with a big company. Here's the story of one of the men who led to my decision. 

Kevin (29M at the time) was the son of a rich man. His dad had sent him to get "experience" and it appeared it may have been his first job. 

We usually served lunch and breakfast staying open 7am-4pm. Kevin arrived late his first day, but things went OK most of the first day, which deceived me into thinking he might be a competent employee. Kevin began showing his true colors on the last customer of his first day. 

An old man with a cane and an equally old and cane-carrying wife stumbled in a few minutes before closing time and asked for a dozen donuts. Kevin made a "great impression", wise-cracking, "are you a cop or something, you withery (sic) old man?". He may have needed a cane but that old man sure had wheels walking out of our establishment. I roll my eyes and go home. 

I ignore his behavior, and the next day I pay the price. During breakfast, he SCREAMS, "I DONT WANNA MAKE A FUCKING OMLETTE!". I assume he was yelling at a coworker. I assume wrong. Pretty soon a furious customer is asking why this little motherf@cker said that to her. 

During the lunch service, Pricky McPrickFace was caught in the break room playing CS:GO while everyone else worked hard. I told him to Rush B(akery) and get his ass back to work. 

The real, truly evil nature of Kevin revealed itself in the afternoon, though. I notice Kevin is gone at 3pm and assume he went home an hour early because he is lazy. Once again, I assume wrong. As I'm sitting in my car after I leave, I see Kevin leaving after me. I yell to him, "where the fuck were you?". He yells back "I was in the bathroom! I had the shits!". I believed that not one bit, but I at least figured I had nothing but a lazy employee. 

Wrong. I had a Kevin. 

The next morning, I walk in and Kevin is stifling a laugh like the guards in the biggus Dickus scene in life of Brian. I ask over and over what the joke is but he won't say. About half an hour into the breakfast, an employee of mine needs the olive oil and yells for me to come check something wrong with it. 

"What is this residue?" A customer asks. There is a brown residue all over the lid. I take a sniff to see if I can identify it. I can. 

Oh no. 

Oh NO. 

OH. NO. 

It's shit. 

There is shit on the bottle. 

He spent yesterday afternoon in the bathroom, fucking himself with the bottle.

He BURSTS into laughter, nearly splitting his sides as I scream at him in full earshot of the disgusted customers. I fire him immediately, physically rip off his apron and send him home. 

I think. 

Two hours later, his dad calls me up and explains that "Kevin has Asperger's. If you continue discriminating against my son, you will have to explain this to the judicial system! He cannot help his need for anal stimulation". 

Piss, Shit and Chechnya. I have no other option but to bring oilfucker back. 

The next morning, he's serving up breakfast. As I watch him like a hawk, I witness him shove a pancake down his pants and take it out, throw it on a plate and walk out to customers. I hear him yell, "who wants a free pancake?" before giving it to a customer, who takes a bite of the groincake before I can warn them. I apologize profusely, but as soon as I am done, I fly into a rage, enter the break room, and punch the little bitch in the face. 

I end up having to pay a ridiculous amount of money to the man as he threatened to press charges if I didn't pay him. Hey dude, I have a better suggestion, maybe don't let your son work if he can't resist fucking the olive oil.Hello, everyone and welcome back to yet another installment of the series Kevin in a Big Rig.  Once again, I’d like to thank everyone who has read my previous episodes and shown more interest and support than I could have ever hoped for.  I know a lot of you have been asking questions about how First Kevin (FK) got away with his stupidity and why I didn’t do anything about it.  I apologize for not answering many of you outright, but I can promise that I fully intend to answer all of your questions in upcoming posts.  I can assure you that it will all be worth it.  Now, without further ado, on to Part 4:  First Kevin Gets Lost, OP Gets and Idea!

Backstory: this story takes place a few weeks after the truck heater SNAFU.  While I would like to say that FK learned from his mistakes and tried to do better, it would be more accurate to say that he merely doubled-down on his brain-dead antics.  In the interim, his driving skills plateaued at N00b level, his navigation ability was at “Potato” and his superiority complex had gone from annoying to insufferable.  Despite everything, I was still very much a rookie driver, a peon in a very big company and, most importantly, more broke than MC Hammer.  I was afraid that doing anything to rock the boat with management would lead to me being fired, in further debt and my truck driving career at an end.

To add some perspective to my situation during this, I should mention more about the contract I had in place with the company at the time.  In exchange for free training, I had agreed to work for the company for eight months.  If I quit or was terminated for any reason before that contract was fulfilled, I would be liable for over $6,000 in tuition fees.  Furthermore, since the company owned the training facility at which I trained, they could refuse to release my CDL school records to any prospective employers unless they bought the contract.  Since most reputable employers required proof of completion of a CDL school and were unwilling to make such an investment in a relatively inexperienced driver, I was stuck and pretty much at their mercy.  This is the dark truth that many super-carriers such as Swift, Werner and CRST will not tell you when they promise you a “rewarding career” and “free training”.  In short, I was pretty much powerless.  But that was about to change and, in some strange way, I have FK to thank for that.

The morning on which this story takes place started out like pretty much every other day for the past two months:  FK finished his shift and me waking up to see what kind of fresh Hell of a mess I had to sort out.  The day before, we had picked up a load in Pennsylvania with me doing the initial pick-up.  I had gotten us just across the state line into Ohio before going off duty.  Just before picking up said load, I had filled the fuel tanks completely and burned maybe 1/4th of a tank before going off duty.  The next fuel stop was in less than 400 miles: we had more than enough fuel to get there.

Again, FK had ended his shift with no clue where we were: no surprise there.  A quick look out of the window: oh, we’re on the shoulder of a highway; what a completely unexpected and unprecedented development….yawn.  Fine, lets get this over with.  By this point, I had already purchased my own truck-enabled GPS.  FK, apparently upset that I didn’t recognize his obviously superior ability, had thrown a tantrum and demanded I no longer use his GPS because HE would work out the route (yeah…RIGHT!).  He gets out of the driver seat and, like the petulant man-child he was, he took his GPS from the mount.

A trick I learned from my trainer was, when using a GPS, was to enter the departure and destination and then add each assigned fuel stop in order as waypoints in the route.  This forced the GPS to stay on the company route 90% of the time.  Also, our fuel payment cards would only work at the assigned fuel stops so it made life easier just to follow it: having to get fuel elsewhere needed a valid reason, assistance from dispatch and often carried a lecture about the importance of the company-assigned route.  I had tried to teach this trick to FK, but because he had SO much more experience than I did (a full month), he felt he didn’t need to listen to me.  

I set up my GPS and hit the CURRENT LOCATION function.  This, of course, as routine as FK never had any clue where we were.  I had already familiarized myself with the route and knew which highways, towns and cities I could use to help get my bearings.  This time, however, I was completely stumped.

I had expected that FK would have gotten at least as half-way into Illinois, but the GPS had us in some small town in Indiana.  Also, it wasn’t a town I had seen on either the GPS route or the paper map I routinely used to verify the GPS.  Ok….that was odd.  I look again at the GPS for a highway number or street name.  Again, nothing on it showed me made any sense.

I go back to the navigation page where it showed the distance to the next checkpoint; which would have been our next fuel stop.  This didn’t make sense either at it was showing close to 500 miles to go…to the FIRST fuel stop, not the second.  It had to be a mistake, I think, since we there was no way to be FURTHER from the fuel stop than we I went off duty, was there?

I sit in the driver seat for about five minutes; trying to make sense of what the GPS is telling me. I had almost convinced myself that the GPS didn’t log us reaching the fuel stop and was trying to backtrack.  I was about to force it to reroute to the second fuel stop when I, by chance, happen to check the fuel gauge: and my bottom jaw hit the floorboard.  Where once the needle had been just above the 3/4th line, it was now showing less than 1/4th  of a tank.  By my estimates, that was good for about 100 miles safely.  Something was very VERY wrong.

“FK, where the hell are we?” I ask, knowing it was in vain.

“I don’t know,” he replied, testily.  He had been growing more indignant ever since the heater fiasco.

“Did you get to the first fuel stop?”

“No.”

“Did you get lost again?”

He didn’t respond right away.  “I was following the company route.” he finally replied, proudly.

“Bullshit.  Because we are very low on fuel and further away from the fuel stop than when you started.”

He looked stunned.  Apparently, he hadn’t realized that fact.

I turn back to my GPS and take a look at the map and everything became clear.  When were WAY off course; about 300 miles from the interstate we were SUPPOSED to be on.  I didn’t know how, but we were well and truly lost; lost, low on fuel, in the Midwest and well into the wintertime.  Fuck my life.

I decided to abandon getting back on the assigned route; FK had wasted his entire shift with his unplanned detour and I didn’t want to make the situation even worse.  I tell the GPS to search for nearby truck stops.  It takes a few moments, but the patron saint of truckers had not abandoned me.  There was a Flying J truck stop less than 20 miles away.  I tell the GPS to take me there and send an urgent message to dispatch.  I tell them we need our fuel card unlocked for that location and we are dangerously low on fuel.

To my surprise, FK did NOT like this idea.  “We have to stick to the company route!  If we run out of fuel, its the company’s fault.”

“Company route?!” I scoff, “you got us lost…AGAIN!  You have no idea where we are…AGAIN!  I have to spend half my day correcting your fuck-ups…AGAIN!  Right now, the company route doesn’t mean a damn thing because I HAVE NO CLUE WHERE WE ARE!!  What I do know is we need fuel and now.”

FK starts sulking.  “Well, if we get in trouble, its on you.”

“Fine by me.” I reply and get us going.  My reasoning is that if I run out of fuel at truck stop AFTER requesting the fuel cards open, dispatch would have to explain why they didn’t allow it (running a semi out fuel requires some very expensive emergency road service.)  However, if I run out of fuel while going down the highway, Ill have to explain to dispatch, the Safety department AND the highway patrol as to why I couldn’t read a fuel gauge.  I voted to minimize my responsibility and at least get somewhere where is available.  The LAST thing I wanted to do was repeat what happened in that dealership parking lot.

About a half-hour later, we get to the truck stop.  It’s early morning so several other trucks are already refueling and we have to wait in line.  I check the computer and, to my surprise, dispatch approved fuel purchase, but was concerned as to how we got so far off course.  I reply that I just came on duty and FK was the one who got lost…AGAIN!  I didn’t expect anything of this since the night shift dispatchers didn’t handle things like employee discipline or service records.  When the time comes, I top of the tanks; almost 150 gallons of diesel and try to figure out what I can do to get us back on track.

After driving about five hours, I finally get us back on course and decide to take my legally-required break.  As I go to put myself Off-Duty, I notice an important message has come from dispatch  Its from my Fleet Manager (Ill call her FM for short); roughly equivalent to a supervisor.  “Call me ASAP” was all it said.

“Oh, great,” I say.  I take my phone, step out of the truck and make the call.

“What are you two doing?  How did you end up so far off your route?  Did you follow the route we gave you?”

“What do you mean, FM?”

“Well, FK says you have been ignoring the company routes.  That’s why you’ve been getting lost.”

That explains it.  FK, the little weasel, sent her a text message with some made up story.  My blood started to boil.

“FM, first of all, I have no clue what happened.  When I finished my shift yesterday afternoon, everything was fine, we were on course and had plenty of fuel.  I woke up this morning on the side of a two-lane highway in the middle of Bum-Fuck, Indiana with no clue how I got there and running on fumes.  That’s why I sent the message to have the fuel cards opened.”

“Well, you two are a team so you have to work together.”

I take a deep breath; fighting back the urge launch into a verbal tirade that would surely get me fired.

“FM, you know what FK is like.”

“Well, just figure it out.”  She hangs up and I have to fight the urge to thrown my phone across the parking lot.

A short time later, I return to the truck and make ready to head back out.  FK is sitting in the passenger seat; his precious notebook in hand.  He’s trying to hide a shit-eating grin on his face, but his 1970s porn star moustache gives it away.

“So,” he said, “you gonna follow the company route?  You’re a company driver, so you gotta follow the company route.”  He then hands me his notebook; open to the page he had written down the route.  I take it…and throw it in the back.

“Listen to me, Shit-Head.  You’re not my boss.  You’re not my trainer.  I don’t take orders from you.  From now on, I’ll drive the truck my way, you drive it yours.  Unless its an emergency, keep your cock-holster mouth SHUT!”

For a moment, he looks terrified; then petulant as he goes back to the bunk.  Good riddance.

For the rest of the day, I go through everything that had happened over the past two months.  When I think that, after all the times I had to babysit a supposedly more experienced partner, I get blamed for everything going wrong, I just get more and more upset.  But, since I’m a broke, newbie driver under a hobbling contract and no support from anyone.  What can I do?  I need to get away from this clown, but how?  If only there was some way I can PROVE he’s fucking up.  I’m just a truck driver.

And that’s when it hit me: I wasn’t ALWAYS a truck driver.  Before I started driving, I was a manager at a steel mill.  I was an engineer by trade and my previous job had me dealing with safety and environmental regulations, quality control, OSHA, DOT and, my least favorite, corporate bureaucracy.  Corporate…corporation.  The company I was driving for was a corporation; with a hierarchy of increasingly incompetent managers, V.P.s and Directors who will be slow to take responsibility but first to demand someone else do so.  However, I happen to know how to get their attention: documentation.

But what I needed was something to document.  Cue my OTHER valuable skill set; investigation.  Part of my old job had been to investigate accidents, chemical spills, defective products, etc and find out what happened, why it happened and how to prevent it in the future.  In doing this, I learned that the more details you gather, the better.  Dates, times, names of witnesses, photos, video, ambient air temperature, tea price in Bangladesh…if it was even remotely relevant, write down.  Best of all, I was really good at it; often finding problems everyone else overlooked.

So the two pieces of a plan began to form.  First off, I would need to observe EVERYTHING FK did and said; looking for something I could use to prove just how incompetent he truly was.  In addition, every time he got lost or went off-route, I would take a picture with my phone of the truck’s computer logs showing the GPS pings and their timestamps along with a photo of HIS daily driver log.  FK would be under investigation and not even know it.

I finish my drive shift and go off duty.  Before I go to sleep, I decide to check the computer records to see exactly what FK did the night before that got us so very lost.  According to the GPS pings, he had, for some reason, turned off the interstate and driven close to 500 miles; with over 150 miles going in the opposite than we needed to go.  I took snapshots of the ping and FK driver logs; showing that HE was On Duty when it happened.  

But that wouldn’t be enough, I knew.  I need more; MUCH more.  So I took an old legal pad and began making a list of every thing stupid, dangerous and dimwitted thing FK had done; included dates and times where I could and started writing an email; an email that would take a month to complete.

And that’s where I’m going to end Part 4.  But not to worry, everyone…this story isn’t even close to being over yet.

Thank you to everyone for reading this far and for the continued support and encouragement.  I hope you have enjoyed the series this far and you find these tales, if not informative or enlightening, then at the very least, entertaining.  And Stay tuned: Part 5 will be released shortly.  Spoiler alert: we learn part of the reason why FK’s is such a Kevin.Kevin was my coworker at [large package delivery company]. Every day, I was amazed by his continual employment. He has told me, and done, some of the most outrageous things I have ever witnessed on a job site.



 - I was tasked with training Kevin. He was a slow learner, but that was mostly because of instead of listening, he was telling me about his Dragonball Z fanfic OC who was "stronger than Goku and also a dragon." This was the only topic he talked about for the first five straight hours of our first shift together. This was very deadly in combination with his habit of standing a maximum 6 inches away from you at all points during a conversation, and smelling like he only showered annually. I felt kind of bad because I thought he was homeless, but I soon learned he lived with his parents. Nearly every subsequent conversation consisted of him telling me about the videogame Warframe. I searched high and low for his youtube account where he claimed to have produced rap songs about Warframe, but unfortunately it did not exist. I guess he assumed I wouldn't look it up, despite him telling me its exact name, but I guess he assumes everyone is just extremely gullible. This, more than any other factor, characterizes nearly everything he says about himself.



 - Kevin, as he describes himself, is "really into weapons." He showed me an album of pictures on his smart watch of his various katanas, nunchucks, and about a dozen homemade weapons. He claimed to keep some of them in his car at all times (not the best idea considering the facility was located on US federal property) because of his tragic past of not being able to defend those he loves. Most notably, two of his former girlfriends (Sakura and another equally Japanese name I can't remember, one of whom actually lived in Japan "making futuristic robots") who suffered horrible deaths at the hands of gunmen, one of whom contracted a flesh eating virus from the bullet wound and died later in the hospital. He claims if he had his bowstaff on him, things would have gone differently.



 - Kevin would tell stories about his childhood which were very blatantly the plot of Naruto with him inserting himself as the main character. Most of these took place at his local kendo dojo "The Dojo of the Blind Warrior". His best original (as far as I'm aware) story was that this cute kendo girl pretended to be legally blind for *years* in order to gain the upper hand in a duel with him, where if he lost they would have to go on a date together. He was defeated, but she later vanished under mysterious circumstances.



 - The majority of Kevin's stories are as follows: "I am out with a girl. Then some asshole guy says something derogatory to her. I say a quippy oneliner then sucker punch him" (One time claiming to have indented his ring into the skull of his assailant three times following an altercation at his local Olive Garden. He was not arrested for this).



 - Kevin believed he was the strongest person in the warehouse. He would quite often brag as such. One time, three of my coworkers failed to pull a four thousand pound (~1815kg) container out of a trailer because the hydraulic wheel system in the floor ran out of air. A forklift would not have been able to move that container. Kevin takes a long, hard look at the situation and decides to intervene. "Did somebody order a..." he says as he sprints towards the truck "TITAN SHOULDER BASH?" He then takes a flying leap at the container and bounces off its aluminum walls onto his ass in front of our entire work group.



 - On a slightly darker note, Kevin was generally an asshole to work with, expecting perfection where he sorely lacked it and having no patience for mistakes. One day, while helping (in a loose definition of the term) a coworker push a container onto a truck, became frustrated by their repeated missing of the door. This is extremely common, as those containers were several thousand pounds being pushed across a floor with wheels and the back of a semi truck is only a few inches wider than the container. Kevin shouted obscenities at her and suggested she quit working there. She quickly reported him to our manager who made a rare appearance outside his office to tell Kevin to not be mean. Kevin immediately confronted her, threatening to follow her home and beat her if he got fired for this. Some accounts reporting he used racial slurs (but don't worry he "only uses racial slurs when the other person really deserves it. One time I blacked out in a discord call and when I woke my black friend who was in the call told me I shouted the n word at this idiot for like 30 minutes, but he told me it was cool because he was being an asshole."). We all assumed Kevin got fired for doing this, but he turned up a week later after only receiving a week long suspension. The woman he threated quit almost the second he walked in.



 - On a much lighter note, it was extremely clear his taste in music was "whatever my parents play around the house." When he would leave work angry, he would roll down the windows of his SUV and play I Wanna Rock and Roll All Night by KISS while flooring it across the parking lot. His second favorite song was the Friends theme song.



 - The story ends with Kevin transferring to a different facility in the company, which also happened to be the company's district HR headquarters. I can only assume, being the closest thing to HR poison in human form I can imagine, that he was fired shortly after. My only evidence is that none of the people who transferred from that facility to mine several months later had ever seen him.



UPDATE: for anyone still coming across this post, my friend told me he *finally* got fired from the new facility he transferred to. All it took was him threatening several of his coworkers with murder-suicides. The real kicker is that he only got suspended for this at first until they found out he has a history of threats like this. Incredible HR FedEx.Hey, everyone!  Thanks again to everyone for the upvotes, support and encouragement you have shown me with the first two installments of the Kevin in a Big Rig series.  When I first decided to share these stories here on Reddit, I never would have imagined that an old trucker’s tales would be so well received.  So many of you have left comments asking for more of these stories and I am not one who likes to disappoint.  On that note, on to Part 3:  Frozen.

Backstory:  The following takes place about a month after First Kevin (FK) and I were first paired up.  If you’ve read Part 2 of this series, then you have some idea of the kinds of Kevin-esque things FK was capable of; and you’d probably be right.  But what he did this time resulted in what the absolute worst nights sleep of my entire life; and the closest I ever came to committing legitimate murder.

By this point, I already had FK pegged for what he was; an incompetent buffoon who shouldn’t be allowed near a soap box car; let alone an 18-wheeler.  But worse, in his obviously demented mind, he thought he was the absolute top-dog of the trucking world.  This is in spite of the dozens of times he would have to wake ME up and get him out of another bad situation.  However, at the time, I was more of the “Grin and Bear It” mentality because I was broke and afraid that any screw-ups or boat-rocking on my part would get me fired.  But that was about to change…

One day, after picking up a load close to the company’s home terminal, we received instructions from dispatch to relay the load in the company’s drop-yard and take the truck sans trailer to a local dealer in town for scheduled maintenance.  This was essentially a gloried oil change and lube job with a few other items on the checklist just to make sure the truck was in good shape.  This was normally handled by the in-house mechanics, but because of some serious backlogs, they decided to contract it out.

The plan, as relayed by dispatch, was for us to drop the loaded trailer in the yard, bobtail to the dealership for a late-morning appointment, get the service done (it would take 2 hours maximum), pick the back up when finished and continue on to the destination.  Easy in, easy out.  Unfortunately, FK was the driver on duty during the shift in which we were SUPPOSED to arrive.  But, in typical FK fashion, he got lost because his infamous system of navigation failed again.  As a result, he wasted half a day back-tracking and ran out of drive-time; leaving me to get us to the terminal, drop the load and get to the dealership 15 minutes before they closed for the day.  This meant that, since we missed our appointment, we would have to wait until the next morning when they had an opening in the schedule.  Since the opening was first-thing that morning and parking at the company terminal was packed, I made the call to park the truck outside the dealership for the night.  We had plenty of fuel and there was a gas station within walking distance where we could get food.  The shop told us this was fine so that was that.

This happened in around late November/early December in the midwest.  The winter had already shown signs of being bad and snow had been falling for weeks already.  The weather forecast for that night was to dip well below freezing not long after sunset.  After squaring everything away with the service reps at the shop, I turn to FK.

“Look, FK, its gonna get cold once the sun goes down.  I’m gonna walk over to the store and grab something to eat tonight.  You coming?”

FK replied, “No, I got food.  I’m gonna see if I can get that bunk outlet to work.”  For a few days, he had been complaining that one of the 12 volt outlets in the bunk section of the cab wasn’t working.  Apparently, it was a major issue for him even though neither of us had any electronic device other than our cell phones and the bunk had a total of FOUR outlets; only one didn’t work.  But trying to tell him that fact only made him upset and make him flex is one week of seniority over me.  I really didn’t feel like arguing so I left him to it.

I go and buy food for dinner, some snacks to have in reserve, beverages to hold me over for the night and two packs of cigarettes because smoking was the only thing that could calm my nerves enough to not strangle FK each time he had to wake me up to help him navigate.  As I’m heading back, the sun goes down and I can see a nearby pond start to freeze.  I quicken my pace so I can get back to the warm cab.  As I get to the truck, I see FK in the passenger seat hunched over something.  I go around to the driver door and jump in.  

For those who don’t know, trucks meant for long-haul operations have very thick insulation to hold in heat for a VERY long time.  This came in handy since that truck had an idle-limiting system that wouldn’t allow the engine to run for long periods of time sitting at idle.  If the engine was needed to maintain heating or air conditioning while parked, the driver could set a device much like a digital thermostat: you set the control for the temperature you want the cab to be, select it to either heat or cool and the engine will start and stop to maintain the temperature much like the central unit of a house.  Since the cab was well insulated, the cab of the truck could stay warm for hours.

Before I left the truck to go to the store, I made sure to set the idle control system to maintain a comfortable temperature.  When I got back, however, I couldn’t help but notice it was colder than when I had left it: much colder.  What was strange about that was that the engine was running fine.  Naturally, I checked the temperature controls on the dash; they were set to full heat and full fan.  And that’s when it hit me: there was nothing coming from the dash vents.  The blower fans were dead quiet.

I looked over at FK who, I just noticed, is poking around with the fuse panel that was hidden behind the rear panel of the glove box.  “FK, why is the heat not working?”

“I dunno.  It stopped working when I was checking the fuses.”  That led me to my second question.

“Why are you messing with the fuse panel?”

“I was trying to get that outlet to work.”

As you may know, most vehicles have to fuse/relay panels; one underneath the hood in the engine compartment and another inside.  Trucks are the same in that regard except they have a LOT more fuses than the average passenger car.  One thing that was stressed heavily during my training was that the fuse panel inside the glove box of the truck was STRICTLY off-limits.  This is because if someone goes about carelessly pulling fuses looking for a bad one without first disconnecting the power, it could cause a surge through the panel and short out other circuits.  Since the fuses in the glove box controlled vital circuits such as external lights, dashboard instruments and engine controls, messing around with them could lead to major issues.  Also, the dash blower motor circuit was also fused in that same panel.  And FK had been messing with it.

Its hard to remember what I was feeling at the time; anger, hate, panic, homicidal rage…all of the above?  “Oh, fuck!” I exclaimed as jump into the bunk area.  I check the thermostat; its showing 58° F (14.4° C) when it was set to 73° F (22° C).  I checked the vents in the bunk heat controls and turn them full-heat and full-fan but, sadly…nothing.  We were in a truck with no heat and near-freezing conditions.  To make matters worse, the shop at which we were parked was already closed.  We were in trouble.

I grab the truck’s computer and send an urgent message to dispatch, telling them that our heater isn’t working and the temperature outside is dropping fast.  FK is still mumbling about the outlet.

“Will you forget about that goddamn outler?!  We have no heat!!  Don’t you understan that?!”

He said something, but the computer signaled an incoming message.

“Truck 1234, you have access to your truck so we cant get you a room.”

I tell dispatch AGAIN that the heater isn’t working and its getting colder by the minute, but they said “company policy” meant we had to stay in the truck.  We were screwed.

I turn to FK and say, “Close that fucking glove box and don’t even think about opening it again.”  At this point, even he realized he screwed up royally.  We were stuck in a cold truck for the night.  Neither of us has enough money to afford a hotel room and, short of starting a bonfire inside the truck, we were in for a cold, cold night.

I quickly eat my dinner and stow my food away.  I then dig through all the clothes I had with me; looking for every stitch of warm clothing I had and layered up as best I could.  I ended up wearing a two long-sleeve t-shirts, a pull-over hoodie and Carhart jacket with two pairs of jeans, two pairs of socks, heavy-duty work boots and two pairs of jersey work gloves with a fleece blanket for cover.

The entire night, I don’t think I sleep for two consecutive hours.  Despite wearing what felt like a weeks worth of clothes all at once, the cold air still permeated through.  I stayed curled in the fetal position for the entire night; shivering so hard I could feel the entire truck shake.  Each time by violent shivering or chattering teeth brought me out of sleep, I would look at the thermostat control.  By midnight, the temperature was well below freezing and, with high winds that had come up, the truck was only getting colder.  I can remember feeling disgusted that each time I woke up and not seeing sunlight.  At one point, I honestly believed that I wouldn’t survive the night due to hypothermia.

Finally, at about 6 am, I woke up for the last time and decided to go outside.  Not because it was any warmer, but because the gas station I went to the evening before opened at that time and all I wanted was a little heat.  I didn’t wake FK; honestly, I wouldn’t have cared if he was dead for the hell his stupid ass just put me through over a power outlet.  I walked to the store; looking like a vagrant with withdrawal symptoms from shivering so much.

When I walked into the store after that long, bitter night, I wanted to cry because the heat felt so nice.  The cashier gave me a puzzled look, but saw my baseball cap that had my company’s logo and let it go.  I bought two cups of piping hot coffee and a warm breakfast.  I took my time savoring every bit of it.  Since the station had a dining area and wasn’t busy, I really wasn’t in any hurry to get back.

I sat in the station for about two hours before I had to head back.  The shop opened at 8 and I wanted to get the truck in the shop and fixed ASAP.  I get a third coffee for the walk back and get over to the shop just as the office is opening.  FK is waiting outside and sees me holding my coffee.  He asked where I got it and I pointed to the gas station.  The rep opens the door and we go inside, check in with the desk and hand the truck key to the technician so he can get started.  FK, who was useless when it came to things like this, went to the lounge area.  I made sure to tell the tech about the fan and asked if he could check it out; he said he would.  I sign the paperwork and head to the lounge.

In the lounge, FK looks frustrated.  He wanted coffee, too, and was disappointed to learn that, since the shop just opened, the office staff hadn’t made any in the lounge yet.

“Well, walk over to the gas station and get one.” I say, trying not to snicker.  

“You know I can’t walk that far.  Why don’t you go get me one?” he asked, indignantly. I should point out that FK had a bad leg due to, if you can believe it, a bad car accident (I know, big shocker).  At first, I felt bad for him, being partially disabled but by that point, after everything I had endured because of his stupid ass, I was tempted to damage his good leg so they would be a match set.

“Because I signed the truck in.  That means I have to be here when its released.

FK gets mad.  “Well, why didn’t you wake me up and ask me if I wanted anything?” he demands, almost throwing a tantrum.

It was at this point, my tolerance for FK glitched.  This SOB had put me through a living hell of no sleep, being thrown around the truck like a rag doll because of his horrible driving, having to take flak for his fuck-ups and getting chewed out for late deliveries because he keeps getting lost.  Now, he want ME to be HIS errand boy after nearly causing me to freeze to death?   As someone once said, “HELL TO THE NAW NAW NAW.”

I set my coffee on a table and raise to my full height (I had at least one foot and one hundred pounds on him).  “Listen here, you sawed-off little bastard,” I replied, summoning every last ounce of piss and vinegar in me that wasn’t still frozen, “because of your dumb-ass, I barely slept all night.  How the Hell we’re not dead of hypothermia right now, I have no idea.  I have put up with your bullshit for over a month and I’m fed up with it.  You are NOT my supervisor, you are NOT my lead driver and you do NOT tell me what to do.  And if I EVER catch you messing around with the fuse panel or anything else on that truck again, I will CUT YOUR GODDAMN THROAT!”  And, at that moment, I meant it.

FK muttered something, but I told him to shut up and he obliged.  After a couple of hours, the technician came and told us our truck was ready.  FK, still without coffee, sulked off to the truck while I dealt with the paperwork.  I ask the tech about the blower fan and find out it was a blown fuse.  Apparently, FK pulled the fuse and the resulting arc caused the fuse to blow.  Since he was an idiot and the fuse panel wasn’t labeled, there was no way to know which fuse was blown.  He told my to make sure that next time I needed to check the fuses to disconnect the batteries first.  I laughed, signed the papers and went back to the truck.

Back in the truck, I send a message to dispatch and tell them we’re ready to roll.  FK had climbed back into the bunk; obviously still sulking.  I take the first drive shift of the day so the load can, once again, be back on track.

While I wish I could say this was the end of my misadventures with FK, its not.  There’s more.  Yep, it gets even better, folks.

Again, thank you all so much for reading and for all your support and encouragement.  It really does mean a lot!Why was George HW Bush's former advisor a Kevin? He questioned the validity of James Hansen / NASA’s modeling efforts of climate change. The US was on the verge of signing a binding climate treaty with 65 other nations in 1989 and yet, this moron was like, "We don’t want big oil to go bankrupt".  And that is why we’re fucked when it comes to climate change. This man was a mechanical engineering professor and yet he thought he knew about climate change. That's like Jessica Lange waxing philosophical on the war in Iraq. You’re not a military theorist, you’re an actress. Just like, Mr. Sununu wasn’t a fucking climatologist, he was a mechanical engineering professor at Tufts UniversityA short one.

I work at a bar and brewery, and know a lot about brewing. Outside of work, I also brew, making gluten free beer and cider. Why? Because I know several people with Coeliac disease, which is a debilitating gluten intolerance. If you have coeliac, your intestines will literally stop working in the presence of gluten, and will need time to heal afterwards. It ain't no small thing.

Preamble over, a Kevin entered the bar today, she sent her husband to buy her a cider, which we carefully checked for any gluten. I know there's no guten in this cider, but I checked anyway.

It's worth noting that while alcoholic drinks aren't required to report ingredients, they are required to report allergens. This particular cider reported sulphates. I pour the cider, assure the guy that there is no gluten in it, and that's that.

Two minutes later, Kevin shows up. She insists that there is gluten in this cider. Why would there be gluten in this cider made out of apples? Why, because there's yeast in it!

Y'all, I about bluescreened.

”So, you think there's gluten in yeast? There isn't gluten in yeast.”

”Yes there is. I want the other cider instead.”

”Even if there was gluten in yeast, you can't get alcohol without yeast. The other cider also used yeast.”

”Nope, there's no yeast in that one.”

Of course, she gets her new cider and pops off, happy as a clam.

1. There is no gluten in yeast. Yeast is a fungus, and you get gluten in some cereal grains. Sometimes supermarkets will sell yeast that has flour in it for bread, and that's got gluten in it. But it ain't in the yeast!

2. You literally cannot get alcohol without yeast, alcohol is a byproduct of yeast. It's possible to filter and distil the used yeast out of the drink, but without turning it from cider into hard liquor, you're not getting it all out. There was dead yeast in both ciders, just because that's how brewing works.

3. The cider she turned down has won awards from the national coeliac organisation. They don't exactly give those awards to anything their members can't enjoy.

How has she survived this long?First of all, a big thank you to everyone who up-voted and commented on my first post in the Stories About Kevin subReddit titled “Kevin Violates Parole”.  I cant begin to tell you how humbled and honored that people have found the tales of an old truck driver interesting.

As requested, I decided to post several of these stories in a series.  I’ve decided to call the series “Kevins in a Big Rig”.  And I hope you all enjoy.  If you haven’t read “Kevin Violates Parole, ill include the link below:  


[https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/nsms5q/kevin\_violates\_parole/](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/nsms5q/kevin_violates_parole/)

And now, for Kevins in a Big Rig Part 2:  First Day, First Kevin.

The first Kevin I encountered when I became a truck driver was, by far, the absolute WORST!!  To say that he was dumb as a box of hammers would be insulting; to the hammers.  Even now, six years later, I can scarcely believe the majority of the things this guy did that ranged from “Really, Dude?” to “Oh my GOD, how can you still be alive being so dumb?!”  The worst part is that I had to share a truck with this guy for early three months; including trying to sleep with him driving an 80,000 lb vehicle without adult supervision. Please keep that in mind as the story progresses.

When I met this Kevin (I’ll refer to him as FK for First Kevin), I had just completed my 6 week training period with my Driver Trainer after I received my CDL.  The standard policy of the company was to pair two drivers who lived relatively close to one another so that both drivers could take home-time at the same time (we typically stayed out on the road for weeks; sometimes months at a time working constantly.  Unfortunately for me, FK was the driver that lived closest to me at the time who had no co-driver at the time.

So I get paired with FK and the first day, I could feel the stupid vibes pouring off of him.  I was born and raised in the Southeastern US and, even to me, calling this guy “White Trash” would be an understatement.  (He bragged about his family being big in the KKK, but he “accepted” his Driver Trainer who was black.)  But being a new hire and bottom-rung of the ladder, I shrugged it off.

The first day FK and I are paired up, we pick up a load going to the LA area.  FK, thinking that because he has a whopping 2 weeks more driving experience than I do, that HE should be the one to take the first shift “because I don’t trust you yet.”  I should explain, this was NOT his personal truck; it was owned by the company and he was NOT a supervisor of any kind.  I didn’t care so I rode shotgun for a bit.

As soon as FK starts driving, I’m immediately grateful for the Driver Trainer I had.  FK reminds me of my time at CDL school when I would be in a truck with four other students and in instructor.  Student truck drivers are notorious for being clumsy behind the wheel, but they tend to “find their groove” while out with a Trainer.  FK, on the other hand, thought the bouncing gear-changes, excessive revving and braking so hard that a simple 4-way stop feels like landing on an aircraft carrier.  I wasn’t very experienced, so I thought nothing about it….for long.

We get fuel at a nearby truck stop and head west.  Once we’re on the interstate I notice FK keeps picking up a spiral-bound notebook, looking at something, then putting it down.  He does this every few minutes for about an hour before I ask what he’s looking at.

FK gets a shit-eating grin on his face and hands it to me.  “It’s the route the company sent us.  You know, since we’re company drivers, we have to follow the company route.”  

“Uh, ok…so why do you keep looking at it?  The next turn-off is at least 200 miles away.”

“Yeah…but I keep forgetting.”  

Note that FK had a perfectly good truck-specific GPS in the truck and the route was programmed in.

“You programmed the GPS, right?” I ask.  “Just follow that.  Its telling you the same thing as your notes.”

He mumbles something about how its SO important that we follow the “Company Route” or we’d get written up and he was gonna do everything right and blah blah blah.  I just let it go.

So we’re still going down the Interstate, FK driving and religiously checking his precious notebook every five minutes.  Its around rush hour and we were in a fairly large populated area.  I start seeing signs of road construction and traffic is beginning to stack up, but FK is still looking at his notebook and NOT SLOWING DOWN.  Traffic is quickly becoming bumper-to-bumper and FK still hasn’t seemed to notice.  It’s then that I see the issue: the the two left lanes are closed due to construction.  FK is driving in the center-left lane of a four-lane section of interstate. The far left lane is all ready closed and the center-left; the lane WE ARE CURRENTLY IN, is about to close in less than a mile.  Fk, still reading his notebook, drives right up to point where the orange barrels mark the start of the lane closure.

“Dude…get over!” I tell him and instinctively check the passenger-side mirror to check for traffic. Its then that I notice the other semi; hauling ass up on our right side.

FK looks up, sees the barrels and, no signal, no mirror check, just merges right.   “WHOA WHOA WHOA!!!” I yell just as the other truck blows past, raring down on the air horn.  I briefly glimpse the other drivers face and he is PISSED!  Not that I blame him.

FK looks sheepish and starts mumbling something about idiot drivers, but at the time I’m still trying to keep from going into full-on heart attack.  I stay up front until we clear the construction zone and then climb back in the bunk to get some rest (emphasis on TRY).  I had to drive the night shift and I knew better than to drive without sleep.  His less-than expert truck handling did not help matters.

A few hours later, I wake up to the sound of air brakes releasing.  I hear FK yelling he’s out of time to drive and I need to take over.  I pull my boots on, sign in as the Active Driver to the trucks electronic log terminal  and settle into the driver’s seat.  Its at that point that I look out through the windshield and see something….odd.

Its dark, of course, but in the headlights I see two white lines converging at an angle just ahead of the truck.  I look to left and the dim reflection of emergency flashers light up cat-eye reflectors an a white dashed center-line between two solid white right-of-way boundary lines.  Its pretty obvious FK, in his lack of wisdom, had stopped the truck right at the merging point of a highway on-ramp AND A MAJOR HIGHWAY!!  

“Where the f\*\*\* are we?!” I demand.

“I dunno. But I ran outta hours and this was the only place I could find.”  That was bullshit because there was rest area 10 miles before that would have been a much better place to stop.

“Dude, do you have any idea how dangerous this is?  Not to mention…ILLEGAL!”

“Well, I had to stop somewhere.  Anyway, I gotta pee.” He goes to get out of the truck.

“No the fuck you don’t.” I say, pulling on the seat belt, releasing the brakes and putting the truck in gear.  “We are NOT staying here a second longer.  If you have to piss, use a Coke bottle.  We’re outta here.”  I get the truck going, thanking God there was no traffic or cops at the time, while FK is grumbling about having to pee in a bottle.  I don’t care because I’m more concerned about NOT causing an accident or getting a ticket because of this idiot.  He can piss in his pants for all I care.  He goes straight to the bunk anyway so I don’t have to listen to him.  I drive the rest of the night without incident and he takes over again early the next morning.

These incidents may not seem too bad, but bear in mind this happened in just the FIRST DAY.  I was with this clown for 3 months and conditions did NOT improve during that time.  

As promised, this will become a series and FK will star in the first few posts.  Stay tuned for more Kevin in a Big Rig stories!  Thanks for reading!A few years ago, I was a Driver Trainer for a large trucking company.  Basically, my job was to take newly-minted truck drivers and teach them how to handle themselves in the real world.  Sometimes, it was easy: other times it was like teaching a fish to play tennis.

One of my students, the Kevin of the story, was so dense he made a lead brick seem like a feather pillow..  Not because of his driving, but because he almost got himself (and me) arrested.  Here’s the story.

Kevin was on my truck for about three weeks. He wasn’t the worst student I had (another Kevin has that honor) but he was far from the best.  At week two, we end up stuck in Salt Lake City, Utah after delivering a load.  It was a slow time of year and SLC had always been a sparse area for outgoing loads, so I expected to have to wait to leave out.  Not a big deal; I needed the downtime.

Kevin, from out of nowhere, started to seem anxious about something.  When I ask him why hes so tense, he tells me he needs to get his license changed to his home state.  He lived in Louisiana, but his license was from Iowa. The company used a loophole in Iowa state law by granting temporary residency to students to get them a license. After the license was issued, they had 30 days to get it switched to their home state.  Not a major issue since management knew the drill and would get us to student’s home state in plenty of time.

“Dude,” Kevin asked, “when can we go to Louisiana?  I need to get my license changed.” he asked this everyday for a week, but it wasn’t until we were stuck in SLC that is really seemed to bug him.

“Look, I’ve told dispatch you need to get home.  They’ll work it out. Just relax.”

He didn’t.

After three days, we finally get to leave SLC bound for Chicago.  It takes a few days and the entire trip, I can tell hes getting more and more nervous.  Eventually, he can’t talk about anything else except how he NEEDS to get home.  He was getting pretty annoying.

We make our delivery in Chicago and get another going to Laredo, Texas.  Normally, we would have gone through Houston, Texas, but this happened during the massive floods and I knew going that way would be a bad idea.  Fortunately, I found a way that would avoid the flooding AND get Kevin to his hometown.  Better still, we would have enough time for him to get a ride to the DMV, get his license changed and still make delivery in plenty of time.  Win-win-win. And Kevin finally seemed relieved.

We get to Kevin’s hometown on a Sunday afternoon.  As he gets ready to leave, I tell him ‘First thing in the morning, get your ass to the DMV, get your license taken care of and get back here pronto so we can get going.”  He says “OK” and leaves with his girlfriend while I enjoy some time to myself.

The next morning, I give Kevin until 10AM before I start getting impatient.  I texted him asking where he was and got no reply.  I text again; again, no answer. I call...no answer. I tell dispatch, who’s asking me when we’ll get moving, that Kevin has disappeared; he was supposed to get his license changed over but I haven’t heard from him all day.  Dispatch tries to call him and they don’t have any better luck.  Apparently, Kevin has disappeared.  By late afternoon, I start getting the feeling this little shit has bailed on me and wasted my time (this was a common occurrence for new drivers).  I tell dispatch that ill give him until the morning to reach out; if he doesn’t, I’ll continue on to Laredo on my own.  There was still plenty of time and dispatch agreed.

Morning came, Kevin was still AWOL and I was out of patience.  I send him one more text telling him I’m leaving without him and head out.  I drive for several hours before taking a mandatory break and check my messages.  To my surprise, Kevin reached out.

“Hey, man.  My PO found out I took a job driving and was pissed that I left Louisiana. She told me to get back as soon as possible or she would have me listed as a fugitive.  I called her yesterday (Monday) but shes out of town and told me to wait till she gets back on Wednesday.”

I’m completely shocked. PO?…as in PAROLE OFFICER?!?!

“Kevin, are you telling me you’re on parole and leaving the state without permission?!”

“Yeah, I was in jail for selling dope.  I got parole for 2 years.  I didn’t think it be a big deal since I was working.”

“Dude, you violated your parole! You’ll be lucky if you don’t end up back in jail.”

“Well, my PO said she wants to talk about it Wednesday.”

“Yeah, I imagine so. You better get in touch with dispatch and let them know so they can work something out.”

I end the conversation and continue on to Laredo.  I deliver the load and pick up another headed to Atlanta, GA. Thursday, I call Kevin to find out what the deal was.  He tells me that his PO gave him the OK to keep working.

“I assume you have some kind of official document that says that.” I tell him.

“Uh…no. She didn’t give me one.”

“Then you better GET one because there is no way in Hell I’m leaving the state with you unless I have something from the state saying its OK.”

“Uh…why?”

“Because, Dumbass, if I carry you across state lines KNOWING you’re violating parole, that makes me an accessory to a felony.  I’m not going to jail for your stupidity.”

“Oh, ok. Ill ask her.”

I tell Kevin when and where to meet me.  I tell him that if disappears again, I’m not coming back to get him.  He says he understands.  I get to the location when I said I would….and he’s nowhere to be seen.  I text…no answer.  By this point, my patience for this clown is completely gone.  I tell dispatch I don’t trust this guy’s word and I’m not taking a chance on him lying to me.  I leave out again and head for Atlanta.  Kevin does reach out…6 hours later and wants to know if ill come back for him.  I tell him that he has lied three times and acted so shady that I cant trust him to do the right thing.  If he wants to finish his training, he can sort something out with management but there’s not a chance in Hell that he wil see me again.

Fast forward a few months.  I found out from dispatch that Kevin’s PO had NOT given him permission to leave the state again.  Apparently, I made the right call by leaving him there.  Fortunately, they weren’t interested in prosecuting me.  I have no idea what happened to Kevin, but I imagine he did something else that was stupid and landed back in prison.  As for me…I took a break from training after the whole debacle.

This Kevin wasn’t the only one I had during my time as a trainer; and he definitely wasn’t the worst. But for dragging me into his parole violation, he is firmly in the top 10.Im German so sorry if i miss spell some words. 
Im Friends with a gut who Fan be cool, but is a Kevin sometimes. I can‘t remember everithing but i will Trainer to List everithing. So First of all. He Gold all of us That there is gonna be an apocalypse with the Monsters from Goosebumps. Becouse That Stock in a Book from That he sead.  Also there is a Giant war there children Need to Figh. There is a Bünde down Building near our house he told me that there are seckret meetings  Fromm the war.he told me that he could immetate every Animal noise, he Thea showed  mehr the sound of an earthworm. At friday the 13th 2020 he was nervos the Wohle day and sead „Dont say Friday the 13th or something Bad is gonna Happen to you“ you can Imagine what i sead the Wohle time. We are still Young so we often play playcatch idk  Howe thats called in english and every time he gets clearly catched but dosent think so, he Gers super pissed and dosent Talk to us for the rest of the day. He thinks that Gold has left us and thats why atheists  Come on to the world. Ok  I think That is it i‘ll update if more happens. Bye.So I have a friend who is actually pretty cool, but can be a bit of a Kevin sometimes. One day we were at a buddy's house fooling around with some airsoft guns, as I had just gotten my first one. Well, I was shooting it off in full auto, just hosing some soda cans, when he comes up, grabs the carry handle, and attempts to rip the still firing airsoft rifle out of my grip! fortunately, I managed to let off the trigger before the barrel was turned towards anybody, and no one was hurt. Shortly after, we were attempting to get Kevin to have an airsoft battle. We didn't have ridiculously overpowered guns, so we told him that if he put a hoodie on he wouldn't really get hurt. Kevin then grabs a pistol, puts it up to his head, and fired it! His logic? "You guys said it wouldn't hurt, so I was testing that theory." Fortunately, it was one of those cheap spring-powered Big 5 pistols, so he wasn't seriously hurt, but still! He is still not allowed to touch any of my airsoft replicas, and I would never trust this guy with an actual weapon. thanks for reading, hope you enjoyed!Ok so long time lurker etc.

So for context, I teach (at a level higher than hearing about this Kevin would suggest) I have taught Kevin now for 2 years.
Some of Kevins academic highlights.


Only answers a third of the questions on an exam, emails to ask if 10% is a passing mark.....

Follows up email to ask about resiting the exam "as I got 10% is that added to my resit mark" (sure it you resit it an extra couple of times you pass by default)

Submitted a paper early (super shocking as Kevin normally applies for extensions for everything)..... Check submission, realise Kevin has once again done half the work required, gently ask did they accidentally submit a draft... Response "no I didn't get what the second bit was so I didn't do it, that won't affect my marks right?" 


Kevin has a habit of ending up in hospital the day before any deadline, not send an email saying "I am sick" I mean litterally ends up in hospital... Last time he fell down the stairs


Kevin often attends sessions online, but obviously just signs into the room and does something else, Kevin normally emails two weeks later asking for help, showing that they haven't been paying attention


Kevin frequently forgets how to upload work to the online portal they have been using for years, unlike most students who attach the work to an email to show it exists, Kevin always sends an email to ask if he can email to work (normally at about 11pm), at first I thought this was just Kevin stalling for time, but Kevin has been sat with his tutor, and proved that he has the work, its just his brain saw a squirrel when it was trying to apply logic ..When I was a kid, my nose used to bleed a lot, for pretty much anything (being slightly hit in the nose while playing, the temperature being a little too hot or too cold, blowing my nose often when sick...).

 One day, during lunch time at school, I mentionned this to my group of friends. And while I was talking, Kevin hit me in the nose. So of course it started to bleed. Kevin got really surprised and said "wow you're right, it bleeds when I hit it". Then I told him not to do that because it hurts, and he was surprised again. He didn't mean to hurt me, just wanted to fact check.Since the stories are fairly short I've included both of the Kevins who graced carpentry class in HS. They aren't dynamic or thrilling stories but I believe they show the simple essence of a Kevin. 


****


**Kevin #1**

Kevin had a lot of issues and was *always* getting into something he shouldn't be or endangering himself in ridiculous ways (he was not, however, developmentally delayed or otherwise impaired). When we were 16/17 we had carpentry class together and I was temporarily assigned to follow him around the wood shop to make sure he didn't break anything. I was explicitly told to tackle him if he approached the table saw with intent.


One day he was given the "safe" assignment of staining a wooden box while I babysat. I watched as he picked up the can of wood stain, brought it right to his eye for a good look, then SLAMMED it onto the table. Unsurprisingly, the stain sprayed right into his eyes and he began to scream. Someone had to haul him to a different building so his eyes could be flushed. He was no longer allowed near wood stain or paint. 


**Kevin #2**

Same carpentry class, this Kevin was about 18 at the time and had no cognitive or developmental delays/disabilities. I had been working on a project for the local film festival and was at the painting stage. But, since I was a fairly competent student, I was pulled away to do more pressing work and Kevin was covering my place. This was an incredibly simple paint job. There were two very large pieces of sanded plywood that had been cut out to look like theater curtains and a nearly life-size audience. Since the shop was low on space they were on sawhorses, stacked on top of each other with a couple cloth covered 2x4s separating them. They were also slightly offset as one was a few inches longer than the other.  


Kevin's job was to paint the curtains which were about a foot and a half wide. There was 2" painters tape dividing the curtains from the audience. I stressed that the audience had already been painted and I didn't want it messed up. Assuming that no one could majorly screw up painting a board I went to work on the other task. My assumption was wrong. 


Kevin let the paint roller cross over the tape *numerous* times and I'm not talking small overage I'm talking 2"-6" paint streaks going past the tape. Additionally, he managed to somehow run the roller off the top board and onto the bottom - painting over a portion of that audience. Again this wasn't a one-time incident, there were clearly several streaks. The first words out of the shop teacher's mouth were "ARE YOU MEDICATED?!". Kevin was not medicated. He was then banished from the shop for awhile. 


***


Again, not the most glorious of Kevin stories but they make me wonder how those two got out of bed every morning without hurting themselves.I didn’t know my FIL was a Kevin until he moved to my city. He is generally normal but once in a while, he asks the most Kevin questions. For example, once he asked why fire trucks aren’t red like in movies. I had to explain that they can come in many colours but, oddly enough, our fire trucks and the trucks in the places he used to live are all red. This week his question got a little heated.

Backstory: My Kevin grew up in a small town in Ontario, Canada in the 50s/60s. His town was a mix of English and French speaking families but he attended an English Catholic school. He started a family in a majority anglophone city a little south of where he grew up. As an adult, Kevin’s job was transferred to a small town in Quebec where barely anyone spoke English. It was there that he had a stroke, which is maybe why Kevin emerged. He has lived in an English-speaking city for a decade and Toronto for 5 years before that.

This week my family and Kevin were watching the hockey game when Kevin went on a tirade about the French language. 

Kevin: “You know, when I lived in Quebec, everyone spoke French. The signs were in French. If you got a ticket, it was in French and the judge would speak French if you tried to fight it.”

Me: “The courts would probably have a translator like we do here for French people so they can have government services in both languages.”

Kevin: “Translators? In Ontario, everything is already in French. The store clerks have to speak French if you ask them, packages have to have French, the street signs are in French... even the yield and stop signs are in French.”

Me: “Wait. The signs here are only English and I’m sure most store clerks only know French as well as us.”

Kevin: “What!? There is a stop sign across the street from my house and it says S-T-O-P.”

Me: “That’s English.”

Kevin: “What?! What about yield signs?”

Me: “Those are triangles. Man, the Leafs suck.”Here's my series of tales about the Kevin I know. A lot of his problems aren't his fault really. He come from a family of money, so the great grandparents wanted this generation to be raised to respect the things they had. They did this by raising them in almost complete isolation from the world then dump them in my country without any idea how the world actually worked. Went about as well as you'd think.

So onto Kevin. He's a nice guy, terrible fashion sense has been trying to grow an afro for years (he is painfully white) and always has a gold chain around his neck.

I should start at my first meeting with Kevin. I entered their house and heard a BANG like someone had rung a gong, in the kitchen I found Kevin and his blind cousin on one side of the kitchen island and two other cousins on the other. They were throwing utensils at each other in all out war. The bang had been a metal oven dish which one of them had used as a projectile. The reason for this war? Kevin had heard that warm milk went well with cornflakes, so was going to try and shove a metal frying pan with mouldy milk and cornflakes into the microwave. One of the other two called him stupid and the fight began.
I have no idea where he got the milk, much less why it was off. All of them are lactose intolerant.
Edit 1

Kevin went ice walking. I got a call from Kevin’s saner cousin (who is blind and done with this crap) on Kevin’s phone. He’d had Kevin call me and he all but begged me to come over to where they were hanging out with a bunch of Kevin’s sketchy druggy friends. It was a very cold winter that year and the canal had frozen. These genious’ had decided that the canal was solid enough to walk across. They had gotten a bunch of house bricks (which I do not know where they got them from, nor do I wish to know) and they’d been chucking them onto the ice for several minutes to test the thickness. Each time it made an eerie metallic almost bang, then slid several feet. Kevin determined the ice safe. He is not a big guy, upper end of 4 foot so he doesn’t weigh that much. Apparently the reason for this was that some months ago he’d been playing catch with his friends and the ball had ended up on the other side of the canal, so now he was going to stroll on over there and get it back. Along with anything else he found he liked. And so, as he stepped onto the ice, me and his cousin where the only ones saying it was a bad idea.

He went through about three steps out.
Luckily, he was able to grab his cousins arm. His friends legged it and just abandoned us. He had dirty canal water almost up to his nipples. He quickly remembered he had had his phone in his but pocket and that had drowned (that’d be the first iPhone he killed) his cousin didn’t have a phone and I’d left mine at home. I offered to give them money for the bus, but they declined and started walking home. They lived well over 6 miles away from me so where (hopefully) heading to their closest relatives house.
Couple hours later I got a call from one of the cousins, letting me know that they were okay. He didn’t get hypothermia; he didn’t get frostbite. But he did learn his lesson. Waddling about 5 miles with frozen trousers would do that to you.
He really does have bad luck with water, though. 
I'll edit when I get more time of his various misadventuresAs I type this up, Kevin is hiding in his room because we were "mean to him" after his actions this weekend. And all we did was tell him to go to one room and stay there so he wouldn't ruin anything else. 

Kevin is 20. No, this will not make sense when you read the full account of this weekends events, but believe me that this guy is 20. 

Me (29M), my brother (40M) and his son Kevin  (my nephew, 20M) were all going to visit my/my brothers  parents over the long weekend. 

On Friday morning, Kevin kicked the weekend of insanity off by pissing himself on the drive to our parents/his grandparents house. His explanation was that "he just really needed it and they don't have bathrooms in this country". Iowa has bathrooms and it is not a different country. (We were driving Chicago to western Nebraska). 

Upon arriving in our tiny Nebraska hometown, one change of pants later, Kevin decided it would be "funny" to call the town sheriff a "bumpkin" when he came to say hi to my brother and I. 

We also made the mistake of going to visit the little corner grocery store (we visit at least once a year so we still know everyone in town) to say hi, and leaving Kevin alone to walk around town. He immediately tried to scale the town water tower. He got about 20 feet up before starting to cry. He yelled out for the sheriff, and probably regretted referring to him as a "bumpkin" an hour earlier. 

Next, we paid a visit to church and kept Kevin within our view at all times. He still managed to steal a Bible from the church. We made him return it. 

As we settled in at home that evening for dinner, Kevin repeatedly mocked his grandparents for being "rural folks" and spoke in a dramatic southern accent to mock them. We are nowhere near the south in Nebraska. 

Kevin put a baseball in the cavity of a roast chicken. No further explanation needed. 

He repeatedly joked at the family dinner on Friday night about putting a boot into a woman's anus. As you can imagine his christian rural grandparents didn't find this funny. 

Next up was Saturday. He made it clear that he was dumber than a bag of hammers. With a literal BOX of hammers. He went into the toolshed at six AM before any of us were up, and dropped a box of hammers on his toe. We were soon up, and my dad fell down and broke his hand scrambling out of the house when he heard Kevin shrieking. 

With two broken bones in the family, we tried to salvage Saturday. Kevin immediately ruined it, by playing lil Nas x songs (yes the Satan one) in front of grandma and grandpa on the family tv. 

Sunday morning, he farted REALLY loudly during a quiet moment in church, then said "Satan is in my ass" in earshot of an entire town. 

He also stole another bible. We made him give it back along with the first one. 

Sunday afternoon he walked up to the police station holding a grape soda and eating a watermelon. Thinking his racist caricature to be funny, he yelled to the sheriff, "aren't ya gonna kneel on my neck? Look! I'm a N[I'm sure you can fill this part in]." 

Not to be outdone by his racism was his sexism. On Monday morning, he let us all know that "female soldiers aren't real, they're just there for 'relief' for male soldiers." Yeah. 

To cap off this amazing weekend, Kevin spent Monday afternoon pissing my parents garden. He said there was nowhere else to go. There are two bathrooms in the house. 

Christ, I think my brother may not be a great parent.This might not fit here but out of all the forums this one made the most sense. Backstory: (this is about my mom by the way) my mom was never good at brushing her teeth and has lots of cavities, so many cavities that she had to get some fake teeth put in, so my mom went to the dentist to get it sorted. But about a weak later she says her teeth hurt so she returns to the dentist to see what happened, the dentist's assistant never finished the operation, I know this cause I think the dentist asked her or the colleagues were talking about it, and she replied with "I didn't know I had to do that". My mom, my sister and I thought she was getting fired for sure, but it gets worse, SHE WASN'T FIRED. She is still working at the dentistry and I'm surprised that she still works there.I knew this Kevin throughout primary school and haven’t heard of him since but the incidents I shall talk about are ones that are kinda funny:

1: at some point he argued with the teacher about bonjour being Maltese for hello because his grandmother told him, he kept denying the fact that it was fuckin French until his grandmother personally came over and spoke the truth, I think he cried like a bitch.

2: this might have been a year later but I can only remember the same teacher (or at least someone close to her) being involved. Some bullshit was going down and after the first punishment or something, I fuck you not he tried to sketch a childish license to do whatever he wants, the answer to that is far over obvious.

I can’t think of an outro for this

Edit: I wonder if that little shit is on here, if so, it’d be pointless to stop me, I am a god nowIdk if this belongs here.

An man was walking on the sidewalk while my dogs where running on a field with no leash.It is really annoying when you have to chase them after they run off.
So my mom ran to get them little did she know that this man wad a kevin 
Kevin:I'M GONNA KICK YOUR DOGS!(He kicked the fucking pug)(My dogs are all bark no bite I have 2)
My mom:(calling the dogs over)
Kevin:I KEEP MY DOGS ON A LEASH LADY
My mom:started cursing in polish(we immagrated from poland)
Kevin:LADY THIS IS AMERICA SPEAK ENGLISH
My mom:(She ran back to the field)
Kevin:(walked off)This just happened a few hours ago. This coworker (not Kevin 1 or 2 who I also work with and have posted about) is a night/closing driver I've worked with for a few months now. He's a really nice guy and a genuinely hard worker but...he just makes really dumb decisions and mistakes. When he was first hired, these instances were much more frequent, to the point that almost every night my manager considered sending him home. 

However, over the past 2 months, he's been doing really well, has only been making the occasional small, understandable mistake, and been becoming much more social. (Which is great cuz, like I said, he's really nice but very quiet and a bit flat when speaking but tells surprisingly funny jokes.)

Last night, though, he made so many big, back to back mistakes that my manager was literally banging his head against the counter and threatening to send him home like those first few weeks.

So Kevin was out on a 4 stop delivery because we only had him and myself as a flex (someone who makes pizzas and can drive) along with our manager. We try not to send me out until all drivers are out on long delivery times or only one driver is left, in case huge orders come in that need to be made and my manager is busy managing.

Eventually, some time after Kevin left, a single delivery came through and I left to deliver it. I came back to the store, waiting for my next delivery and talking with my manager when I saw Kevin slink in quietly, grab a soda and dash out the door again. I completely understood because sometimes you don't read the receipt correctly before delivering and need to come back for something. Here's where the confusion started to set in. 

My manager gave me a weird look because he hadn't seen who'd come in, only the door opening and closing. I explained it was just Kevin who must have forgotten a soda. Whenever there's an order error, my manager pulls up all orders to pinpoint which it was and make sure it was corrected. He noticed the address and smacked his forehead with his hand because the house had been far away from our store but right across the street from an open gas station! Sometimes, employees will get the missing drink from the gas station and tell the manager later to be compensated. It saves on delivery time. I agreed that that was a bit silly but thought it was fine because he'd most likely already delivered all of his other orders (over 60 minutes had passed and each delivery takes about 15 minutes), right? Wrong.

Right after we finish checking the order, the phone rings. It's customer #4 on the stop list, wondering where their order is. I apologize and explain about the short staffing on a Friday, reassuring he's on his way. I tell my boss and he starts yelling about what could be taking Kevin so long. 

Then, the phone rings AGAIN. It's customer #2 on the list!! They say that THEY hadn't gotten their order yet either!! My manager and I are standing around scratching our heads at what Kevin could possibly be doing for over an hour with 3 of his deliveries (if you count the missing drink) not finished! I even commented to my manager that Kevin could have asked me to take one or two of his remaining deliveries since he saw me standing there waiting for my single order to be completed when he grabbed the drink.

THEN the phone rings AGAIN!! It's customer #1 with the missing soda!! They say they'd like to cancel their order all together. My manager apologizes, pulls up his order in the system and asks why. He says that Kevin rang the doorbell, even though the delivery instructions said to call because his wife was sleeping for work. Then, as Kevin was about to hand him his food, Customer #1 asks where his drink is. Kevin then BRINGS THE FOOD BACK TO THE CAR WITH HIM TO CHECK and returns WITHOUT THE FOOD saying he can go back to the store but that it might take a while. (Which, again, he could have just stopped at a nearby gas station instead of wasting a 15 min drive here and a 15 min drive back!)

I'm not sure what the fallout was, since I had to leave to complete that delivery I'd been waiting for, but my manager was banging his head against the counter when I left, threatening to fire him and, when I returned, everyone was quiet while they cleaned for closing.

I really do like Kevin as a person but, sometimes, I wonder how he's made it this far.

Edit: Unsuprisingly, nothing in the way of reprimand happened. I asked my manager what ended up happening when I left and he just said he "talked to him." I also haven't had a chance yet to ask Kevin where exactly he was and what he was doing for over an hour. Everything is back to normal and we actually called him in because we were short on drivers tonight (the day after this was posted.) Even if my manager had actually wanted to fire him, we're so short staffed right now that firing anyone is impossible. But mess ups this have become rare for Kevin so I didn't actually think he'd get in real trouble.

He was in good spirits tonight, excitedly telling me he got a new car, so the talk doesn't seem to have been particularly harsh. He was even thanked by everyone for having come in on an off day to help us :)So this is going to be complicated with the amount of Kevin & Kevina's in this story so with the exception of the Dog, Sheriff's Deputy & me (who barely is involved I just saw this all from the side lines), but pretty much Everyone with dialogue is a Kevin in one way or another.

The Cast

Co-Worker Kevina - CWK

Dog Owner Kevina - DOK

Traveler Kevins - TK

Sheriff's Deputy who was not paid enough to deal with this - Deputy Dewey

Person who is confused as all hell - Me

The Poor Dog in the Middle of this - Tyson

So several years ago I used to work in a Colonial Fort that was in the Middle of a State Park in New York State as a Tour guide/as a snack shack employee. On this day as I come in I walk into the main visitor's center which is like a hundred yards from the Fort itself. I come in and there is a beautiful Husky Dog walking around the gift shop.

Me - Woah cool dog. Whose is it?

CWK - Oh we just saw him wandering around the parking lot and didn't want him to get hit by a car so we brought him in. He doesn't have any tags so we're going to call the SPCA to see if they can pick him up.

That seems reasonable enough, I pick up my tour group give them their tour, go back see Tyson is still there and think still nothing of it. I then change into the snack shack uniform and go to do my shift there for a few more hours till closing time. Our time clock was in the visitor's center so I had to go back in it to punch out at the end of the day, when I come in I see CWK & DOK yelling at each other with several co-workers and Deputy Dewey in between the two trying to calm everything down. 

DOK - ARREST ALL OF THESE DOG NAPPERS. THEY TOOK MY POOR TYSON.

CWK - ALL I DID WAS GIVE HIM A MUCH BETTER HOME THAN YOU DID.

Deputy Dewey - Please Ladies remain calm. Let's figure this all out, ok?

So what unfolds is basically this. The SPCA refused to come to pick up Tyson and animal control wouldn't arrive until after we closed. My co-workers including CWK were trying to figure out what to do with Tyson. They knew it belonged to someone because it was in very good health and wore an expensive collar (no tags though). They figured he just got out of his yard and wandered into the park.

One of them volunteered to take him home for the night figuring they could drive around town the next day looking for the owner & if all else failed take him to a shelter. Well CWK had a much dumber idea.

While the few other co-workers were busy with other stuff, TK was leaving and noticed Tyson and asked CWK about him.

CWK - Oh he must be a stray or something, we don't know what to do with him.

Remember they had decided one of them was going to take it with them.

TK - Well that's too bad. We can take him back home with us. The camper has plenty of room for the pup. 

CWK - Great! I'll be glad to let you have him! Hope you enjoy your new dog!

Before my co-workers knew it, CWK just gave this dog to people who weren't from the area! Also these TK were like "Man someone must have lost a dog, cool it's ours now"! No following up with a shelter, just a new dog.

Shortly after Tyson's owner show's up. Apparently she goes to the park often and just lets him wander around with Tags and no leash for hours at a time as she wasn't at all concerned when she came in eight hours after we found him. After finding out what CWK did she called the cops and that's about where I came in. Now back to the program!

DOK - SHE NEEDS TO BE ARRESTED FOR GIVING MY DOG AWAY. NOW. 

Deputy Dewey - Ma'am this is a civil matter not a criminal one I can write her an appearance ticket, but if I do that, I'll have to write you a ticket for violating the leash law for the County. 

Side note I have no idea if the first part was true or he was just trying to shut her up. Maybe he was a Kevin too...

So anyways she angrily leaves and the next day we start seeing flyers around town with the dog's picture on it and a facebook group name. The group was basically was her and her friends shitting on CWK (deservedly) and the rest of us (not so much) and her plans to sue the Fort. Finally there was an update that the Dog was found, in Kentucky of all places. TK's were from Kentucky and drove immediately back from New York, knowing this dog belonged to someone in the area. For you non Americans (or Americans who don't know geography) Kentucky is pretty far drive away. Like over five hundred miles (or 800 KM to you freedom hating metric users). Luckily they did keep an eye on message boards I guess or something & reached out. 

So DOK had to fly to Kentucky, due to them being retire's or something, that spend more of their time on the road than not to get there before they drove else where, then rent a car for two days to drive back home. The last post was again about suing all of us, which didn't happen to the Fort or me at least. CWK was fired for causing all of these headaches for the Fort (about a month's worth of angry phone calls and bad press in a small town) so I don't know if DOK was able to sue her personally or not.

So in the end we have several Kevin's 

1. DOK who just allows her dog with no tags to run around loose for an entire day in a state park, which is a crime
2. CWK For just giving dog's away without getting any contact info just in case
3. TK for stealing a dog and going a several day drive away with it.

I just hope wherever Tyson is, he know's he's for sure smarter than these humans!This happened earlier tonight. A guy walks in to pay for his pizza and I tell him his total. He hands me his card...with the activation sticker still on it. I think 'Oh, no worries. It's probably new,' and go to insert the chip. That's when I notice that the chip is partially covered by the activation sticker. I consider trying to swipe it but, since there's a chip, our reader would just tell me to insert the chip.

I start gently peeling at the corner when I think to ask if it's okay. After all, maybe this guy handed me an inactivated card by mistake and throwing away that sticker could be bad.

Me: "Did you want me to leave the sticker on?"

K: "Oh, yeah, I like it on to make it look like new."

Me: "Oh, okay."

Pause.

K: "Don't you have touchless?"

Me: "Oh! Yes, we do! But since you hadn't said anything, I'd assumed you wanted to use the chip."

I wave it over the machine, it beeps in affirmation, and I offhandedly remark, "I guess it would have been hard to use the chip with it half covered like that."

I gave it back to him, he looked quizzically at the card and said, "Do you think that's why it doesn't work?"Short and sweet story that happened not too long ago, so here we go. I drive a manual shift car, which means that it doesn't have park. Well Kevin wanted to learn how to drive manual, so I was teaching him how to drive manual shift today. So everything is going well enough, as anyone who had learned how to drive manual, it's tough getting out of first gear intiallly. Yet Kevin picked up on it realitively quickly, and so then came time to actually park the car. 

So Kevin then looks at me and asks how do you shift it into park. I thought he meant gear parking it, like leaving it in either first gear or reverse to keep it from rolling forwards or backwards. Personally I don't like to do this, and just use the emergency break as I keep my breaks well maintained. So I explain to him that manual shift cars don't have a park gear like automatic cars do. 

Well Kevin didn't seem to grasp this concept, and tried to argue that all cars have a park shift, not sure if that's what you call it. So instead he told me to stop messing with him and tell him where it was. I simply kept trying to explain that there is no such thing in my car, and all you do is pull the emergency break. Well Kevin got madder and madder, until he finally jerked the emergency break up as hard as he could. Got out of my car and got into his and left. Haven't hear from Kevin since, not sure if I will though, although I dread the thought of Kevin doing this again to someone else.I’ve written about [Kevins](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/lhu86m/business_travel_with_kevianna/) and [kevinas](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/cpwp2r/kevina_the_corporate_assistant/) before. Those were the ones that had made the cut into employment. These are four stories of those that did not make the cut over the past few years.

**Summer vibes**

During the summer one Kevin came into the interview for an intern position dressed like he was going to the beach; and he was. He did not want to change; so he figured it would be ok; it was only an intern position right, no need to be formal? He was wearing flip-flops (with bare feet, but maybe white socks would have been even worse), shorts and what looked like a Hawaiian shirt. He sure left an impression; but not the right one.

**Need for Speed**

One Kevin  was late for his job interview, it can happen. We aren’t going to difficult if you have a valid reason and keep us informed. When we called the person in question after about 30 minutes of waiting we found out he had already arrived out our office. He told us he was sorry and making a point that he had been driving far over the limits, mentioning 160-180km/h an hour on the highway to make up for lost time and almost had an accident as well. He seemed proud of that as well.

My boss told him there and then he was not going to bother with the interview as driving 2x to 3x the speed limit is not a quality we are looking for. (All roads towards our office are between 30km/h for residential and 100km/h for highways.)

**Fake it till you make it**

We had an interview with someone from India. A young Kevina who had a decent resume and background for a starter position at the company. The first round of interview would be over webcam to not have her fly out for just one introduction interview. But right after the small talk introductions the conversation became weird with audio cutting out for a few seconds every time we asked a technical question. The answers she then gave were technically ok-ish; but she did not seem to understand what she said herself.

After a few minutes of this awkwardness it became clear why; they forgot to disable the sound and we could hear another person telling her the answer. Turns out just out of frame was sitting someone giving her all the answers which she just repeated verbatim. They tried to talk themselves out of it; telling us it was because of her anxiety to work for an company abroad.; but it was clear she was just trying to pass the interview to get a job without any actual skills. (I later learned this tactic was used at a lot of IT companies).

I understand the “Fake it till you make it” mentality, everyone has their moments when the need to do it. But you still need to back it up with at least basic knowledge, experience and some grit.

**Do you speak English**

We had an open interview with a candidate for a position in the companies intern/job experience program. It is a program where we work a third party to help dropouts and young adults with troubled backgrounds to get job experience and education.

This interview is just to get to know someone and go from there. This is communicated to each and every applicant (through standard letter explaining all the steps etc). For some reason this person had “prepared” for this interview in English, and despite everyone in the conversation being Dutch, he demanded the interview to be in English. Well, ok, nerves I guess? if you want that, fine by us.

As we continued the interview in English it was clear he was not very fluent at all, ending up with a blend of Dutch and English. It quickly became hard to follow as his English pronunciation was very unique to say. When we pointed it out to him and suggested we continue in Dutch, he became angry and insulted. We had ruined his interview by suggesting English in the first place. Needless to say the interview was over quickly.Two stories of Kevins on the elevators:

1: To understand this, I need to give a bit of backdrop. Three buildings are connected via skywalks to a parking garage roughly in the center, like a malformed spider. The skywalks connect to the garage on the third floor of the garage. It's obvious (to anyone who could drive) that the garage is just parking. 

I step through door from skywalk to the garage right where the elevator within the garage is, and it opens just as I'm headed up the stairs. A Kevin steps off the elevator with her companion who has a walker, looks around, and asks me "How do we get to the third floor?" I said, "well you take the elevator, but you ARE on the third floor. Or did you want to get to one of the buildings? Then you need to take the walkway to the building. This is the parking garage" Kevin says "Oh yes we need the A-B-C Building". I say "Yes, its connected by the skywalk, you need to take the skywalk." Kevin hesitantly walks to the door, opens it with her companion shuffling behind her. "Which way do I go" I said "follow the signs that are right in the doorway to lead you to A-B-C Building". I think she wanted me to take them there myself, but no, I was LEAVING. As I went up the stairs, I hear them talking about needing to take the elevator to the third floor. Elevator dings as the button is pushed (did she pick up or down? who knows)

2: I hit down button on elevator. Door opens, Kevin steps out. I get on, go to hit my button, and notice the button for ground floor is pushed. I stop door from closing and see Kevin start to aimlessly wander  about the small foyer that makes up the floor I came from. I ask him "Did you need ground floor? Because you're not there yet." He gets back on. Next floor down (STILL not ground floor) door opens again, there goes Kevin again. I call to him again "Still not ground floor" He gets on again. I got off on 2, so did Kevin. I directed him back again to the elevator.My fiancée and I were planning a week-ish long vacation and we needed someone to watch our dog. We asked our buddy Kevin because our dog really likes him and she’s not inclined to like many other people.

Our dog is a 6lb chihuahua who likes to sleep under blankets on the couch, so aside from feeding her and taking her out, she’s not particularly high-maintenance. My fiancée gave him the rundown, and he expressed concerns about our dog’s level of house training because he seems to be under the impression that small dogs are impossible to house break. We assured him that she was, she knows to go outside and will do so as long as he lets her out.

The day after we dropped our dog off, we got a text message from Kevin informing us that our dog was in fact NOT housebroken because she had peed on his carpet while he was at work. We asked when the last time he let her out was, and he replied that he hadn’t let her out since we dropped her off the day before.

Fiancée got annoyed and told Kevin that yes, she IS housebroken, but she has to be given the opportunity to do her business outside. She cannot open the door herself, so someone has to let her out. If she’s not let out, then she’ll relieve herself when she physically cannot hold it anymore. Kevin replied that housebroken means housebroken and she shouldn’t be relieving herself indoors under any circumstances whatsoever. For the rest of the week we got at least one text a day informing us of how our dog soiled his carpet yet again. My fiancée told him the same thing each time: Take her outside. His response was some variation of the same stupid logic he had spewed before.

When we arrived at Kevin’s house to pick up our dog, the second we walked through the door he shoved some cleaning spray and a scrub brush into my fiancées hands. He said “YOUR untrained dog made this mess so YOU clean it up.” Kevin had apparently spent the whole week covering up our dog’s messes with a paper towel, expecting us to clean it up when we returned. 

My fiancée was livid. She threw the spray and brush at him, yelled back “YOU didn’t let my dog out for a week, YOU clean it up!” She picked up our dog and stormed to the car. I stuck around just long enough to gather the dog supplies we left for him. We’ve hardly spoken to him since and he certainly won’t be watching our dog again.

TL;DR: Kevin thinks that “housebroken” means “the dog doesn’t pee inside no matter what.” Doesn’t let our dog out for a week then expects fiancée to clean up the various messes as “punishment” for her “poor training.”

Edit: not that anyone has been asking for it but here’s some [pet tax](https://imgur.com/a/SQDnTnm) anywayI love the Stories About Kevin sub, but have never had anything post-worthy until now. Hopefully, this post fits appropriately. 

The story begins with my regular afternoon stroll with my lovely fur-son Hachi. Hachi is a 6 year-old male Shiba Inu. For those who are unfamiliar with the breed, you have to socialize them pretty young because they're naturally anti-social. Unfortunately, Hachi was given to me: a sick, bedridden kid with no friends; because of that I couldn't socialize him as much as he probably needed (he also had a few bad experiences- but that's whole another post). Don't get me wrong, Hachi is the sweetest boy and my best friend, but strangers scare him. Hachi struggles to make both human and doggy friends. Tbh something I can relate to as I'm pretty anti-social and non-confrontational myself, which made this walk extra anxiety inducing. 

After doing my laps around the neighborhood and just generally avoiding any passerbyers (COVID, anti-social, anxious puppy), I'm almost back to my apartment building. I'm halfway across the street, nearly homestretch when introduce Kevin. Kevin is walking his dog over on the sidewalk where I'm attempting to cross. His dog is significantly larger than mine and while the dog looks nice, I'm still nervous. And then it happens, I barely have a chance to make eye contact with this man before, without a word, he drops his leash! His dog comes barrelling over towards Hachi and me. Defensively, I move Hachi between me and the dog. With a big smile on his face the man yells out "she wants to play!". 

I'm not sure what this man was expecting, but I don't let my dog play off-leash, with an unknown dog, in the middle of the street in a big city. I was nearly shitting myself because I didn't want to have to break up a dog fight.

\-As an aside, many dogs do not do well on leash for a number of reasons: 1. Leashes limit the room they have to communicate "yes I want to play" OR "no I do not want to play" 2. The dog does not have the option to back away or escape if it's a situation they're uncomfortable with 

Even though I was scared out of my mind, I still tried to be polite and half stammered, "Hachi isn't good with other dogs..."

The man made a confused face before calling out, "It's ok! She's friendly!" Oh? Oh really? She's friendly? Well, in that case I'll let my dog free to frolic in a busy city street and probably get in a dog fight.

This part I'm kind of proud of because I've been working on using my voice and standing up for myself. Admittedly, it was a bit pathetic but, I was able to muster raised tones as I said, "You need to get your dog! Please!" The man scowled before half recalling his dog. I took this as my opportunity to swiftly grab Hachi and speed walk back to my apartment. 

I guess, somehow, I offended him because the entire way back he was yelling at me about how I was a bad dog owner. Stuff like "I FEEL BAD FOR YOUR DOG! NOT LETTING HIM PLAY! SHE JUST WANTS TO PLAY! POOR DOG!"

Let's be honest though, if he lets his dog free and my dog bites his dog, who's he gonna blame? 

I haven't been that angry in a long while. Hachi got lots of treats and belly rubs and completely forgot about the incident.This just happened tonight. I was working inside, making pizzas and taking orders, when my manager turns to me looking utterly confused. I ask what's up and he says he thinks the next order is going to be a prank call we won't make money on. I ask why he's so sure and he says there's four reasons.

1) The order is for a delivery to the restaurant less than 500ft away from our store. (No joke, we walk over there sometimes to get food and come back before needing to clock out fir a 15 min break.) This means they'll have to pay an extra $5 instead of walking/driving/having someone else drive to get it.

2) They ordered the classic Kevin order: 2 pizzas, both half cheese, half pepperoni instead of just ordering 1 full cheese, 1 full pepperoni.

3) They ordered one large pizza and one medium pizza. That means they can't even get a 2 mediums or 2 larges deal (which the restaurant definitely knows about.)

4) Some ex employees of that restaurant work for us now and their friends may be trying to play a good natured prank on us.

We waited to hear back from the driver and, to all of our suprise, IT WAS REAL!! No prank, no problem paying! The Kevin just signed and took it.

People confuse me.Now I’ve known this Kevin for a big part of my life. She means well, but sometimes can be a bit... stupid. No one knows *how* Kevin does well in school, but she somehow manages it.
Here are a few stories from her life:

1. “Yes, I know that plastic melts from heat, do you think I’m dumb?” This one time Kevins mum bought a cast iron pan. Kevin was very excited to use it as she quite liked cooking. For those of you that don’t know, you have to prepare a new cast iron pan. One of the steps is cooking salt in it. (EDIT: no it isn’t. u/Icmedia corrected me: “I'm sorry to be the one to break it to you, but... "Seasoning a cast iron pan" doesn't literally mean you use a seasoning. The proper method is to spread a thin layer of shortening or oil on the pan, then bake it on to create a nonporous surface. Cooking salt in the pan would do nothing. Salt is used to scrub rust from a cast iron pan, but nothing else.” thank you!!) A lot of salt. Now Kevin managed to cook the salt without a fire, but afterwards was posed with a question: what do you do with the salt? Of course, the logical thing to do was throw it out. So Kevin took out the trash can and poured the salt in. The hot salt. Into a plastic trash can. With a plastic trash bag. She thought nothing of it and continued with the fan. Only after smelling the burnt trash did she realise that *oh shit, plastic melts with heat*. This is a person who had done perfectly multiple chemistry experiments involving fire. 
2. The adventure of cast iron pan continues: “Wood won’t *burn*”. You also have to cook the pan in the oven. Now this pan came with a detachable wooden handle. What Kevin did was just put the whole pan - handle and all - into an oven to cook. Somehow it did not occur to her that the wood might just burn. She had seen many barbecues being made and knew perfectly well that wood + heat = burning. Thank God Kevins mum came home in time and took the wooden handle off.
3. “I did what you told me to! Why are you mad?”. Kevin is a fan of taking directions literally. One time she and her friend bought fries and Kevin was carrying the bag with 2 portions of fries and her friends ketchup sauce. Somehow, the ketchup fell out. No biggie, it didn’t break and was still usable. Kevins friend told her to put it back. So Kevin took the ketchup and dropped it back on the ground. This time, the ketchup did break and was no longer usable. Kevins friend just stared and her in disbelief while Kevin was just standing there not knowing what wrong she had done. Kevin had done what she was told to do - put it back. Did it occur to her that the friend might want to use the ketchup? We will never know. 

So, these are just a few stories from this Kevins life. God knows what she will do in the future, but we can only hope that there will be someone to stop her.

I am thankful for my family and friends for putting with my idiotic adventures and general misunderstandings. I can just hope that there will always be someone to stop me from causing a fire or being an idiot.So I was discussing the show Rebel with Kevina on the phone. I told her that after it finishes airing on ABC, I heard it's going to be released on Disney+ via Star. She asks "how is that gonna work with only one season? Are they gonna play through the season over and over again or just once?" as if it is being re-run on a cable channel. I explain how streaming works and how you watch it at will, like owning it on DVD. Kevina was amazed and said she didn't know how streaming works because she only uses TV and Netflix. I was like yeah, that's how Netflix works. "Oh I didn't know, I just turn on Netflix and click on what I want to watch". I'm like "yes, you click what you want to watch, you don't wait for it to air at certain times". She is astounded. She knew this but somehow it never clicked. and at some point she was also like "oh, so that's what streaming service means".

I can understand how my grandmother hasn't caught on to shows being on whenever you choose to watch. she has never used streaming services. It is a bit frustrating that I've explained it to my grandmother multiple times and she hasn't caught on, but hey I also tell her about my shows that are on specific times so you can see how she would get mixed up. But this Kevina I just spoke to has been using Netflix for years and didn't get that streaming shows are played at will and not played at specific times. How? I want to know how?Sorry for my english

My fathers friend has a Kevin and Kevina as her children. They were like 15 and 11 when I saw them for the last time, so exactly when the story takes place. They were pretty "not so clever" while living in Poland, but after moving out to England it got worse.

Kevina was asked to wait 20 minutes and then take the bacon out of the oven. Bacon stayed there for over 1.5 hour because "20 minutes is more than an hour".   I don't have the slightest idea of ​​how she deduced something so nonsensical, and it terrifies me that she passes from class to class with no problem. Let me remind you, Kevina was 15 at the time. 

 While we were on a trip to the beach, Kevinas mom pointed to ornate cannon and said to me "Hey, watch this!".

"Kevina, what is that thing called?" - she pointed at te cannon.

"Um....A pyramid?" - Kevina replied.

 I was so surprised I couldn't speak. I didn't correct her because I thought it was just a joke, but soon I realized that Kevina wasn't joking at all. After the beach trip, we went for some ice cream. Kevina took vanilla - the most basic flavor that exist and I believe there is no single person living in civilized society who doesn't know how vanilla tastes. She started to complain immediately because she had no idea it will taste like this.

Kevina was basically acting like she was 5 or less. She had been often fighting with her mother and every time she raised her voice at her just a little, Kevina was stooned for a minute or two, and then she was starting to yeall and cry exactly where she was standing or sitting. It was lound "MAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA" while running completly in tears. Let me remind you one more time...She was 15!

When my father gave me some pocket money to spend on whatever I would need while he was away with Kevinas parents, Kevina was really surprised that I got the money...but she hadn't!  She jumped up from her chair and ran to her mom before leaving to alert her that my dad had given me money.  It was just like she expected that she should get pocket money from him, too. 

We were all so annyoed by Kevina all the time, that one time when we meet in the living room in the morning - Kevina was still sleeping -  her mom suggested we should go on a trip for the day, but leaving Kevina at home. Otherwise the trip would turn into a nightmare. 

 Every time Kevina called her mom to ask when we would be back from the store - apparently she thought we went for the groceries - her mom was replying that we will be back in just a moment. Kevina believed it every single time.  She didn't realized she heard the same thing at least ten times in many hours and we still hadn't come back. 

Because of the terrible heat of that summer, there were many accidents on the roads and we had to find detours. It made us come home around midnight.  Kevina was sitting on the couch and calmly asked if we had bought jam. We didn't even had any shopping bags. She literally didn't figured out what happened that day.One of the first conversations we had I mentioned something about an “overdue fee” (like for returning late library books, etc.) and he looked at me completely blankly. 
Later on he asked me what an “overdoofy” was. 

Another time he was my date to a mutual friend’s wedding. We were invited to come early for cocktails, which he refused to drink because he wouldn’t drink anything with the word ‘cock’ in it (“miss me with that gay shit”). Anyway he comes to my house to pick me up, and both of his ears are bleeding profusely. 

I’m like dude, why are your ears bleeding. 
And he just puts his hand up to his ear and with the most defeated expression, goes “aww man...again?”
So I take him inside to get cleaned up, so he doesn’t bleed all over his tux. 
At this point I’m a little concerned because blood randomly spurting from your ears seems like a significant medical issue he seems pretty unconcerned by. 
After I clean the blood off he goes to fix his hair with this pointy-ass comb, misses his part, and stabs himself in the ear, which promptly starts bleeding again. 
And I go...”um Kevin, do you think maybe your ears are bleeding because you keep accidentally impaling yourself with a sharp metal object?” (a question I never thought I’d have to ask an adult man). 
Turns out I solved a mystery that day. 

Anyway I have way more  so if you like this lmk and i’ll do a part 2To change things up a bit, I thought I'd post an especially Kevina moment I had when I was about 19.

My family had just moved into a new house on a very quiet suburban street with not much street traffic. As I pulled my car up to the curb out front, I somehow got it in my head that "it wouldn't be safe to exit out of the driver's side door and walk around into the house." Oh no, my brain geniusly thought that I should crawl into the passenger seat, open the door and get out onto the sidewalk to avoid the, again, very sparse traffic on our quiet street. 

So, I started my huge brain plan, crawled awkwardly through the newly opened passenger door, and proceeded to bust my shit all over that sidewalk. I scraped up both of my knees and one of my hands because I moved my foot wrong getting out and also managed to eat a bit of grass when my face hit the small sliver of lawn near the sidewalk.

I think the fall sobered me up (even though I wasn't under the influence of anything) to the fact that this had been a TERRIBLE idea. I did a walk of shame into the house, explained what I did to my mom and, once she was done belly laughing at me, helped me pick the gravel out/bandage me up.

I swear to god I'm not normally this stupid and I think that's why this moment has stuck with me through all these years.We had a tree felling job some years back; it was a beautiful day, and spirits were high.   
A small group of us all mucking in to get the work completed by the end of the shift. As the clearance of a few rotted trees got underway, we were all told specifically to be careful of the poison ivy.   


Many of us had stories about it, many of us had experienced some of its effects on our skin, so we all wanted to keep exposure to the plant minimum.   


I noticed in my peripheral vision Kevin, whilst being lectured about the plant seem confused almost in another world. Crouched down in his familiar squat position smoking his cigarette. He pipes up with the words poison ivy doesn't affect me; I have Celtic genes.   


The crowd were used to Kevin's outbursts of mania and randomness, so we didn't pay much attention to his most recent outburst.  As lunchtime rolled around, he had continued with the declaration of his Celtic gene shield to almost everyone again and again to the point where we tired of Kevin's voice. 

  
He then declared he needed the bathroom for a number two, and he would prove to everyone his immunity to this ivy by wiping his backside with the deadly weed. Everyone said in no uncertain terms, "Dont do that, Kevin", to the reply, but it's okay I've told you I have Celtic genes, and we don't get affected by it.   


Kevin proceeded to take the dump and wipe his ass with a large handful of poison ivy. The effects were not instant know one clearly remembered when we saw his face change. The gait start to lengthen and widen as if inviting air to the nether regions—the slight scratching and reddening of the face. 

As the end of the day rolled around, Kevin was in agony, exhibiting all the signs of a dog with mange restless, jumpy and the look of fear in his eyes.    


We made it home and dropped Kevster off now with Ivy poisoning spreading to his face as he had been scratching and spreading the cursed thing around. Kevin was not seen again for over a week.   


When he did manage to phone in, the boss gently inquired about his Celtic genes to no reply.   


Oh, Kevin, don't do that!(I'm going to try and give the bare minimum information in this story to preserve the patient's privacy.) 

A few years ago, I worked as an aide in a local hospital. One night, we got a patient (the Kevin of this story) who had jumped off of a roof during a party and broke both of his ankles. 

After surgery, he came up to our unit and the nurse I was working with for the night offered him pain meds. Kevin asked for only one of the two pills offered, the nurse gave them and left. A few minutes later, Kevin called me into his room and I asked if I could help him with something. He said he wanted his other pain med. 

The problem with this request is that, at least in our hospital, once you've been given any type of pain med and a certain amount of time has passed, you can't be given more until you're due for more to avoid overdosing due to a problem with overlapping administration. 

I explained I could ask the nurse what we could do for him and to please describe his pain. He said only one leg hurt right then and that, because he got one pill for one leg's pain, he now wanted the OTHER pain pill for his OTHER leg's pain. Basically, this Kevin somehow thought that LOCALIZED PAIN MEDS exist and that individual pills only help with pain in a SPECIFIC REGIONS of the body.

In other words, he wanted a right leg pain pill and a left leg pain pill and was upset because he'd only recieved "one leg's pain pill."

It took everything in my power not to laugh and to go tell the nurse what he'd said. Sometimes I really miss working at that hospital.Hello! So this story is about a distant relative of mine who I'll call kevin (obviously). So this kevin is about at least 45 and has 4 children. I'm pretty sure he's a highschool drop out. 

So at a first cousins wedding in December of last year (covid cases were low at that time in my country) me and my other cousin (sis of groom) were getting ready in her room alone since we both were groomswoman. I'm very close to this cousin of mine despite the huge age difference. 

Also keep in mind here during a wedding close family just stays at the groom or brides (whichever side they are on) parents house. My aunt had invited all of us to spend the 3 days of the wedding with them but I believe kevin came out of nowhere. Since he forgot to book hotel rooms. 

So we were just doing our make-up, talking about how her housejob (a usually paid internship of one year that doctors in my country have to do) is about to start etc. 

Then enters kevin. He comes in and sits down on a chair and we kinda ignore him after greeting him once. And my cousin continues her rant about how after her brothers wedding ends she has to go do her housejob and start a duty in the covid ward. At this point Kevins ears shot up and he asked us if we believe in covid. Both of us said yes of course we do. 

This man then tried to tell us about how covid is fake and how doctors inject it in people themselves. He went on a rant about how even if it was real 'this is gods curse' and 'gods curse can't reach me' so obviously he has NOTHING to worry about.

 My cousin who's a doctor was BAFFLED by this and told him that she has never and would never do something like this. 

He then told her "you're just a student now we'll see what happens when you start your housejob. Doctors will do anything for some extra payment." 

Well then we had to suffer him ranting about 'the covid hoax' for about 30 minutes. 

I still think about how that guy has FOUR children. I feel bad for them. And his wife too. 

What a moron.In 2006 or so my dad was trying to land a good job as a pilot, and for one flight leaving a small little mountain town he was in charge, there we're 50 passengers on-board. To be safe to turn on auto pilot you needed to be 11000 feet in the sky. they were 500 feet up and this Kevin turns on auto-pilot and starts texting. the captain (my dad) screams at him because of his idiocy. and once he started to be screamed at he didn't think he had done anything wrong. quite short, but I wasn't there. I don't have a lot of the details but those are the main points.

Edit: I asked my dad about the yelling and it was less of a yell and more like a "NO, NO!" as if Pilot Kevin was a Dog.So my mom has been friends with Kevin (31m) for around a year now. He's a 6'3 240lb high school drop out with one braincell that bounces around his head like a pinball machine. (same guy from the stalker story) this dude is a complete moron. Here are just a few of the beliefs and incidents that revolve around Kevin.

Kevin Believes that school makes people stupid. Like genuinely he believes that the more education someone has, the dumber they are, and this was his reasoning for advising me against applying to my dream college. His justification? Joe Biden is a college grad, and therefore, everyone who graduates is stupid bc Biden bad or something?

Kevin once thought it was a good idea to drive his lifted truck, sideways, on a 17% incline in order to retrieve a deer he had shot, that we could have easily drug down the hill. He rolled the truck and totaled it.

While he was searching for a new truck, he borrowed my moms, and managed to put gas in it instead of diesel because it "wasn't loud" DESPITE the large yellow "DIESEL FUEL ONLY" sicker on the fuel cap. My mom had to send it to the shop after, and Kevin then claimed he could "fix it for much cheaper and it would be good as new" not a snowballs chance in hell.

Kevin installed a ceiling fan for us once, and when it was up he couldn't figure out why it wouldn't work. I could hear the large ungreased wheels turning in his head as I walked into the sun room to grab my keys. "Well the switch is on, and that fan is turning, so what's wrong with this one?" I noticed the chain. I thought to myself "surely he cant be that stupid" I reached for the chain and internally said "surely not" and I pulled it... The fan started spinning immediately and Kevin proceeded to look at me like I was the second coming of Christ.

Kevin once told me that he could outsmart Albert Einstein because Einstein was autistic, and Kevin is not. I didn't even respond to this one.

He told my girlfriends father who is somehow bigger than Kevin and way more intelligent that he did a poor job raising her, and that she was rude... She hadn't said a word to him other than "Hi I'm so and so" he's lucky her dad didn't beat the shit out of him on that one, and instead threw his car into reverse and missed his toes by inches.

I have many more stories about Kevin, and I may come back to share more if you want me to.Hey everyone. Got another security story for you. Once again please stay away from meth. Anyways here’s the story.

This took place in the Kelso/Longview, WA area around the summer of 2016. This particular shift started at 9:30 pm and finished at 6:30 am shift. For this route my first stop was  usually the local train station in Kelso, assuming there were no calls waiting. I pull up to the site and see there’s a lot of folks waiting around and speak to the station manager. He told me that the rest of the folks came on a late train but he had another issue. He then pointed out to me the wild eyed Kevina in the corner, frantically talking on a pay phone. The Kevina in question was a pretty well known homeless woman in the area and was known for causing trouble, especially when she had meth in her system. The Station manager also informed me that it sounded like she was on the phone with the police and he couldn’t close the train station until she left. Realizing this was gonna set the tone for the of the night I went over to see what the Kevina was up to.

I approached the Kevina, who was manically yelling on the phone, and noticed she had a kitten next to her on a bench eating out of a can of wet food. I attempted to get the Kevina’s attention, hoping to gauge what was going on. She turned to me once and frantically told me “THEYRE GONNA TASE ME, THEYRE GONNA TASE ME”. I attempted to ask who but those were the only words I could get out of her. So, being me and having no answers, I decided to go look for someone with a taser! 

I went outside to have a look around and saw a pair waving me towards them. Being curious I asked if they knew the Homeless Kevina inside. They explained that they did. Apparently the pair, an older woman and a younger male, were trying to bail the lady’s daughter out of county lock up and needed someone to watch the kitten. Enter Kevina, who they asked to watch the kitten. Well they couldn’t get the daughter out of lock up for what ever reason and when they went to get the kitten back Kevina told them no. Apparently Kevina wanted to give the cat back to her “rightful owner” personally, but she didn’t know the owner’s name or what she looked like. When pressed with this info Kevina apparently responded that she’d look it up. I then asked the burning question, did they threaten to tase her? They both laughed and said no, the lady then explained that her daughter’s name was Tasia (pronounced like Asia). The pair tried to explain to Kevina that the daughter’s name was Tasia, but Kevina thought they were threatening to tase her so she ran to the train station to call the cops. 

I was still speaking with the man and woman when the cops pulled in. While the first two cops went to speak with Kevina, who was yelling louder than ever that they were gonna tase her, when the third came up to us showing all of the patience of a man named Mike. Enter Officer Mike. The first thing out of his mouth as he came lumbering forward was “So you like to tase little old ladies, huh” but I stepped in between the pair and Officer Mike. I explained everything I was told and managed to paint a better picture for him of what was going on. Instead of calming down Officer Mike redirected his aggression towards Kevina once he knew who made the call, with his first words towards her being “GIVE THEM BACK THE CAT, KEVINA”.

Officer Mike and Kevina got into a loud back and forth with Kevina repeatedly being told she can either give up the cat or be arrested. After a few minutes Kevina finally gave the cat up, but not before telling the couple she was gonna find out where they lived and take the cat back. The couple took off pretty quickly and all that was left was getting Kevina off of the property, who tried to set up camp at the train station. The police happily stayed in the area a little longer and managed to get Kevina to camp out elsewhere. I then started my shift about a half hour later than I was comfortable with but managed to get ahead of schedule a bit later in the night.Hey people.

This is a story about a friend of mine, who we shall call Kevin.

Background:

Kevin is nearly 50 years old and has been disabled his whole life.
We’ve been friends for over 20 years and is the best man I’ve ever known.

But god bless him he is a Kevin.

We both live in Scotland And During COVID he has been getting me to do all his grocery shopping, and running small errands.
I’m disabled myself but a bit more active, plus I’ve got a car and don’t mind helping him out.

Kevin has a care nurse visit him three times a day to help him get washed and dressed, but other than that he is self sufficient, he is also very well known in his community, and loved by everyone.

Story:

One afternoon I get a frantic call from Kevin telling me to get to his house RIGHT NOW!

He sounded panicked and scared, so I asked what was wrong?

He says, there’s blood everywhere! You’ve got to take me to the hospital! 

Me getting worried asked what’s happened?

He says he’s cut his finger off and there’s blood everywhere!

I tell him to stay calm and put pressure on the wound.

I grab my first aid kit and my car keys and race off towards his house, I’m halfway there when I say to myself, “ why the hell is he calling me?”.

For more context, he’s in a wheelchair and I can’t lift him into my car (i tried this before and failed).
Plus, if his injury is as bad as he says, why didn’t he call an ambulance, his care nurse or the registered nurse that lives next door and was off work that day?

When I get there, he’s at the door with a paper towel wrapped around his finger, I ask to see his bloody stump and ask where the other end of his finger is, only to see the tiniest little paper cut on the end of his finger.

I stared motherfuckerly at him and just say “really?”

I put some cotton wool on his finger and squeeze lightly, then put a bandaid on and left.

He later called me to apologise for worrying me, and I took great pleasure in mocking him for his little boo boo.

Not much of a story but we both laughed about it and thought I’d share.

Anyone who wants this for YouTube help yourself 

Laters 👋Travelling aimlessly across the US a few years back, I was told of a man called Kevin. 

The chap who mentioned him said, "he's a Brit like you still has the accent and all. He is always looking for good people for work." 

Match made in heaven; I thought a fellow Brit, and he's got work. Before you ask yes, I was brought up aware of what Kevins we're capable of, but surely, times had changed, I thought? 

The first meeting was as one would expect two Brits in a sea of Americans shooting the shit about things back home. It went well. I had a job offer and a place to stay—his basement. 

Now sharing the basement with me was a motley crew of characters who shall remain anonymous for this as they are story-worthy material for another time. 

Work was well paid, hard graft but enjoyable nonetheless. As the weeks went by, tales of Kevin were being told every day. Every one of the members of staff had some story of Kevin and his misgivings. 

It turns out Kevin thought himself a player, a ladies man who, on inspection, looked like an underweight Jimmy Nail or strung out Sean Bean. I guess the British accent worked well for him. 

He had children by a woman in the local village who he swore blind were all unplanned. He had a live-in girlfriend who would leave at any opportunity or slightest hint of Keviness. She was at least 25years his junior. 

His company would mysteriously run well without him around, only to ultimately go to pot any day he decided to grace us with his presence. 

One example I remember well there was at least six workers all in full flow, and Kevster stopped us all in our tracks to explain the function of a particular piece of machinery. Totally uncalled for, not related in the slightest to what we were doing and quite frankly, the most exemplary display of being a Kevin I have ever seen. 

In the evening's members of staff would congregate in the kitchen, drink, have a smoke make food and have some fun. Kevin could never quite dial into our frequency. Like having an FM radio, but he's on AM. 

He would waltz in midflow of a good conversation and try and hijack it taking it off someplace else, all to a dead-eyed crowd with looks of confusion, bewilderment and a lot of how did this end up here thoughts in heads. 

One of his favourite Kevin things to do was to hear us all talking, laughing out loud about a particular subject, and then look up this specific topic on youtube, then make us sit through a clip he had found long after the laughter and subject matter had left. 

I lasted a year in Kevin's basement. I had the best time met some amazing people and left knowing when I meet a Kevin in the future, to beware. 

In the nicest possible way, a Kevin is like an endangered species. You want to save them, but they are Kevins.This post is about two different Kevins in the place I work. The title is in reference to the fact that my job actually PAYS for these two to make constant, avoidable, dumb mistakes, ask dumb questions and not work half the time. These are the dumbest stories about them I can think of. (I'm sure there will be more to come.)

First off, I work in a popular, midwestern pizza chain. As you can imagine, turnover rates are high so people are constantly being hired or leaving. Two new people have been hired within the past 3 months and still make Week 1 level mistakes/ask obvious questions.

--

Kevin 1 was making pizzas with me one night and we both saw on the screen that the pizza was meant to be half pepperoni, half cheese. I bumped it. He then yells at me and asks me WHICH SIDE THE PEPPERONI SHOULD BE ON! I looked at him confused and said it wouldn't matter because it's a circle, walking away to attend to the oven. He thought I wasn't looking when I saw him pull the order back up, check to see which side, then quickly bump it again.

--

One day, I hear this story from my favorite manager: Kevin 2 called into work saying his mom took his keys away and couldn't come in to work that night. He said he would try to get an uber. My manager said to keep him posted. An hour or so later, Kevin 2 says he ordered an uber and it's en route. Another 30 min later, he says it still hasn't shown up and doesn't know what to do. My manager says not to worry about it, consider it a day off and he'll see him on his next scheduled work day.

Less than an hour later, Kevin 2 SHOWS UP TO WORK IN HIS CAR to pick up his pay check. The thing is, Kevin 2 gets AUTOMATIC DEPOSITS so this would be his PAY STUB he's picking up, not money! I'm still confused as to how he wasn't fired right then and there.I have no idea how we have so many at the university level but they are there. So I was returning from my engineering class and there are some kevins and Kevinas trying to change a tire, the front passenger side. One of the nuts is hard stuck on the wheel which is why the kevinas recruited the kevins to help. I stop by and suggest something to add more leverage to the tire iron. Me mentioning leverage gave them a brilliant idea. what if they use the strength of the car? they all ageed it was briliant. I realized while it could go wrong if they took it slow it could go right so I decided to say and watch for the out come.

They put the but end of the tire iron on the ground behind the wheel and were going to back up. I played out how it would work in my head and said, "if your going to do this you should put in in front and pull forward. If you back over it like that the earth will be pushing the tire iron right and making it tighter so do the opposite to go left you know righty tighty lefty loosely"

they all call me an idiot because the wheel will be turning left so it would loosen.

I pointed out that the direction of the turn for left being lose is focused on the outside usually moving part not the inside usually stationary part and if the wheel goes left the tire iron will be going right

again they all dismiss me and say I don't know what I am talking about

I draw up a diagram to show them

finally one of the guys says, "you're just a girl you don't know what your talking about leave this to the men" and the girl who owned the car told me to "just stay out of it"

I said, "ok fine ignore the engineering student your right lefty tightly rightly loosely have fun" and I left a few hours later my boyfriend and I were walking by and there was a bent tire iron beside the still flat tire. Feeling petty I took our my diagram from earlier and wrote Lefty Tighty Righty Loosey above it and left it on their windshield. The car was towed the next day.

Edit: to clarify it was the front passenger side tire as someone pointed out this would have worked on the driver side.Everybody hates New Jersey. Only because it’s stuck between New York and Philadelphia. New England is a combination of 5 states, and they produced the patriots, the best football team ever. 

Erica and Noah were struggling to have a kid. She was beginning to talk to people who could help. She needed to have a kid or Noah would never really love her. They had unprotected sex every day, in every position imaginable, but nothing was happening. 

“Honey, your boss doesn’t know what he’s talking about. I’m extremely fertile.”

“Okay, obviously I’m the problem then.” Noah was having sex with three different women at the time. All unprotected. He really believed that his sperm just didn’t work. His boss Ted (who worked in Homeland security and was helping clear the ocean of garbage) had more girls lined up for him. The theory was that he was far too smart to procreate with a woman who wasn’t on his level. 

In reality he just didn’t love her. There is a phenomenon in this universe where if one parent can’t imagine having a child with a girl, it simply will not happen. A certain level of attraction is necessary.

Erica really, really wanted kids though, and she was pretty offended that it hadn’t happened yet.

Eventually, they decided to talk to Noah’s boss, who had worked with the president. All they needed was some of Noah’s sperm. He gave them a sample and the tests came back, he was able to have kids!

Erica was trilled with the news. But they kept trying and it still wasn’t working.

Six months later they were still dating and it felt like they were going to break up soon. So Erica came up with a plan. She talked to her dad, who had Italian mob connections in New York.

Finally, Noah had his boss Ted over and they talked for a long time. He broke up with Erica, and she was unable to accept that he wasn’t going to spend the rest of his life with her. After the first night when he didn’t want to have sex with her, she found a magazine full of naked men in the bathroom. There was something sticky on it. That moment she started coming up with a plan. If Noah was gay, he would never be able to put a child in her. 

Ted hated Erica. They had been dating for two years in college, and she left him for Noah because Noah had a powerful family. Erica was secretly still in love with Ted though.

For the next few weeks she started going out to bars every night, but asked the neighbors to tell her if anybody walked into the room while she was gone. Less than a week later, she was at Coco’s taqueria right across the street and got a call from Beargut, the senile cat lady next door. A young man had just walked in. Erica was talking with a guy she had been seeing for a few days. She was sleeping with a different man every night at that point. After taking the phone call, Erica started complaining about Noah to the guy she was sitting next to. “He’s been having these secretive meetings with his boss and not telling me anything about it.”

The guy (she was pretty sure his name was Robert) came up with her, “I can protect you in case anything goes wrong, you don’t need those guys.” He was just a nice guy.

They walked in and snuck through the door. They were talking about some complex science ‘in the name of saving the planet’ that Erica didn’t understand, but Robert seemed very interested. After a while, Erica hears the repeating slap, slap, slap of sex.

“Erica and Robert have a dramatic whispering conversation”

The creaking stops, so does the talking.

Erica barges in, Robert hides behind the sofa.

Noah, thinking on his feet, says - “I’m sorry, Erica, I know it’s hard to understand, but I just- I’m gay. I don’t think this is going to work”

Erica didn’t understand - “What the fuck?! Why?? Do you hate me!?”

Noah, sarcastically, said “Yeah, I hate you -“

“-SCREAMING-” from Erica.

Ted awkwardly walks out, and gives Erica a an amicable hug, which turned her on and confused her. “I… should go.” He walks out in the hallway, but Erica follows him into the hallway and tries desperately to stop him.

“Wait! I know you’re not- you… you like… What changed? What happened to you?”

Ted shifted awkwardly “You don’t understand, me and you have so much history, and Noah… He made things blow up between us all. Remember we all used to be so close?”

\-They convince Erica that Ted and Noah are gay. 

\-“Ted, can you let us talk?” Noah says. 

Erica leads Noah into the living room, and closes the door behind him.

Noah turned to Erica, “So you have to listen, I made an appointment with the birth center, the sperm just needs to come from the right place, a place of true sexual arousal, that’s why Ted needed to be here. I’ve got a vial of sperm in there and our first kid might be in there. I really do love you.”

We faintly hear the main apartment door slowly open and then close. 

Noah says - “Did you hear that?”

Erica says “I think its okay, it must be so hard for you, I’ll still marry you.”

Noah is happy about that, but he clearly doesn’t care, he knows that Erica isn’t the one after everything he learned from Ted. “No, but did the door just open and close?”

Erica goes, “I didn’t hear anything,” opens the bedroom door and says “Look, nobody there”

“Promise me you weren’t fucking Ted”

“I wasn’t, I just needed to, you know, actually get aroused.”

“So did he jerk you? A little Boston cream pie on his face? How many times have you done this before!”

“Never.” That was a lie. He had been sending his sperm to the government for weeks.

Ted is never seen or heard from again.

Erica convinces Noah that Ted screwed him over, but a little part of him will always remember that door faintly opening and closing.

Noah looks around the room- “Erica was there someone else here???”

She denies it

Long story short, Robert stole the sperm, it was Ted’s sperm though. Ted still loved Erica. That baby was going to be great.

The vial is GONE because Robert stole it.

A month later, Erica misses her period and she gets pregnant. They had been having a lot of sex, but Erica wasn’t really acting the same.

Noah was NOT happy

“Erica, look. I’ve been giving my sperm to the government and they’re going to make sure we have a great kid. It was going fine, and our son was going to be amazing, until that vial of sperm got stolen. Now we’re fucked.”

The relationship is ‘rekindled’.

Well, now that Robert had the sperm, and Ted had disappeared, things were going to need to go differently in the Jones lab. Ted wasn’t the man Noah thought he was. After moving to New Jersey for work, Ted had climbed the ranks at Jones Capital quickly. After college in Canada, Noah started working with him to try to save the world. They had a good time working together, but Ted was concerned Noah was holding him back. He secretly wanted to fire him, but really was just pretty angry at him for sticking with Erica after everything. They did a lot of drugs in college though, and he was actually the reason Noah had to transfer out of Cornell. They were living a great life until Erica cheated on Ted with Noah, and Ted took out his anger by telling everybody he knew that Noah’s grandfather (the CEO of Jones Capitol) was a literal Nazi. He couldn’t fire Noah because they had been through so much together.

But other people in the company weren’t so nice. They knew Noah’s grandfather had good genes, and there were a lot of migrant families on the southern border with plenty of fertile women. All they had to do was take the sperm, clone it, and see what the baby grows up like. There were hundreds of little half-Noahs with single immigrant mothers living impoverished lives.

Noah’s position in the government didn’t give him much clearance, but Ted told him about some technology where they could use your sperm and find out what your kid’s brain would look like depending on who the mother was.

Turns out the technology was just a chip in the brain that allowed the government to see the world through a person’s eye.

Well the Mexicans did not like what was going on with their emigrants, especially the ones that were being sent back to Mexico. They teamed up with North Korea to duplicate that technology, and they use eye surgery to plant little cameras in people’s heads.

Noah and Erica’s son Charlie was a great kid, he was smart, kind, and loved his parents. Noah knew that there was something strange going on, but he could never let him know.

Robert was a spy for the North Koreans.The title is courtesy of my brother Kevin, who intended to say that he was going bicycle riding with his friend Louis. 

Our story opens with the same brother, the same friend, and the same bicycle.  This being the 1960s, the manufacturers had just introduced the "banana" seat for kids' bikes, which led all sorts of kids to attempt to ride two on the bike even though safety experts warned against it.  (It was also in the days before helmets.)

11-year-old Kevin left our mother the note that opens this story. It was fall in the Sierras, which means it was COLD. Kevin and Louis were riding around on Kevin's bike and Kevin decided that his face was getting too cold. Did they stop riding and go home? No. Did they even stop riding? No. It might be the last ride of the season before snowfall.

What they did was decide that Kevin would *pull his coat up over his face* and Louis, on the back of the bike, would shout "RIGHT" or "LEFT" as necessary.

This would have worked much better if either of them had been able to remember which was right and which was left. 

"Left! No, LEFT! THE OTHER WAY!" 

Too late. Whichever direction Louis had intended, it wasn't the way Kevin turned. They rammed into a parked car. 

IIRC, Kevin wound up with minor damage.  Louis was unharmed. The unfortunate "bikle" was totaled and not replaced.Years ago, I went to a friends apartment to hang out. Kevin is his real name and Kevin was working on his car. He was changing a water pump. So I walk over to see what he is doing and he is loosening all of the bolts that holds on the pulleys for his serpentine belt. I stopped him immediately and shown him the idler control arm. I released the belt and helped him with his water pump. Had he loosened a few more bolts, that entire belt would have possibly snapped and hurt him or ruined all of his progress. 

I also know of one other Kevin who floats in a small boat off of some Florida coast, who mumbles Facebook videos that nobody watches.Typing on phone, so sorry for typos.

When I was in college, I was in the National Cadet Corps (NCC) where the Indian military takes college students to 10-15 days camps to teach us their ways. The intention is to get more youngsters excited for the Army.

Now to the story.

This story is from one such camps when I was a senior under officer in my college, and I took a group of 15 cadets to the camp under my command for the first time. 

My troop has this one guy, who didn't understood the difference between Daia (Right) and Baia (left), despite me teaching him several times. Let's call him Kevin (duh).

He seemed to understand it for a minute and then he would forget. 

On 10th day, we were to march with 30 other cadets infront of a colonel. I again brought Kevin up at the terrace the night before and made sure he knows the difference. Everything was fine, so I went to my barrack.

The next morning (The big day)

We lined up in threes, that's three people in front and three after them and so on. 

Our camp senior put Kevin in front of the in threes line and in the middle, because he was a bit short.

Now the colonel came, the camp senior commanded the march to turn left to face the Colonel for permission to start the march.

Now the scene is, there are 15 officers watching along with the Colonel. The troop is in the middle of the ground, in clear view and hundreds of other cadets are viewing from outside the ground.

Camp seniors shouts, Contingent bia Mud (Left turn)

Everybody turns left on the mind count of 1 231, but one. Kevin.

Kevin turns right.

We were in attention so he could not fix his position.

Camp senior asked for Colonel's permission to start the march. He permits.

Camp senior shouts, contigent dia mud (right turn) Kevin knows his mistake, he looks at other cadets and turns left to align with others. 

Camp senior started the march and guess what, Kevin's foot was not matching.

We did a round, the march ended and we did a line tod (line break).

After that there were several other ceremonies which took like 2.5 hours.

Everything ended, we were dismissed to our barracks. 

I get called by Camp officer (Major).

I went to the office, and who do I see? The camp senior and Kevin.

I did a salute to the Camp officer, and he told be to be at ease. 

He asked, are you Kevin's Senior Under Officer? I say yes sir. He said didn't you teach him the basics of marching?

I said I did sir. 

Then why did he perform poorly in the march.

I said sorry sir, it was a mistake. I will train him more.

He says, this wouldn't go unpunished. He ordered me 20 rounds of the ground with gear which is a 7 KG 5.56mm INSAS Rifle, and a 20 KG bag. And asked me to start right away. I followed the order.

And what happened to Kevin?

He was ordered two front rolls and back rolls of the entire ground, pushups, burpees, rope climb. And a 5 rounds run of the ground.

I finished the run, went to the major's office, said I finished the run. He says ok, and I left for my barrack.

That night I went on the roof for a phone call (roof was the only place where we got good network), and who do I see there? Kevin, practising his Daia and baia mud (right and left turns). 

Fron that day on, Kevin never forgot his daia and baia (right and left), and later on got a Bravo grade in his Junior Under Officer exam. 

I graduated college after that, and I heard Kevin was a Senior Under Officer then and commanding a troop of cadets.This story takes place in a forest with 3 of us there. There was me, friend 1, and Kevin. Me and friend 1 were trying to teach Kevin about the benefits of plants until we come across some poison ivy. We said to Kevin, "Hey, don't touch that! That's poison ivy, and it can hurt!" Kevin, who was half-listening to us argued, "Leaves don't hurt! None of them do!" And presumed to rub his hands against the ivy, before exclaiming "See!" My friend, who was just looking to skrew around with Kevin, said that he would give Kevin $40 to rub poison ivy all over his face. He did, and we gave him the money.

The next day, things did not go so well for Kevin. I can imagine what he looked like, but he stayed inside for the next 2 weeks. I am cross-posting this from r/talesfromtechsupport as I'm told its worthy to be here as well.

Years and years ago, when I was still in high school, I was already doing tech support for my friends. There was this one friend, that while wasn't the smartest, was nice, but broke a lot of things with what he did. This meant that I wasn't surprised when he called saying that his new comp was having issues.

I went over and took a look at his new computer. This was the time when the case was solid metal, the computer cost thousands and weighed a lot.

His father was somewhat rich and had just bought him the computer, but was also doing work on the house. So when I opened the comp up, I found the insides had been coated with sheetrock dust. I told him I'd be back the next day with what I needed to clean the comp.

I left and came back the next day and as I walked into the house, I heard a strange noise, it was like thunka-thunka-thunka, over and over. I asked him what that noise was and he said I should be proud of him, he was cleaning the comp himself. I asked him again what the noise was, a bit worried now, he replied that it was the comp going through the rinse cycle.

Now very worried, I told him to show me and he took me to the laundry room and there in a front loading washing machine was the comp going around in the machine. Each time it slammed into the drum it made a thunka noise.

I watched it for a moment before asking him if that how he would clean his SNES, this made him stop and look at me in shock, as realization set in, and asked what should we do. I said first we needed to get the comp out and see what the damage was. So we got the machine to drain and spin down and pulled out the machine. I also saw that the metal case of the computer had destroyed the washing machine's drum.

So we opened up the comp and found it was basically green soup inside, every board shattered into small pieces. At this point I put the comp back together and began to walk to the front door, this was last straw in a long line of things he wanted me fix that he broke. As I walked toward the door, he asked what he should do and I told him to rebox the computer and send it back to the manufacturer. When he asked me what he should tell them, I waited till I was in the door and told him, just as I was closing the door behind me, I said, "Tell them that you're too dumb to own a computer."

I never spoke to him again.This story takes place in a fancy dress competition. Kevin was dressed as a Vampire , Dracula to be exact. His Dork friend told him to put some eyeliner for a scary look. then he borrowed a girl's make up set and went to the restroom. he took the pen opened it and put it on his pupil. he screamed very loudly and fell into the toilet. everybody rushed to the restroom, they asked why did you scream and he told that he put the eyeliner in the eye as his friend told. Then everybody explained him how to put the eyeliner.(This incident actually took place in my school)This story takes place in a restaurant with 4 of us there. There was me, friend 1, friend 2, and Kevin. I was ordering my meal and I asked the nearby waiter what the difference was between the spicy food and the non-spicy food. He said that the spicy food had habanero sauce in it, like the one on the center of the table and left. Kevin who is very competitive asked what was happening. I told him about the situation and the sauce. Kevin then laughed it off and made a bet that he can drink the entire bottle of hot sauce. Friend 2 jokingly said that he'd give him $40 if Kevin drank the entire bottle. Kevin then took 5 ice cubes put them in his mouth and starts draining the bottle. He figured that since it was "hot sauce" he can cool it down with ice to make it "cold sauce". We had to leave the restaurant early, but friend 2 gave him $30 for his efforts.Hey guys, so if you read the title this is the warning,  I’ll be describing the after math of a motorcycle accident. It’s summer, people are gonna be out on their motorcycles, if they’re out while you’re out please be careful and if you’re out riding don’t be an idiot. If you don’t want to read past this I don’t blame you. Anyways on to the story. 

This took place in 2007 at the Famous Fort Hood. A ton of units had just returned from Iraq, if you’re on the outside looking in when this happens you’ll usually see liquor stores usually sold out of whatever you’re looking for and fleets of new vehicles outside of most units, usually sports cars and motorcycles. The Kevin I’m about to mention was a motorcycle guy!

If I remember correctly this happened on a Saturday and I drew the hospital guard shift. Basically I sat at the front desk of the ER just in case things got stupid. Things rarely got stupid though, at least not while I was working. Then in came my buddy James, who had to escort an ambulance that held The Kevin of this story after a very nasty motorcycle accident. 

Before I could ask what’s up, James beckoned me to follow him while he was eating a sandwich. He took me to the back entrance and that’s when I saw it, the aftermath of a nasty motorcycle accident. So I’m gonna verbally paint a picture and this is where it gets graphic. You’ve been warned!

The Kevin came in on a stretcher and well I wasn’t expecting to see this. While it’s not uncommon to see brain fluid leak out of the ears after a Traumatic Brain Injury I was not expecting it to look like a garden hose shooting the stuff from his ears. His face was pretty messed up as and there was just a lot of blood. Between bites of his sandwich James just kept saying how fucked up this was, then he showed me the driver’s license. I recognized the ID as we’d had a lot of issues with this guy and his motorcycle. Heck, this wasn’t even his first accident!

So at this point me and James go back to the ER desk and he tells me what happened. As mentioned The Kevin of this story was a motorcycle enthusiast, having just bought a brand new Hayabusa. For those not familiar a Hayabusa is one of the fastest retail bikes you can get. The Kevin had a lot of run ins with us after buying the bike, mostly for little things like not wearing his protective gear, but he did end up with a few accidents under his belt. Most people would take this as a sign that maybe he shouldn’t own a motorcycle, but this is a Kevin story and like I said this doesn’t end well!

Then this night happened. Kevin was out on Veterans Memorial BLVD, a straight piece of concrete that was Popular with a lot of the street racers and motorcycle guys. The Kevin, having just finished at one of the local tattoo shops, hopped on his bike and decided to show off for his friends. The Kevin began popping wheelies out on the street, holding them for a while, but he didn’t take into account the traffic that night. While in mid wheelie a car in front of him had stopped at the light, but being in mid wheelie he didn’t notice and hit the car with his bike. James continued to say the witnesses said they saw the impact the back of the car, forcing the Kevin head and back first into the pavement, then the back landed on him. My shift ended roughly two hours later and I’d checked in with the docs concerning the guy a handful of times, they said if he lived he’d probably be a vegetable at best. One of the sadder aspects of this story is he wasn’t even home that long, maybe 3 or 4 weeks!

Again I’m posting this as a warning. I know most of us like to tell humorous tales of wanton stupidity for our amusement but this felt important. If you’re on a motorcycle this summer, please don’t be a Kevin!A friend of mine is a rare breed of Kevin: he is a self aware Kevin. He is very intelligent and hard working, but sometimes has what he calls "brain farts". In those moments he can be Keviniest Kevin that has ever Kevined.

His lastest Kevinism: in our country gyms are starting to open again and our Kevin decided is was time to hit the gym again.

He went at an hour that caught gym pretty much empty. Except for a girl, a rather quite beautiful girl (according to his words).
During the workout he kept glancing looks to the girl and the girl was glancing back.

But then disaster struck: Kevin needed to fart, BADLY!

In his mind he though: Well, the gym's music is awfully loud, so she won't hear me fart.

And farted he did! He farted a few more times always with any kind of smell and because of the music, he never heard any of them.

In the meantime he kept looking at the girl, but she stopped looking at him.

At the end of the workout the light bulb went on: He was wearing earbuds!This story takes place on a playground around 9 years ago. On the playground, there was me (A 8-year-old male), my friend (9-year-old male), and Kevin (8-year-old male). We were bored out of our skulls, so my friend suggests that we do a race. All of us agreed, and before the race started, Kevin said that he wanted to take both of us on. He proposed that it was me and my friend vs himself. Me and my friend, knowing that we are faster than Kevin agreed. The race begins and suddenly Kevin shouts, "If I run with my eyes closed, I will go faster!" Unfortunately for Kevin, he was running towards a basketball pole and WHAM! Fortunately, there was an adult nearby and she called the ambulance. We soon were told that Kevin ran just right into the basketball pole, and he broke his chin.Some top tier responses from a variety of Kevin's that were polled:

- is this a trick question?

- I'm 60 years old and I've never needed to know this.

- day time or night time?

- (and of course one Kevin that without hesitation and with full confidence said) the sun.I'm on mobile, I hope the formatting is OK 

I work with industrial grade machines for printing and industrial grade cutting. Not the light stuff too, like heavy duty, cut your fingers off level stuff. AKA no an ideal setting for a wondering Kevin.

The wild Kevin appears.

This Kevin is the most Keviny Kevin you could ever meet. Lies about obvious stuff. Like for example, he said how much he loves 4Chan. That's fine. You do you. But sometimes he spoutes insane conspiracy theories, and when asked where he read it, he refuses to give the source. I asked if he read it on 4Chan. His response? "No no, I don't read 4chan." Things like that.

One time, I caught him struggling with some printing equipment, when asked he said everything was fine. I looked and he spilled ink EVERYWHERE, this is acrylic stuff, the machine was essentially doused in permanent glue. Everything was a solid chunk at this point. I asked him about it, and he blamed me. HE LEGIT BLAMED ME FOR HIM SPILLING INK. And no sadly he was not joking.


On another occasion he cut his hand 5 time on the cutter. When asked he said, in all serious, it asked for a blood sacrifice.

I got more stories. Kevins....Since i'm soon done with my school years and wont have to meet him again. i feel i can finaly type this all down to get it out of my system.

This all happend now during 2020-2021 and to put into context we are all around 20-30 years old in the swedish collage equlivent

This Kevin who is an underclassmen lives in the same dorm as me. we are 5 including me and i'm the only female in this dorm. Not sure if it's necesary to the story but we are going a yearly course of game programming (We decide every year if we want to redo the course to learn more)This is my second and final year and this was his first.

Kevin seemed fine the first time I was polite and said hi and greeted him in the hallways during our 3 week quarenteen he lives on the upperfloor and i'm just below him and he behaved like a normal person.

After quarenteen and into the first month of school i noticed the changes. I'm glad i wasen't in the classroom at the same time as him (We were splited into two classes to prevent spreading Covid if someone would get it at school). He started during the late evenings around 23.00(11pm) to stomp on the floor. I send him a message on Discord to ask him to keep it down as it was kinda late and the rules are that it needs to be silent between 22.00-07.00(10pm-7am) and he said.

>"I'm sorry I just get to happy with music and needs to stomp to it. Do you want something as forgiveness?!"

(yes he uses the ! weirdly.)

I told him it's fine, no need to give me anything I'm just telling you since sometimes people forget they don't live with their parents anymore and they need to respect that others have other sleeping habbits. Over the school year he continues with these and he screams like a banshee around the silent hours until 02.00(2am) I have told him several times, and I have even told the teachers/those who take cares of the dorms and acording to them they have even told him off.

Time to introduce the others.  
Dude Who lives next to him = Rick  
Programmer girl in the same group as kevin = Ashely  
Other Programmer girl = Evelyn.

Me and Evelyn has recived during the first month quite disturbing messages from him. He started with me saying that he's intrested in becoming my boyfriend and want to start a relationship. I politely turned him down as i don't feel like i can feel anything for a guy i have only said "hello" to.He then became really intrested in Evelyn as aparently she reminded him about his old girlfriend. (Evelyn and me are similar bodybuilt and the way we are so I has sometimes wonderd if he's refering to me)

But what Evelyn has told me and showed me through discord messages same thing, He wants a relationship without even knowing us and he's really.. persistance.Ashely haven't had the messages to her but as she shares the classroom with him she has told me about how he's been really loud and obnoxsius.Me and Evelyn has been speaking several times with our head teacher telling them that we aren't feeling quite safe around him. and that his acting out is disturbing in several regards. And acording to the teachers he has been talkt to now several times.

he has atempted to get into my room to see it. I have told him i refuse to have someone in my room that isn't invited in. He has atempted several times to "make me invite him" but i have told him no.

Rick who lives next to him has mentioned to me as well several times that he's disturbed what he hears in the thin walls between them. About Kevin reading out loud sexual stories/jokes and about his own "private moments" togheter with what Rick asumes is to have his friends laugh with him.

He has atempted several times to cook food in the microwave with a full sealed lid on. (the school has given us our third microwave after he has exploded two of them) as well he never clean his dishes.I think I might have been an ashole when I told him off a few weeks ago that he must be quite retarded to not understand that people are telling him off so many times and he continues with both anoyance and destuction this was a night between Sunday and Monday. around 3am. I had taken pills to help me sleep that i had just started with the last couple of months  (probobly related to his disturbance and the mental exuastion after losing both my grandparents recently)

He awnserd with that. "The silent rules don't aply to the weekends."

To be clear. the rules in our dorm is the typical rules that aply for normal apartments about the silent hours. Meening they aply to the weekends as well.

I just fucking lost it and wanted to call him every name known to man but I relentled to going the normal route to just report it to the teachers that i think have started to ignore my calls for help.My parents have tried to help me report but they has as well started to tell me to just suck it up it's not that much more of school.

This is just a TLDR of everything that has happend this singular school year.. I have more stories to tell if people want to read more.I won’t bore you with a long story, but with small things jot-dot style. There can be small story’s though. Here is all stupid things my brother does.

1. He thinks one hour is 47 minutes, not 60. That’s how he was acting when I started playing on the PS5 at 8, and he came downstairs and said it was his turn to play since I played for an hour when he asked when I started playing. *At 8:47.* That was yesterday .

2. He said the Earth was created before the Big Bang.

3. He thought that locking two people out of the house is ok.

4. He thinks it is ok to try to get me to do everything for him. He only stopped when our dad said I wasn’t his slave.

5.  He thinks it’s ok for him to pit a disc in the wrong case. How I know? My Xbox has about a dozen and a half game’s. The game discs were in different cases. He also said I have to put them in the right case because it is my Xbox.

6. More on the last one. It is only my Xbox If I need to put away games, otherwise, it’s his,

7. He thinks he can get away with watching YouTube in school. Since we’re online, he watches it or Netflix. He gets caught when my dads Bluetooth headphones and my brothers switch laptops. This happened at least three times.

I do have more, but I can’t remember them, and I don’t want to waste your time anymore. And just so you know, he does not have any mental illnesses.This classmate thought that shark were haram ? Thought that if you pour something in a bottle that had pure water( this is something in islam) will instantly turn into pure water I believed it till I asked my,brother which said it was fake  failed in most exams thought that he can be a you tuber while not posting videos and thought he could be rich by it thought that  he could fight me he was 4 feet and I was 5 feet and stronger I had previously broken a student's nose and even tried to fight me  insulted me a lot I was patient and tried my best not to kill him and got contineley got in the principal office for not studyingThis is something about someone in one of my classes who is a moron. Here are some things he does daily:
Thinks “r*tard”is ok to say to someone with autism because “they used it to describe people like you”. I’m autistic.

He thinks rules don’t apply to him. When the teacher says “put your phone away” he says “do you pay for it? No? Then you don’t get to decide”

Kevin thinks COVID-19 is a bio weapon, made in a lab. Why though? I have no idea. He won’t explain why someone would make a pandemic and end 2M lives on purpose. And after all this, he thinks IM the Kevin. LolSo back when my oldest was 5, her biological father - Kevin - wanted to enact his rights for the first time ever and finally meet her. Because the had no relationship, Kevin had to take her on day outings first and build up to full visitation. The very first time he was to take her by himself for the day, I carefully explained her dietary issues.

She's always had digestive  trouble and can become constipated very easily. To give an example, when she was 6mos and we got the okay from her ped to try solid foods, we tried peas and she didn't poop for 3 days. I had to put prune juice in her milk (yuck!) just to give her some relief. It worked -- she ended up spraying the curtains and changing table during one unfortunate diaper change.  So believe me when I say I stressed to Kevin how important it was she get a balanced meal with little to no junk food, and also that bread tends to be hard for her to break down.

Well off they go, in his mother-in-law's car because Kevin can't drive, and I get to do my own thing until that evening. When it's time to pick my kid up, she's sitting in the back of the car, clutching this huge Jimmy John's sandwich like she was afraid it would go missing. Kevin tells me they didn't have time to eat dinner, so he picked her up a sandwich. She had only wanted turkey and cheese on it, "but it's okay, I added extra lettuce". Oh... Gee.. thanks Kevin, that'll help.

When we get home, I get the real story from my child that they hadn't had lunch either. Kevin had taken her roller skating, and when she said she was hungry he grabbed a snack bag of chips from the vending machine. That held her over for a few minutes before she said she was still hungry and he got her another bag of chips. This happens once more before he decided to leave and take her to the park instead, and then it was time to head back. According to the agreement, Kevin was to have her from 10am to 8pm, which meant he was responsible for 2 meals. By the way that kid wolfed down that sandwich made up primarily of bread and cheese, she had been hungry for a long while.

So anyway, I got to stay up with my kid until 2am the next night trying to sooth her tummy and force feeding her laxatives. thanks KevinI had gone on a few dates with this Kevin. He was really sweet but I was getting to the point that I couldn’t handle the Kevin-ness. He had come over to my house for dinner, there was a brief issue with how to cook the frozen pizza, I did it myself so Kevin didn’t burn down my house. 

Anyway, after dinner we are cleaning up, and I open the dishwasher to unload it, I wasn’t expecting help, but Kevin jumped in. Of course he had to ask where everything went, even if he had just put away something similar (ie a glass cup then a plastic cup, even though they went in the same place). He pulled out a spatula, and I pointed to the two jars next to the stove “there, one is for spatulas, the other for everything else”. He goes over and is just staring at them, so after a few seconds I go over, and he asks which one is he supposed to put it in. I take it from him and put it in the jar with all the other similar spatulas, and just sort of roll my eyes. I go back to the dishwasher, but Kevin is huffy and says, “Well, how was I supposed to know which jar, I’m not a chef I don’t know what a spatula looks like”

I think there was one more date, but I just couldn’t deal with the Kevin-ness.This is one of those stories that was funny as hell when it happened but I’m not sure if y’all will find it as hilarious as we do. That being said, I’m posting it anyway because I can’t stop thinking about it and I think it would be a decent addition to this sub.

Background: I (24 F) have an associate of science in biology and am working toward my bachelor’s. I just finished a course about evolution.

One day a couple weeks ago, I came upstairs to my room and heard my boyfriend (26 M) talking to his brother Kevin (24 M) on the phone, obviously in a heated argument. Now, for a Kevin, my boyfriend’s brother is a smart guy. He’s a business major and is an expert on economics. In other areas, though... not so much. I hear my boyfriend quietly say, “EldritchAbyssinian is coming upstairs, want to ask her?” 

Me: “Ask me what?”

Bf: “Kevin wants to ask you something about evolution.”

K: “What would it take for me to be able to fly?”

Me: “... To fly?”

There’s a 30 second long silence between the three of us before Kevin says, “Fuck you guys, you don’t understand anything.” and abruptly hangs up. Bf and I exchanged confused expressions before laughing our asses off. It ain’t much, but it lives rent free in my head.This is a short story, a quickie, if you like.

My husband wanted to cut up a sausage for a snack. He pulled a random knife out of our butcher block and started pressing into the sausage with no luck. That sausage was staying intact. 

He started loudly complaining about what a useless knife it was and why it even existed if it couldn't cut anything?? He was about to throw it away when I went to see what he was talking about. 

Turns out he was trying to cut his sausage with the back of the knife, not the actual blade.[The News Article](https://tdn.com/news/local/cops-longview-winco-shoplifter-fought-bit-guards/article_6df4707f-3210-5c21-95c6-9faf258fc5c3.html)

Hey y’all, got another security story for you and how it made the local news. Also, just a reminder, drugs are bad! 

So for the record this isn’t my story, it belongs to my buddy whom I’ll refer to as Tim. Tim was a good guy, wanted to be a cop but at the time was too young. He took the security gig and hoped it would open a few doors and he was able to make a few contacts here and there. Due to his age, and the fact that he was too young for our company insurance to be a patrolman, He usually got relegated to a lot of stationary sites like the setting for today’s masterpiece. This didn’t seem to bother him too much as he was always a very approachable guy. Anyway, on to the story.

On this day, like most of Tim’s days, he was working a local WinCo grocery store. At the time the store usually had a guard standing out front and up to two loss prevention guys monitoring the store. Like Walmart, this place invited a level of crazy that definitely deserves its own Facebook page but Tim was usually capable of handling it. On this day the crazy just decided to slam a few energy drinks and decided shop listing sounded fun.

The story, Tim was out front doing his Guard/store greeter thing when he was called by the Loss Prevention and told to be on the lookout for a shoplifter, Our Kevin, with a female accomplice who had a child in a stroller. Loss Prevention had been keeping an eye on him via the cameras and had watched him hide some shaving stuff in his jacket while his GF hid some alcohol in the child’s stroller. Tim didn’t have to wait long as he caught sight of the Kevin and his GF. 

Tim made the stop just as Loss Prevention arrived. The Kevin started going on a rant about being hassled.  Loss Prevention pointed out that he had shaving equipment in his jacket, even labeling every item by brand, as well as the bottle of alcohol under the stroller. The Kevin tried saying he came into the store with the items but obviously Loss Prevention and Tim weren’t buying it. The Kevin relented and gave the items back, complaining the whole time that he was being robbed, and tried to leave but was stopped by Tim who informed him he had to wait for the police. That’s when crap hit the fan.

Kevin pulled out a pair of brass knuckles and began trying to assault Tim. Loss Prevention stepped in and managed to tackle The Kevin to the ground, grappling the Kevin’s punching hand. This didn’t stop the Kevin though from continuing the assault, biting at not only Tim and Loss Prevention, but also at a handful of good samaritans trying to assist in subduing the Kevin. While all of this was going on, The Kevin’s girlfriend has her phone out and is delivering a commentary of how everyone is beating up The Kevin (read:”my boyfriend and I were minding are own business and these security Not Sees attacked us”). 

The cops finally arrived after what seemed like hours according to Tim, managing to get Kevin cuffed while he flayed around. As he was being hauled away The Kevin’s final words to his girlfriend were “bail me out, babe” before being taken away. Insanely enough this isn’t where the story ended. 

The next part actually came from a news article I found while trying to find the Police Blotter report. Apparently The Kevin went before a judge and was given a bail amount more than he could afford and he tried asking for leniency. The judge denied it and that’s when the Kevin came up with what he thought was a golden excuse. He proceeded to tell the Judge that he only acted like that because of all the drugs he was on. The judge asked him to seek counseling from a lawyer before saying anything else and apparently the Kevin just kept going on about the drugs he was on that day, fully believing that he wasn’t in charge of his actions!(Sorry for my English, I am still learning)

This Kevina is my close friend and also a flatmate, unfortunately, she often thinks in Kevin's way. You know, cat is surely a dog but even if it isn't, then it might be a squirrel. Somewhere in the early January 2021 we both decided it's time to finally start exercising and get fit for the upcomin summer season. 

And as you may guessed, while I actually took it seriously, Kevina started to think about ways to get fit without actually putting any effort into it. And what really makes her Kevina is the fact, that she really beliefs that her ways of loosing fat and getting fit will work one day...

\- No need for actuall exercising, stretching is way more than enough. No matter how many times told otherwise, Kevina is stubborn to belive, that stretching equals losing fat. I could understand if it would be an actuall power stretching or something, that will help her shape her belly and legs muscle a little bit, but no. She will literally do some bends, a few squats and call it a day. From what she told me, she isn't even sweating during her "exercising" but she still expects fat to just go away.

\- Kevina loves junk food and eats it at least a few times a week. I told her, that it may go if she will count her calories. Every macdonalds meal has a kcal quantiny written on the packaging to make it even easier. No, Kevina will always order the most caloric foods from the menu because they are her favorite. One time she really get into manging her diet with a new app she downloaded. She was so excited to try it until...nex mornign when she decided she's too lazy to go to the store for bananas and eggs and dumped her new diet plan right away.

 From one extreme to the other, if someone will manage to get to Kevina somehow, she will then switch to not eating literally anything for the whole day. It's impossible to explain to her, that instead of losing fat she will just get weaker and hungrier than before. And after getting very hungry after not eating for whole day...she will order macdonals.  To justify it, she says that she is going to burn that additional fat during exercises anyway. Yes, during stretching...

\- Kevina doesn't know what she maybe doing wrong. She keeps complaining that everyone are getting fit while she's only gathering more fat. (We're living together for about half of the year and she gained + \~\~15 kilos from eating junk) 

\- Kevina loves tips and tricks for quicker fat loos that can be found over internet. She's mainly focusing on drinking lemon water and doing coffee grounds peeling. What she doesn't want to understand is these tips are really working miracles but while you're doing some real workout and diet. They're just helping you to get fitter instead of just making you fit. And what's more about that coffee peeling, the first time she told me she tried it,  we didn't even had an actuall coffee at home. I think she did it with an instant.  She tried to do peeling with something that dissolves completely. 

\- Not gonna lie, I love junk food too but I do understand that if I want macdonalds for dinner, it means really hard workout time. What about Kevina?  She weighs almost every day. If her weight drops even by one kilogram, it means that she can order macdonalds now. This way, in three months, she balanced between losing - 1kg and gaining +1kg

\- And obviously, every day is a good day to not do anything at all. Kevina either has the weakest  immunological system I ever saw or she's acting every time she feels lazy. Literally, this Kevina never stops complaining about how bad she's feeling today and how unable she's to do anything. But Kevina is a brave, strong girl! She know how to take care of herself! She won't do anything at all, will stay on our couch watching tv for whole day. Kevina did a great job again.

&#x200B;

For me personally, the most pissing element of all of this is the fact that she REALLY doesn't get it and get's super depressed anytime any of her friends (me included) will do any progress.My friend Kevin (putting this in the nicest way possible) is a ham fisted idiot with an immense and unprovoked hatred of squirrels. 

His supposed squirrel vendetta for lack of a better word, stemmed from an incident from his child hood. The story is as follows; Kevin and his mum are walking through the woods, Kevin spots a squirrel. The squirrels more sociable than most goes up to Kevin, curious to find out what this strange creature was. 

Kevin in his infinite wisdom grabs an acorn of the floor and tries to feed the squirrel, the squirrel unwavered by the obvious bribe from a rival squirrels denies the offer. 
Kevin then proceed to force feed the squirrel his nut. In a burst of pure terror the squirrel unceremoniously uses Kevin's testicles as a launch pad to the nearest tree top in order to escape the giant sweaty childs wrath. 

The obvious response to that mistake would be dont force feed wild animals, but not Kevin. Kevin has taken that event and stored in the same place in his brain he storeds his hatred of American television, Indians who don't like curry and people who don't watch day time television. The poor and innocent squirrel. 

TL:DR don't force feed wild animalsMy younger sister is 17, and it just hit me that she’s not the quickest thinker out there. I’ve got a few stories that come to mind about this.

Kevina was shopping at the mall (pre-pandemic) and was extremely excited that she could get random items for free. When I asked her to show me the deal she pointed at a sign that said “BOGO 50%!”, I think she forgot that the 50% was there for a reason.

Kevina is baaaaaad with animals. She insists she loves them but isn’t good with them. She got little frogs as pets and they lasted two weeks. Why? She kept them next to an open window in -20C degrees. She was bummed out about that and didn’t get it.

Kevina ran up to me one day very very excited about a discovery she made. She proceeded to explain to me that our mother was white and our dad was Portuguese, making us half Latina. I explained to her that dad was white as well and not Latino, she told me I was wrong.

This most recent incident made me realize that she’s a Kevina. I was driving her and after letting a pedestrian cross, I turned right on red (perfectly legal in my province). She accused of running a red light. Her reasoning was this: when there are three traffic lights, the left one is for turning left, middle is to go straight and the right one is to turn right. I told her that it’s for different angles and that it’s easier to see from far as well. She told me I was wrong and when she got out of the car said “keep going through reds”. I should note that before I brought her to her destination she said “I can’t wait for my license so I can drive myself”.(sorry for any mistakes english is my second/third language) At the time I went to a horrible school that did not care about anything, so Kevins, yes his real name was actually Kevin no one was willing to deal with Kevins antics. This dude did many stupid things (most of them I forgot about). He took the school bus just like me, for some reason he thought that the first seat in the first seat in the bus was the greatest, that's why he threatened to throw rocks at anyone else who dared to sit there. Thankfully for him he never did because he sucked at fighting. One time in the winter in the break he saw that some people had built an igloo of some kind. Kevin insisted that he be let in but they told him no. This really seemed to piss Kevin off so he attacked one of the people who came out of there. he jumped on the poor guys back and started punching him, he lost that fight. for the next story I need to add a TW for s\*xual assault. One day while we were waiting for the bus he decided to grab my ass, im a guy, I get that  I look like a girl or maybe that he was gay but later he said he hated gays. anyways he did this 6 different times because "someone told him to"

If I remember any other stories ill make sure to update youHere's a short one about a Kevin I went to High School with.  This Kevin was a smart kid in a lot of ways, as many Kevins are. He was in all the advanced-track, college prep classes, so he definitely had book smarts if nothing else.

For the final in our AP English class, we had to do a whole big project.  Part of it was a normal academic essay on a topic, part of it was choosing several different ways to demonstrate or apply our topic in creative ways.  Kevin is into the creative part, but bored by the regular essay part.  So he decides to plagiarize it.

You probably know a bit about different types of plagiarism and how teachers can spot it. Sometimes it's just failing to attribute some quotes.  Sometimes it's lifting a few paragraphs from Wikipedia and just changing a few words around.  And sometimes it's wholesale using someone else's work.  None of these strategies for our Kevin.

Kevin finds an essay online he thinks will work.  He hits CTRL+P.  He turns it in.

No copy and paste.  No reformatting.  The URL is printed at the bottom of every page.  The website menu and ads on the page?  They're printed too.  The links within the text are even helpfully printed in blue ink.

And of course, he was absolutely shocked he didn't get away with it.The Kevina I work with is a lovely lady, but a bit clueless.  In addition to that, she refuses to take hints.  As an example, she became a huge fan of the show "The Expanse", and she tried every day to make me watch it.  I told her over and over that my husband had watched it, and I'd glanced at a few episodes over his shoulder, but - while I could see that it was an amazing show - it just wasn't my cup of tea.

&#x200B;

That didn't work.  She still kept trying to make me watch it.  Finally, in some desperation, I said "If you want to talk about the show with other people, have you tried Reddit?".  She'd never heard of Reddit, so I explained.  "There are discussion threads for every topic you can possibly name.  I guarantee there will be some about 'The Expanse'."  She seemed interested and said she'd check it out.

&#x200B;

Fast-forward a couple of months.  Kevina and I were discussing some random topic, and I said "I saw a post about it on Reddit."  She got a very weird look on her face and said accusingly "What were **you** doing on Reddit?".  Puzzled, I said "Why shouldn't I be?".  She said angrily "Oh, gee, I don't know - because you're **married**?".  Now I was even more puzzled and asked "What's that got to do with it?".  She looked a little less certain and said "Well - it's a dating site, isn't it?".

&#x200B;

Turned out that she'd completely forgotten our previous conversation and had Reddit confused with Tindr.This  is my mom's story, and it's actually really short, but I thought it was hilarious.

My mom works at a hospital where she looks at scans of patients and finds out what's wrong with them to the best of her ability. So one day, she was looking at a case with a gangrenous foot, and the doctor leading the case was named Kevin.(not actually, of course.) So she decides that an amputation would be the best course of action. A couple days later, she sees Dr. Kevin being escorted out of the OR and into the parking lot. She asks his assisting nurse what happened after the patient's surgery was completed, and she says that Dr. Kevin threw the amputated gangrenous foot at her. To this day, the patient doesn't know about this.I kept waiting for the day that I'd have something to post on r/entitledparents r/choosingbeggars or similar subs but out of the blue today I remembered that I have some pretty good material for this sub. 

Today I'd like to tell you about the wife of a friend of mine, let's call her Angie. Angie is a sweet girl in her early 20's, has an amazing talent for languages, other than her native English, and has so many wonderful stories of her exploits.

One of my favorites was related to her phone. She had a cheap android phone which she primarily used for taking selfies, oh God so many selfies. She came to me complaining that her phone was slow and glitchy and asked if I could fix it. I said I'd take a look and I went to her storage first and found the memory was entirely full, I mean entirely. So I looked to see what the culprit was and of course it was her photo storage, to the tune of 80% of her available storage after the OS was photos. So I set her up to transfer everything to Google photos to clear some space. Once that was done, I had to do 2-3 OS updates she'd ignored. Then I looked at app updates some of which hadn't updated in 6mo. So I set it to update everything, gave her the phone back and told her to let it do it's thing while I go have a smoke. I knew Angie was not what one would call "tech savvy" so I told her to come get me if she saw anything unusual, I also uninstalled several non-app store apps that looked fishy. After about 5min she calls out to me from the livingroom in a bit of a panic about this app she doesn't recognize trying to update. I ask what it is and she yells "it's the Call Lander!" I'm rightfully confused and ask her to repeat it and she clarifies "Google Call Lander!" I'm even more confused because I like to keep up to date on new Google apps and I had never heard of "Google Call Lander". So I but out my smoke and go inside to look and she shows me her screen. This is the first instance of an oft used phrase for me when talking to Angie for the rest of the time I've known her "God damnit, Angie!"  "That's CALENDAR. Google Calendar, like the days of the week".

On another occasion we were discussing kids, she had already had one by this point but was trying to make a joke that she was a virgin. I asked her how she thought that worked and she told me it was like Jesus "immaculate constipation". I sprayed soda in a fine mist across the room. This wasn't just a matter of saying the wrong word, she got the idea that since the baby wasn't made the normal way it would come out a different orifice, that's why it was called "constipation" because it had to do with the butt. 

Another time, I don't remember why, the old song that starts with "On top of old smoky" came up in conversation. She immediately says "oh you mean like the 'La cucaracha' song?" Still can't figure out the relationship there, her explanation didn't help. She made some comment about how some people sang the 1st song as "on top of spaghetti" as a parody and that's why it was the same. 

Just the other day, she called her husband and asked "what was that "jet" song we listened to the other day, Alexa doesn't know it". Her husband asked her for more details because they listen to a lot of music. She says "you know, the one that goes 'D-d-d-d- daddy with the jet!'". He thought about it for a few minutes and said "wait a second, and he hums a few bars of a song to her and she says "yeah, that's it!" He was humming "Bennie and the Jets" by Elton John, he told me now all he can hear is Elton screaming "DADDDDDY WITH A JET!" now. 

She asked her husband a bit ago to pick up "heatant" on the way home. He asked wtf she was talking about. She said "you know, the opposite of coolant because the car took a long time to warm up today so maybe it needs warm juice". He told her there's no such thing, it doesn't exist. She replied "omg well then coolant doesn't exist!"

Another time she asked what kind of lizard or snake had to bite a guy so his penis stopped working. Her husband asked wtf she was talking about. She said "you know when a guy gets 'a reptile disfunction', what is it that bites his junk and it quits working?" 

She had just turned 20, I think, when she went into a chain drug store and had to use the bathroom. In this particular store you had to ask an employee to let you into the restroom. She had to go really bad so she shuffled up to an employee with her legs practically crossed, doing the dance and said "excuse me, I have to go pee pee!" Between her acting and sounding like a 5yo but looking late teens early 20's the older female employee said "oh course, dear, where's your guardian?" She looked confused, which was her standard look, and asks "guardian?". The employee let's her into the bathroom and clarifies "the person who takes care of you". Angie says "he's outside" thinking "why do they want to know where my husband is?". She tells us this story later and we laughed and she asked wtf. We had to explain that they thought she was "mentally challenged" at a level where she needed a caretaker and wanted to know if she was supervised. She wasn't amused. 

The absolute best one, I have video of and here's the link. Please forgive my wife and I for butchering that classic Abbot and Costello skit, it was off the cuff. I brought it up because I thought it was pretty common knowledge and I really didn't expect anyone to seriously fall for it.

https://youtu.be/OGHWYvpqSsI

There are so many more with new ones happening all the time, I'll update when I get a new batch.

Edit: Spellingbackstory: in 6th grade, we had a mummify a stuffie project

cast:

Kevin: the Kevin in a different team

Me: innocent bystander

story:

we were supposed to attach the mask after we mummified the stuffie but Kevin just HOT GLUE the mask on the not mummified stuffie then said "don't worry its removable" READ HOT GLUE so he couldn't remove it. the mask was supposed to be of the stuffie HE MADE A MASK OF A WHITE BUNNY (his team's stuffie was a black cat). Later he drew a MUSTACHE AND, angry-looking, EYEBROWS sometime in class I wasn't there to see him do it.

aftermath:

his team before mummifying had to rip off the mask, the stuffie's face looked like it got punched into a pulp but the face was going to be covered so it doesn't matter.

tell me if I made a mistake in formatting, spelling, or grammar because it's my first post.I’ve posted on this sub before this is not the same Kevin from before (that ones real name was ACTUALLY Kevin lol). A guy in my grade who I rarely speak to messaged my bf and said that he was a pedophile. He said, “Think about it, you were a Junior while she was a Freshman.” For context at the time I was 16 and my bf was 18. Whole thing was very strange I never speak to that kid and he’d have to have gone through my tagged posts on insta to find my bf’s account and message him. He spammed him photos of Chris Hansen and criticized our 1 and 1/2 year age gap. When I called him out on it he blocked me on everything. Funny part is over the summer he ended up dating a girl a grade below him...So I have a friend Kevin who thought that epd445 faked being a pedo for attention 2days later he got caught with weedThis is my first post here and I’m on mobile, so be kind and excuse the formatting.

These are a few short stories about a Kevin i had the displeasure of sharing a class with in high school.

Kevin was in my ceramics class. I was about to graduate and he was a freshman I think. He had definitely been held back a few grades because he could drive (lord watch over anyone in his way) and “held down” a job.

Despite our grade difference, we were in the same class because of how the pottery classes were structured. Students could take the class as many times as you wanted. The first time was the most basic with hand building, second year introduced throwing on a wheel, 3rd year was more advanced techniques and so on. I was taking the class a 4th time by this point. Kevin was, predictably, in the basic class.

Now Kevin was like grainy coffee, no filter. He would say anything and everything that popped into his mind. This would include everything from off the wall conspiracies to just complete idiocy. Typically, his “quotes from Kevin” were followed by a collective *sigh* from the class and a unanimous, “Kevin...” said in a tone as if you were scolding a child or puppy for soiling themselves. The difference is that the toddler and dog would KNOW that they F’d up where as Kevin seemed to just be egged on by it. You couldn’t “prove” Kevin wrong with logic and we accepted that he was beyond help.

If Kevin’s art abilities were something to scoff at, you’d be scoffing at just how many pots and projects of his blew up, and the ones that stay together we abysmal in their quality. Pottery can blow up in a kiln for a few reasons, either there can be air bubbles in the clay, it’s too thick, or it’s too wet, all of which were almost always present in the works Kevin churned out.

I think he had a total of 2 assignments NOT blow up, and the rest were held together with Elmer’s Glue and a prayer (Elmer’s glue is actually great to repair broken mugs and such with). His projects exploded so spectacularly, he only had the most bare bones of shards to glue back together.

We all felt bad for Kevin but couldn’t stand him at the same time, but we did try to help him where we could. I don’t think he was ever diagnosed with any learning disabilities, but there were definitely a few screws loose in the old noggin.

I was relieved when that semester was over and I didn’t have to see that drain on my life force ever again.

But I was wrong.

My first winter break home from college, I picked up a few hours at the burger joint I worked at in high school, and someone somewhere in the company had hired Kevin to work there!

This post has been a bit long already, so if this does well I’ll make another post detailing his constant and epic fails that occurred in less than a month of working with me.

Thanks!A few weeks ago, I asked my husband to bring me a pie crust from the store for chicken pot pie and he brought me a graham cracker crust. Original post:

https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/mq5248/graham_cracker_chicken_pot_pie/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share

This week, my family is coming and I wanted to make chicken pot pie again - something I can prep ahead of time. 

He managed to get the correct pie crust, but... Guess what I just found in the cupboard instead of the fridge three days later?Just read about a firecracker incident of another Kevin and remembered a story about a Kevina I used to know:

She was the not-yet girlfriend of a very close friend I had, who was more like a sister.  
We were mere teenagers, with me being the oldest at 16 and her being 14 at the time. Kevina was 15.  
We always spent our New Years together, and since the two of them were oh so in love, I decided to invite her too. My parents gave their okay, 3 more friends were invited, and she gladly accepted too, stating she loved fireworks.  
That was great, because I usually ended up being the only one lighting them.  
I had bought a bunch of different types, getting all hyped up about it.

That year, New Years Eve was particularly cold, and there was Snow.  
So at around midnight, we gathered outside, prepared everything and then celebrated.  
I started shooting up some rockets, and Kevina asked to join me.  
I cheerfully handed her some rocets too and went on preparing my next round. when suddenly I hear the swishing noise of a burning fuse much louder than it should be.  
I turned around just to be met with the shocking picture of Kevina, holding the rocket with the already burning fuse on the stick in her stretched out hand.  
I yelled at her, but she just had that wide smile on her face, blissfully unaware of her own upcoming misery.  
"It's okay, it'll just fly away."

I sprinted the two steps over and grabbed my friend, who was just turning around, just as the rocket went off and started flying horizontally, right into a neighbors window.

Luckily I had been wearing my heavy leather jacket, which held off the sparks from her and I.  
Kevina ended up with relatively minor burns on her hand, and the neighbors sofa caught fire, but was put out again quickly.  
Police was called, and Kevinas parents came.  
I gave a short statement, but I don't know what happened with it, because I made it clear that I didn't want Kevina around again.

The two of them broke up about a week later too, thankfully.So when I was in college I was in a dorm. I had just got a new laptop bacause my old one broke. I am setting it up when the fire alarm goes off... again.

Some idiots on the top floor could not seem to remember to unplug their curling iron. I rolled my eyes and said to my roommates "go ahead I'm going to the bathroom first" 
I had to go and it would be a while since one girl had to be taken to the hospital every time for her epilepsy. 
I come out of the bathroom and there is smoke in the hall.

"Holy shit the first time I ignore it and its real". When I open the stairwell door the smoke is lots thicker. I see the smoke coming out from the door a floor below me. It cleared below that and I wait out side.

When we are allowed back in I go up I stop at the floor the smoke had been coming from. The carpet is burned and there are people gathered around the first door on the hall, Kevina's room. 

I ask around and hear the story from kevina herself. Kevina was studying and decided to microwave some potato logs to eat so she threw the foil wrapped potato logs in the microwave. When it started popping she opened the microwave stirring up the flames. Seeing the stuff on fire reaches in barehanded takes it out the gose to the hall to take it to the bathroom to douse it. She got 3 feet before the flame she was carrying got to much for her and she dropped it"

I ask her, "why would you put foil in the microwave?"
K: "I did not know that would happen"
M: "why did you not close the microwave to smother it a bit and go get water?"
K: "I could take it to water faster"
M: "why did you not smother it when you dropped it?"
K: "how do you smother a fire?"
M: "still why did you think carrying it was a good idea?"
K: "seemed like a good one at the time"
Kevina should you be in college?

I'll admit I did not make the smartest choices either after I saw the smoke I went and grabbed my laptop and saved it. But I did not nuke aluminum foil and try to carry fire.
Kevina was burned a bit but just enough they wrapped her hands and let her stay the epileptic girl did have to go to the hospital though.My Kevin is a Kevina. We are in an RN Masters program. ONE SEMESTER (one class) LEFT

This semester is our capstone project, which is instead of a thesis. So- important.

Cast:

Me

Good group member - Good

Kevina - Kevina

Professor - Prof

Week 1 = we meet for our first online lecture, groups are assigned for the capstone project. I am assigned to a group with Kevina and Good. Our path is lightly penciled in, and we are set loose to try and create this into a formal paper in 4 months.

Week 2 - I haven't heard from anyone, so I send an e-mail to my group members (BCC: Prof) about meeting up to come up with a basis for our project. I hear back from Good stating when she is available, Crickets from Kevina. After 2 days I text Prof, who gets in touch with Kevina, who tells me she was having "e-mail problems". (it happens, but this laid a foundation for the rest of the semester). Now that I am fully in touch with all group members, I check when they are available to meet up and discuss project, come up with a {PROBLEM WE MUST SOLVE}. Both agree on a date and time. Let's say it's Friday that same week. I send Zoom invite.

Thursday - I get a message Kevina has signed into Zoom meeting. I send text "Meeting is Friday" Kevina - "Oh Haha, ok".

Friday - Good and I sign in, no Kevina. We form a basis for {PROBLEM WE MUST SOLVE} (oh you sweet summer children). We text and email Kevina. She's at work. I email Prof. Prof states she will talk with Kevina.

Week 3 - I send email to everyone in group (BCC: Prof) to break up first part of project into manageable sections for each. Set for DATE and TIME, everyone attends, and we lay out assignments,

Next 3 weeks - Kevina attends maybe 3 meetings of the 5, and its all back the beginning with every meeting. We have to re-hash the project goal, what each person's assignment is, and wouldn't you know, Kevina still hasn't managed to get any of the data needed for her part.

Week 6 - Part 1 of project due. Good and I have compiled the data we have acquired and wait until the last hours of the date due. Crickets from Kevina. Good submits what we have. 4 hours after due time, Kevina submits.... some crap she added to our perfectly formatted and edited assignment (this would be roughly 3am; turns out Kevina used 'Grammerly' which broke the formatting of the paper and rendered it stupid). I email Prof to explain what Good and I had done versus whatever Kevina had submitted. We get graded separately. Prof again 'speaks with Kevina'.

The next 4 weeks is for Part 2. We are supposed to edit what is needed (everything from Kevina)/broken (minor edits from Good and I, Kevina has to un-wind the Grammerly from the APA format required) from Part 1, and submit additional research into how to fix {PROBLEM WE MUST SOLVE} for Part 2.

Week 7 - I send email to group on when to meet. Group meets, I lay out plan. I send e-mail afterwards CLEARLY laying out path forward (BCC: Prof).

Week 7, 8, 9, 10 - Kevina continues the same from Part 1. She makes about 2/3 of meetings. It's all BRAND NEW, everytime. She is having trouble getting the data. Blah blah blah. I'm over it.

Week 11 - Part 2 is due. NOTHING from Kevina on edits from Part 1 (which was... everything she was supposed to do for Part 1, and NOTHING from part 2 either). I call Prof and RANT. Prof is sympathetic and states just keep detailing what we are doing, make sure to keep Prof in loop, our grades will not be affected by Kevina.

Due date Part 2 - I send e-mail with the project attached (what there is) explaining what is missing (all of Kevina's stuff) to group (BCC: Prof). Que text from Kevina "Guys, I'm lost. What are we supposed to do for Part 1 and Part 2?". I screen shot the text, send it to Prof (response "Yikes"). I submit what Good and I have done.

Week 12 - Crickets from Kevina. I got an A on submission, I assume Good did as well. I sent an e-mail to Prof telling her what each of US (Me & Good = everything, Kevina = dick-all) had done and what Kevina was SUPPOSED to do.

Week 13 - online meeting with Good, Prof and myself. Group is now light one Kevina. Good and I will carry forward to complete the solution to {PROBLEM WE MUST SOLVE}. Kevina will attempt to salvage a grade with Prof. Prof will meet with Kevina individually and explain this.

Week 14 - I have now received 2 e-mails over the past week explaining the parts from \*PART 1\* she has completed. I haven't responded.

Should I? Because, I have bitten HOLES in my tongue trying to not blow up all semester. I shouldn't. But I WANT to.(Obligatory mobile apology). So Kevin(26), a friend of a friend, has had a recurring eye infection/weepiness/soreness for nigh-on 2 years now and refuses to go to the doctors because every time it even slightly clears up he insists his “cleaning regimen” is solving the problem (this is also for another reason I discovered later). It’s not as if an employer can force him either as he somehow runs his own business. When asked, he insists his regimen involves an eye bath (a little cup of sterile water held onto the eye for a few seconds), eye lubricant (essentially thick, soothing eye drops) and then regular eye drops, all of which can be bought from the supermarket. Sounded pretty normal when he put it like that, but when I happened to be at his house and witnessed his ACTUAL regimen I was speechless.

-The “sterile water” Kevin uses in the eye bath is straight out of the tap, topped off with a couple of sprays of non-bleach cleaning spray (he insists that’s ok as there’s no bleach and the brand is labelled as “eco-friendly”). Eye baths are meant to be single use - Kevin told me he does not empty the eye bath for days and uses it multiple times each day, meaning the water gets dirtier and dirtier.

-The eye lubricant he uses is 5 years out of date. I asked him how he has never bought a new bottle and he shows me the box of 100 he found in his parents attic years ago.

-The “regular” eye drops he uses is a mixture of tap water, the same cleaning spray in the eye bath and then a sprinkle of Himalayan pink salt that he is sure “sucks out the impurities”, all refilled into an old eye drop bottle. Not only that, but each time he uses the mixture he squeezes a large amount onto his eye then proceeds to PUT HIS FINGER DIRECTLY ONTO HIS EYEBALL AND RUB IN THE LIQUID. To compound this he works as a gardener and most times I’ve met him he has had soil on his fingers.

I told him how harmful and dangerous all of this was for his eyes and that he should see a GP (general practitioner) immediately. Kevin then berates me, accusing me of trying to patronise and “baby” him. He also states he “doesn’t want to pay to visit a GP”, leading me to realise he thinks he has to pay for all health services, rather than the NHS providing GP care for free. I assumed this is because he’s a huge fan of House so thinks all medical practices work that way. He also has the same reaction to our mutual friend when he tries to help, and insists his regimen is working but that he just “gets things in it” because of his job. Not even his parents have been able to convince him otherwise, even after they bought him weeks worth of actual eye care products. 

I try to have empathy, but a part of me still waits for the day it gets even worse or something else actually breaks through the Kevin-ness of his thinking.

Edit/update: Thank you so much for all the concern and care in the comments everyone. I’m going to compile the advice here and give it to the people closest to Kevin to see if he can accept the help he really needs. Be assured that I’m reading them all and taking everyone’s suggestions into account.I made the same post but I wanted to change the title. I’ll throw in some more stories as compensation.

This Kevin is a different kind of Kevin.
This all happened when I was in 7th grade. Kevin was in my class and to be honest, he looked exactly like the real Kevin from “the office” if he was Asian. He joined our class in the middle of the year but he showed behaviour that is for 2nd grade. Also, he doesn’t have any disability that makes it reasonable. He is just plain stupid. He speaks mandarin better than English but he can’t read, write, or understand English. He was from Ontario and the school he attended was English only. I can also understand and speak mandarin fluently. I also had a classmate that can speak mandarin more fluent then me. That led to some very embarrassing moments for both all of us. Here are the best Kevin stories. Everything that he said that I put on this that was said by Kevin was spoke in mandarin.

He is from China. Or he claims he’s is from China. At first, I believed him because of his mandarin skills. But soon, he expressed behaviour that is obvious that he is not from China. After a few days, when I got confused and asked the teacher, she said that he is from Ontario and can speak English fluently. Or at least what she is told. She told me that his parents speaks English and he can speak it. When I asked him in mandarin, he told me that he was from China. I was just confused. A minute later, he told me that he is from Ontario. (Since when did Ontario turn into China?) 

During basketball class, Kevin doesn’t participate and just wander everywhere. When me, the classmate, and the teacher asked him why he is not playing, his response was: “I don’t wanna play.” He did this during basketball class on a daily basis.

I didn’t witness it but another time during basketball class, when I finally convinced him to play, he picked up the basketball, ran with it, set the ball down, and kicked it like it’s soccer. It bounced off the wall and hit another girl’s face. I never knew about it until my classmate told me about it after class.

One time Kevin complained about why everyone got so much homework on that day. There were no homework on that day.

One time I checked the weather. It was -2 degrees Celsius. A few classmates, including Kevin looked out the window and it was slightly snowing. All of a sudden, Kevin shouted out “ITS 20 DEGREES OUTSIDE” we all stared at Kevin. He was from Ontario and we also uses Celsius. (-2 degrees Celsius is around 28 degrees Fahrenheit so he would have gotten it wrong either way.)

He always gets up in the middle of class and asks me stupid questions that he already knows. Both me, my classmates, and the teacher tells him to sit down. He did this on a regular basis at all hours of class. He would do it on math, science, English, even at lunch time. Is he playing a prank? Or is he for real?

One time during life skills class when it just began, Kevin stormed into the room and berating all of us about why the teacher called him out. The life skills teacher told Kevin that he can’t shout and have to get out and get back in. He had trouble doing this and it took him 5 minutes and 7 attempts (yes, I counted it) before he finally got it right.

He disturbs the class by talking nonsense and generally stupid topics. Some were so embarrassing that I looked away and covered my ears. Others just made me stand up and yell that if he keeps this up, I will lunge at him just like that famous scene from WWE when Randy Orton tackled Matt Hardy (In short, I wanted to beat him up) and some were even inappropriate. I don’t even know how he managed to avoid trouble. He did this regularly.

He once got his seating assignment (where you will sit for the rest of the month) at the very back. The moment he heard this, he yelled “WHY DO I HAVE TO SIT AT THE VERY BACK?!?!” (this was before I was told that he came from Ontario) I calmly explained that this is not a Chinese school. The seating assignments are random. (In China, the most behaved students sit at the front and the ones who misbehaves sit at the back.) Despite me explaining that, he stills yells out “BUT I BEHAVED.” I proceed to list out every dumb thing that he had done. Kevin still wasn’t having it and he proceeded to moving his seating plan to sit at the front. Several classmates told him to move his seating plan back, but he refused. I have no idea why the teacher didn’t lecture him and let him sit there.

During physical education class, we had a new activity. I don’t know if many people had heard of this sport, but it’s called “shot put.” It involves throwing a heavy but rather small ball and compete to see who throws it the farthest. Now these balls were not too heavy. We used a 1 kilogram ball (2.2 pounds) but it is still heavy enough to cause serious injury. the teacher told us numerous times that the balls could cause serious injuries if it hits someone so everyone is not allowed to retrieve the ball until everyone has thrown it. Everyone stood behind the thrower (half of the class threw it at once and then the other so that the balls don’t hit each other.) Everyone BUT Kevin. Kevin didn’t listen despite me, my classmate, the teacher, and several other classmates telling him to not go until everyone had thrown it. In the middle of a throw, Kevin threw it early and guess what, he went to retrieve it when everyone is still throwing it. The moment the teacher saw it, she yelled at him to go back because it is dangerous. It took several classmates to yell at him before he finally stepped back. He did this a bunch of times. I genuinely don’t know how he managed to not get hit by any of the balls.

That’s all I remember but I’ll post an update as I remember more.

Edit 1: I remembered more stories about Kevin, so here are more stories

During class, he always asked for paper. At first, I thought it was a simple mistake. But literally the next day, he asked for paper again. This soon got annoying so I handed him a large stack of paper. The next day he asked me for paper again. Before I could say anything, the teacher just gave him paper.

Kevin goes to the bathroom without his shoes because he went to clean it. When I asked him, he said “I need to clean my shoes!” He did this a lot. Everyone’s shoes are always dirty so he had no excuse to go to the bathroom.

During lunch time, Kevin asked the teacher if they can give him some cooking oil. When I overheard it, I asked “what do you need them for?” And Kevin’s reply is the dumbest answer I have heard. “I need it to wash my hands.” At first, I thought I heard him wrong or it was a joke. Nope, he was dead serious. I don’t think there is a culture in China or Canada that involves using cooking oil to wash hands.

Kevin almost never brings lunch. Or that is what I thought. It turns out, he had lunch in his backpack. When I asked why he didn’t eat it, he said that he is not hungry. He did this daily.

I saved the best for the last one.

During physical education, (what is it with him and physical education class?) we had to run a lot. During this, Kevin is always last because he never ran. When I asked why, he gave me the dumbest reply ever. “I don’t know how to run.” After he said that, I laughed for a full minute, but he wasn’t laughing. He said it so calmly too. I saw him run before but pretty rarely. And I highly doubt that Kevin doesn’t know how to run when he RAN IN FRONT OF ME a few times. I don’t know about him but... is this a joke?

Edit 2: once again, more stories for the ultimate school Kevin.

Kevin leaves the classroom for the dumbest reasons such as:

I need to go for a walk outside

I need to go to the office to talk to someone (no one called him down)

I need to chat with someone outside of our class

I need some hand sanitizer (there is hand sanitizer in the room but he insisted he wanted the other sanitizers)

One time during recess, Kevin brought his backpack with him. When I asked why, he replied with “my hand sanitizer is inside!” I then asked him why he didn’t just take it out and he gave me another dumb reply. “I’m too lazy to get it out” 

Kevin starts a lot of arguments between me, my mandarin speaking friend, and other classmates.

Kevin once stood up and yelled in mandarin “REVOLT, REVOLT!” Over and over again and he also shouted at a teacher “CHINA IS BETTER THAN THE USA OR CANADA!” (referring to communism.) Both me and my mandarin friend had to yell at him numerous times to get him to calm down and I soon had enough and shouted in mandarin “DID YOU EAT SH*T?!?!” (Are you stupid) and “YOU SEA TURTLE EGG”(the rudest mandarin word that calls people an uncultured swine) and pretty much every swear in the book in both English and mandarin. Kevin just scoffed at them and kept his shenanigans going for another 10 minutes. He was unprovoked when he did this. I still have no idea how he didn’t get in trouble for all of this. Just a simple few words from the teacher. He eventually sat down as if nothing has ever happened.

That is all I have and if this post gets 100 upvotes, I’ll try to post more and I’d love to hear you’re replies

Edit 3: some people were confused about some things so this is to clear some things up
1. Kevin yelled, but in mandarin. No teachers in the school speak it and none of us translated it to the teacher and that is why the teachers refused to do much.
2. This happened years back
3. All the paragraphs that are separated are all on a different occasion 
4. He didn’t get in much trouble elsewhere because once again, none of the teachers speak or understand mandarin. 95% of the time when he does his shenanigans, it could get him suspended or worse if he speaks it in English because it is either inappropriate NSFW, messed up things that I can’t even say here, supporting communism, etc.
5. I know, I make a mistake when I said that -2 degrees Celsius is 33 degrees Fahrenheit when it is around 28 degrees Fahrenheit. That has been corrected. Thanks to those who pointed that out.
6. Yes, he is a Kevin. He clearly knows English and mandarin but he continues to act like a Kevin despite being told what to do in both English and mandarin... repeatedly.
7. I do apologize if I was being too harsh.[Kevin and the Fence ](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/mrp0dk/kevin_and_the_fence_aka_theres_an_open_gate_over/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf)

Hey everyone! Got another security story for you, This time I was at a rather large auction yard. There were two permanent buildings, the actual auction building as well as a maintenance building, all surrounded by an 8 foot tall chain link fence topped with some lovely Razor Wire. The site itself dealt with heavy machinery like Semi Trucks, construction equipment, and the occasional bank repo vehicle just to give you some ideas. Also of note is the site was more or less in the middle of nowhere, just off the freeway, and about an hour from where I normally worked. Far from the normal drama I was used to, this place was a dream!

Working nights at this site was fairly simple. Once every hour I’d do a security check, the first was always a perimeter check, making sure the gates and fences weren’t damaged and so on. This check usually took me 15-20 minutes. All of my checks following the first were more in depth as I’d go through each row of vehicles and  check to make sure they were turned off (the maintenance workers were idiots) as well as a perimeter check. The in depth checks usually took me over an hour. I never did the checks at exact times, always randomly. This was to prevent me from developing a routine and to keep me from being too complacent. After I did my checks I’d go to small hill on the site and park so I could survey the site and take the occasional break.

Anyway, enough with the set up. It’s about 3 in the morning and I’m finishing one of my in depth checks when I hear a car horn being laid on. I drive the perimeter, come to the service gate, and see a car parked with two large dudes sitting in it. The one in the passenger seat got out and I’m not kidding when I say the car lifted off the ground. He was bigger than me but in a “he could beat me in a burger eating contest kind of way” (I’m far from a small guy, but I enjoy salads and cardio). Anyway here’s the conversation that played out:

Me=Me

Passenger= The Kevin

The Kevin: Hey Man, I need to get in here.

Me: Sorry bud, site’s closed till 8.

The Kevin: Cut that horse shit, you’re gonna let me in now or I’m kicking your ass.

*I look at the gate separating us

Me: I don’t think that’s gonna happen, bud. Like I said, site opens at 8. 

The Kevin: Come on, man. I just need to pick up my car!

Me: Do you work here?

The Kevin: No, R*****d. I won a car and I’m here to pick it up. Now open this f*****g gate or you’re gonna be sorry!

*driver nods in agreement

Me: Tell you what, you’re obviously in a tight spot here so this is what I’m gonna do.

*pulls out my duty cell phone and holds it up

Me: I gonna give you till the count of 10 and then I’m calling the cops.

The Kevin then spouted off every derogatory term I’ve ever heard for security while I slowly counted. By the time I hit 7 I began dialing the number and The Kevin panicked. He hopped back in the car, causing the car to briefly bottom out, and they sped off like a couple of wannabe badasses with a middle finger sticking out of the passenger window. I proceeded to make a note in my log and let the dispatch know in case something else happened. Lo and Behold, something else did happen!

After doing another in depth check I went back to my hill and pulled out my book. It didn’t take long before my Spider Sense began tingling and I decided to do an impromptu perimeter check. As I was driving along I saw a familiar figure just outside of the perimeter, except things were rather backwards. By backwards I mean he was somehow hanging upside down!

I’m gonna try and verbally paint a picture. In his infinite wisdom this particular Kevin had the bright idea to hop the fence. It looked like he managed to get his right leg partially over but due to the angle the razor wire was facing his leg was currently resting securely on the wire itself. The rest of his body was dangling upside down with his buddy trying desperately to lift him. For a minute or two I thought this might have been an elaborate prank, like Ashton Kutcher was somehow gonna jump out of no where. But no, this was really happening, and I was gonna have to deal with it. I parked my truck (they hadn’t seen me), grab a portable spot light, and walk over to this section of the site to go deal with my new friends!

As I walked up to them I shone my spotlight on them and they freaked. The driver quickly backed away as I heard the Kevin’s pants rip, yet they held. Seriously, those pants must’ve been damn near indestructible. 

Here’s some more of our award winning banter:

The Kevin, after I start shining a light on him: Hey Man, can you give me a hand?

*I begin to clap

Kevin: HAHA VERY FUNNY, R****D!

Me: Ok guys, I’ll be fair. I’ll give you to the count of 10 again to leave, but I will be calling the cops this time. Will that work?


It was at this point The Kevin managed to thrash about enough to fall on his fat back. As Kevin was dusting himself off he proceeds to tell me that he’s suing the auction yard, my company, and me for a number of things but I continued my count. As The Kevin screamed louder I began dialing the number. The Driver begins panicking and yells at the Kevin to get in. They managed to take off in a whirl of dust and rocks flying everywhere, a few even coming close to hitting me, as I’m on the phone with local PD. After they took off I inspected the razor wire for damage and found bits of the Kevin’s jeans still attached to the wire, surprisingly no blood still. I then walked through a man gate not too far from spot we were at so I could inspect the ground, which still seemed intact despite massive force that had landed on it previously. 

PD came out, I gave them the Info I had including the license plate which I was able to collect during the pairs first visit and showed them where the bits of pants were. I notified my dispatch of the incident and had a slightly easier night. As I got off I passed all of the info back to my relief and asked him to relay any info that might happen that day. Lo and behold this wasn’t the end. I got back on shift the next night and the swing shift guy could barely tell me what happened he was laughing so hard. 

So The Kevin came back, still pissed off, and demanded not only his car but predictably also wanted me fired. He raised such a ruckus that the cops had to be called and he ended up arrested after not only admitting to trying to break in but tried taking a swing at the day shift guard. 

What about his car? Well as it turned out he didn’t actually win it, he just placed a bid but never followed up to learn if he won or not. According to the workers that happened from time to time but it doesn’t always play out like that. Hope you all enjoyed the story, later!I just remembered I used to work with a Kevin. My partner and I worked in another town (45min drive) and would occasionally give Kevin lifts (he would pay us petrol money, so we had no problems doing that). 


The poor dude was as dumb as a doorknob, nearly everything went straight over his head. We discovered that he had a helicopter Mum, and while he was in school, she would do his homework for him, etc, and as a full grown adult, she would still baby him (she was the one who contacted my partner to ask for us to give him lifts to and from work). We also had Rob, the conspiracy theorist, who got a lift from us as well. 


Kevin and Rob would sit in the back seat and Kevin ate up everything Rob spewed about (chemical trails, reptilian overlords, microchips given to everyone at birth, you get it). 


After a little while, Rob talks Kevin into getting his own vehicle and him and Rob start driving to work together. 
All goes well for about a month or so when they approach us asking for lifts again. No problems.  


On the way home, we asked what changed their minds. Rob goes off about how him and Kevin worked late one afternoon and Kevin drove home. 
Well Kevin was speeding (120km/h in a 110km/h zone), and goes past a police officer. Cop obviously pulls out and flashes the lights, so Kevin in his infinite wisdom FLOORS it. Rob was screaming at him to pull over and reckons he was driving at 180-200km/h to get away from the cop. They get about 10 mins out from our town and Kevin pulls over. Obvious loss of licence, vehicle impounded and $2000 fine. 


I asked Kevin why he didn't pull over, he said he was tired and just wanted to get home. I was gobsmacked. Kevin said he couldn't work out why the punishment was so severe (he was lucky he wasn't arrested). He really thought it was okay to do that because he was tired. 


I left that position shortly after that, so thankfully I didn't have to deal with him or Rob anymore.


Edit: I forgot to add that Kevin's parents paid to get the car out of the impound lot and not long after, I was told Kevin had purchased another car, despite losing his licence for 2 years..Hey everyone, I just want to preface this story by saying Meth is bad, mmmkay! Anyway this story takes place around 2016, back when I was still working security. My shift just started and on this route my first stop was the local fair grounds. 

There’s a few things I need to point out about these fair grounds:

1. The grounds themselves were surrounded by a large fence that encompassed the entire property, with the fence itself being topped with Razor wire. There are 5 gates that lead onto the grounds and they were usually open from 545 am when the driver on this route opened  to 10 pm when they were closed. 

2. Due to the open gates there was usually some traffic going through the site. Most of the time it was people walking through just to cut down their walk time to people actively driving through so they could avoid the traffic lights. Heck I’ll admit there were occasions when folks were locked in either because they saw us driving around the site and decided to hide or they thought they could zip through while we were locking up. 

3. There were lots of hiding spots on this site. You have a horse barn where I’d regularly find people either working with their horses or homeless trying to sleep, a work shop (saw a guy forge a dagger blade there one night during a blacksmith conference), and a stadium where the occasional rodeo, demolition derby, or monster truck rally occasionally took place. This doesn’t really play a part in the story, it’s just a neat little fun fact!

So now that that’s out of the way let me get started. I had just arrived at the site and was setting about doing my checks and lock up procedures. I managed to get three of the gates locked on my walking patrol when I see the first guy, who I’ll refer to as Leatherjacket passing through. No biggie, like I said this was fairly normal. Then the second guy appeared, a wild eyed wonder I’ll refer to as The Kevin!

After closing the third gate I made my way back to my truck and that’s when I saw the encounter. Leatherjacket was walking by the horse arena, just minding his own business, when The Kevin literally jumped from behind a door and attempted possibly tackle Leatherjacket, but failed miserably. After Leatherjacket managed to push The Kevin off of him I see the two square up like they’re wanting to fight, unfortunately I had to roll up and spoil the fun. I immediately shined my spotlight on them and shouted at them that I wasn’t in the mood for paperwork and asked that they take their fight off of the property. Luckily, both guys complied.

I followed them while in my truck to make sure they leave and see they’re both still talking. Out of nowhere The Kevin decided to cut away from Leatherjacket,  walking away from him and heading towards the actual fence. I have no idea what’s going through this guy’s head but I make sure to remind him the only gate that was opened was the one Leatherjacket was heading towards. He continued to ignore me when I see him do what I knew deep down he was gonna do. He was gonna try and hop that fence! 

The Kevin walked up to the fence and the only thing going through my head at the moment was  “is he really gonna try and do this?” To my immediate lack of surprise he “tried to do this”.  His first attempt ended with him initially losing his grip and falling on his butt. Like any good equestrian rider though, he got back up and tried again. His second attempt was much more successful as he managed to make it to the top. But then he did it, I don’t know why he did it, but he did it. The Kevin, straddling the  top of the fence with the razor wire between his legs, decided to sit down!

To be fair, I did make an attempt to warn The Kevin against doing that, but I doubt he heard me since I was laughing too hard to get a word out. It was when he attempted to swing his leg over the fence that he realized he was stuck. The razor wire that he was sitting on had his crotch snagged and he was struggling to kick his leg over. I honestly tried wanted to offer him a little help but I couldn’t breathe due to laughing so hard. As soon as he managed to get the leg over, I heard a loud rip in his pants, watched him lose his footing and to everyone’s amusement he fell flat on his butt from about 10 feet!

Before I could get over to check on him he was up and vanished somewhere in a neighboring field, never to be seen again. Leatherjacket, who actually watched the whole thing play out near the gate, walked up to me and we both got a good laugh out of what happened before he took off. I then began checking the fence for any noticeable damage or blood for that matter. Luckily the most damage I found were the bits of the guys pants stuck on the wire. I then finished locking up and went about my night. Oddly enough something very similar happened at a different site sometime later, but I’ll share that in a different post.Yes the title is bland but it's true kevin is stupid. First of all my friend told me about this, second the story might be a bit different.

Ok so this guy named kevin (yes thats his real name) was in a mall with my friend and friends gf. We'll call friend Sam and we'll call friends gf Anne.

So while they we're shopping Anne suggested they eat a bit so while she was ordering some food Sam said to kevin...

"Hey you should check out some stores here anne might take a while the line is pretty long"

So kevin said sure and went to buy some clothes. A bit of time later Anne was done ordering but Kevin wasn't there.

As they were looking around they hear an alarm.

Sam said he stole a jacket while Anne said he stole a backpack from a thrift store.

Sam: Dude!? What the hell are you doing put that back!

Anne: Yeah you didn't even pay for it

Kevin: So? It was too expensive and it looked ugly so they probably didn't need it!

Sam: DUDE!! Thats still a crime!

Kevin: No it isn't

Sam forgot what Kevin said but he said something in between "you guys pay for it i deserve it"

Security came in and took kevin to mall jail
His mom got him out and apologized for everything.

This was supposed to be a bit longer but that was all Sam could remember well thanks for reading!

Edit: title is supposed to be "Kevin tries to steal stuff"

Edit: sorry about the grammar english Isn't my first language.This Kevin is a different kind of Kevin.
This all happened when I was in 7th grade. Kevin was in my class and to be honest, he looked exactly like the real Kevin from “the office” if he was Asian. He joined our class in the middle of the year but he showed behaviour that is for 2nd grade. Also, he doesn’t have any disability that makes it reasonable. He is just plain stupid. He speaks mandarin better than English but he can’t read, write, or understand English. He was from Ontario and the school he attended was English only. I can also understand and speak mandarin fluently. I also had a classmate that can speak mandarin more fluent then me. That led to some very embarrassing moments for both all of us. Here are the best Kevin stories. Everything that he said that I put on this that was said by Kevin was spoke in mandarin.

He is from China. Or he claims he’s is from China. At first, I believed him because of his mandarin skills. But soon, he expressed behaviour that is obvious that he is not from China. After a few days, when I got confused and asked the teacher, she said that he is from Ontario and can speak English fluently. Or at least what she is told. She told me that his parents speaks English and he can speak it. When I asked him in mandarin, he told me that he was from China. I was just confused. A minute later, he told me that he is from Ontario. (Since when did Ontario turn into China?) 

During basketball class, Kevin doesn’t participate and just wander everywhere. When me, the classmate, and the teacher asked him why he is not playing, his response was: “I don’t wanna play.” He did this during basketball class on a daily basis.

I didn’t witness it but another time during basketball class, when I finally convinced him to play, he picked up the basketball, ran with it, set the ball down, and kicked it like it’s soccer. It bounced off the wall and hit another girl’s face. I never knew about it until my classmate told me about it after class.

One time Kevin complained about why everyone got so much homework on that day. There were no homework on that day.

One time I checked the weather. It was -2 degrees Celsius. A few classmates, including Kevin looked out the window and it was slightly snowing. All of a sudden, Kevin shouted out “ITS 20 DEGREES OUTSIDE” we all stared at Kevin. He was from Ontario and we also uses Celsius. (-2 degrees Celsius is around 33 degrees Fahrenheit so he would have gotten it wrong either way.)

He always gets up in the middle of class and asks me stupid questions that he already knows. Both me, my classmates, and the teacher tells him to sit down. He did this on a regular basis at all hours of class. He would do it on math, science, English, even at lunch time.

One time during life skills class when it just began, Kevin stormed into the room and berating all of us about why the teacher called him out. The life skills teacher told Kevin that he can’t shout and have to get out and get back in. He had trouble doing this and it took him 5 minutes and 7 attempts (yes, I counted it) before he finally got it right.

He disturbs the class by talking nonsense and generally stupid topics. Some were so embarrassing that I looked away and covered my ears. Others just made me stand up and yell that if he keeps this up, I will lunge at him just like that famous scene that made memes from WWE when Randy Orton tackled Matt Hardy while the judge just kept yelling “OH WATCH OUT WATCH OUT WATCH OUT!” and some were even inappropriate. I don’t even know how he managed to avoid trouble. He did this regularly.

He once got his seating assignment (where you will sit for the rest of the month) at the very back. The moment he heard this, he yelled “WHY DO I HAVE TO SIT AT THE VERY BACK?!?!” (this was before I was told that he came from Ontario) I calmly explained that this is not a Chinese school. The seating assignments are random. (In China, the most behaved students sit at the front and the ones who misbehaves sit at the back.) Despite me explaining that, he stills yells out “BUT I BEHAVED.” I proceed to list out every dumb thing that he had done. Kevin still wasn’t having it and he proceeded to moving his seating plan to sit at the front. Several classmates told him to move his seating plan back, but he refused. I have no idea why the teacher didn’t lecture him and let him sit there.

During physical education class, we had a new activity. I don’t know if many people had heard of this sport, but it’s called “shot put.” It involves throwing a heavy but rather small ball and compete to see who throws it the farthest. Now these balls were not too heavy. We used a 1 kilogram ball (2.2 pounds) but it is still heavy enough to cause serious injury. the teacher told us numerous times that the balls could cause serious injuries if it hits someone so everyone is not allowed to retrieve the ball until everyone has thrown it. Everyone stood behind the thrower (half of the class threw it at once and then the other so that the balls don’t hit each other.) Everyone BUT Kevin. Kevin didn’t listen despite me, my classmate, the teacher, and several other classmates telling him to not go until everyone had thrown it. In the middle of a throw, Kevin threw it early and guess what, he went to retrieve it when everyone is still throwing it. The moment the teacher saw it, she yelled at him to go back because it is dangerous. It took several classmates to yell at him before he finally stepped back. He did this a bunch of times. I genuinely don’t know how he managed to not get hit by any of the balls.

That’s all I remember but I’ll post an update as I remember more.

Edit 1: I remembered more stories about Kevin, so here are more stories

During class, he always asked for paper. At first, I thought it was a simple mistake. But literally the next day, he asked for paper again. This soon got annoying so I handed him a large stack of paper. The next day he asked me for paper again. Before I could say anything, the teacher just gave him paper.

Kevin goes to the bathroom without his shoes because he went to clean it. When I asked him, he said “I need to clean my shoes!” He did this a lot. Everyone’s shoes are always dirty so he had no excuse to go to the bathroom.

During lunch time, Kevin asked the teacher if they can give him some cooking oil. When I overheard it, I asked “what do you need them for?” And Kevin’s reply is the dumbest answer I have heard. “I need it to wash my hands.” At first, I thought I heard him wrong or it was a joke. Nope, he was dead serious. I don’t think there is a culture in China or Canada that involves using cooking oil to wash hands.

Kevin almost never brings lunch. Or that is what I thought. It turns out, he had lunch in his backpack. When I asked why he didn’t eat it, he said that he is not hungry. He did this daily.

I saved the best for the last one.

During physical education, (what is it with him and physical education class?) we had to run a lot. During this, Kevin is always last because he never ran. When I asked why, he gave me the dumbest reply ever. “I don’t know how to run.” After he said that, I laughed for a full minute, but he wasn’t laughing. He said it so calmly too. I saw him run before but pretty rarely. And I highly doubt that Kevin doesn’t know how to run when he RAN IN FRONT OF ME a few times. How dumb is he?One of my ex's is Kevin. 

I was living with a friend *actually* named Kevin in NC and had lost my job during the housing market crash. I was taking up side jobs, to make rent and car payments but it was rough. I was arranging things to move out and go back home, when a good friend's ex girlfriend hits me up. She moved out of state and married another dude but was needing consultation because things with her then husband wasn't going very well. Me, being a sympathetic person felt her pain and gave comforting advice. She told me a lot of stories, too many to recall. To get the gist of the way Kevin explained her marriage woes: He was niceguy Kevin. (I found out later after I had broke up with her that he was anything but a niceguy Kevin.)

We were getting into each other pretty heavily a month into talking. She told me that she had made arrangements to divorce niceguy Kevin. After hinting at driving down to NC after the papers were served, (he'd surely beat or kill her once he found out) I was all for it. Now here I am, in this unbreakable position and we're going to drive back home to my Mom's place together. I didn't really feel comfortable with her moving in with me at my Mom's place, but my Mom is a very nice lady and she wouldn't mind. Also, why not? I'm checkmated. I convince myself that it's a great idea and it's a new life that might actually be easier to manage with someone else helping carry the load. (Boy was I sadly mistaken) 

The day had finally came. Papers were served. She was on the way! Excitement and all the feelings of finally seeing her in person again were coming true. She was coming from MN, so it was a long drive down. The same day of her departure and serving, she called me to tell me she had her stuff in the car and was heading out soon. *Ok, I said. Give me a call when you're down the road so I know you're good*. For the next 24 hours I sat there worrying and contemplated calling the police. What if she just didn't have battery on her phone though? All these questions I asked myself swayed me away from calling them. 48 hours go by. Then, some time around midnight, she calls. *Hi! I'm so sorry. I lost my phone, but I have another one now. Oh, thankfully you're alright*. I was literally going to call the police when I woke up. She's still 8 hours away because she told me that she had hit a deer and messed her front end up along the way. I tell her to drive safe and go back to sleep. Around noon the next day, she finally arrives. The car she's driving looks like it went through I meat grinder. There's deep dents all over it front to back. The front end was really messed up. It looked like it wasn't the first "deer" she's hit. And it definitely wasn't going to be the last if she had anything to say about it. She was looking unkempt but good at the same time. We hugged and kissed passionately for a good minute and started our journey back home. 

The day after we had arrived, we were going to go to brunch with a few of my old friends. She insisted on driving because I looked tired and she was scared as a passenger. Ride of my life. She was dangerous. Literally running stop sign after stop sign before exiting my neighborhood. On the main road, it was 10 and 15 under the speed limit (35mph) . Here comes a stop light. Holy fuck. She's not stopping. There's a few cars in line and we're not stopping. I clinch my hand onto the door with a grip of death and embrace for impact. At the very last second she slams on the breaks and stops short of hitting the car in front of us. I turned to her and asked calmly with a cup of adrenaline, *Can you be more careful, Kevin*? She responds with denial like nothing she did was wrong. I repeated myself to make myself more clear. *You just can't stop a car like that. It's dangerous*. Thankfully arriving alive at our destination, we take our seats and try to order. Very indecisively, she takes forever to order. Everyone is obviously not wanting to turn the server away again bc she's not ready. The food is brought out and she finally makes the a choice. It's a grilled salmon and vegies. She eats it with a spoon. 

List of things:  
a)  Caught doing laundry without putting any soap into the machine claiming she forgot. (*I had a sneaking suspicion that this was probably a thing when my socks would last only an hour at the jobsites I was working at)*  
b) Leaving towels inside the bath tub to soak up the water left over, then putting them in the hamper or on the floor soaking wet.  
c) She had 3 different jobs, lasted 1, 2 and 5 days. 1 day, fired. 2 day, the first day was a short 4 hour day and the next was extra short 2 hour fired. 5 day - training receptionist at a friend's company who said that she couldn't figure out how to put people on hold and was caught by a customer saying *Fuck this job and these people* while she had the phone on the desk.  
d) Smoked copious amounts of weed to the point of complete brainlessness. *Moar Kevina! Moar! (I don't smoke)*  
e) My Mom wouldn't let her go into the kitchen anymore because she almost burnt the house down after leaving a dish rag underneath a cookie sheet in the oven because it would have been *easier to take out of the oven without picking up the rag again* to take the sheet out after her pizza was cooked.  
f) At a friend's party, she spilled an entire cup of red wine on their couch and covered it up with a pillow and claimed that she didn't do it.   
g) Never flushed the toilet. It wasn't just one or two times every once in awhile. It was every single time.  
Too many things to list. I can go on. And I probably will with edits...

She could tell I was getting annoyed. So, she had to think of something quick to make me feel sorry for her again because my patience was running thin. A trip to the hospital would do the trick maybe. She came home with an arm band and looked really pale in the face (She had makeup on).  She came in and told a tale that the doctors thinks she had cervical cancer and has a follow up next week. I had another sneaking suspicion that this too, was a lie but how could I prove it? I tried to feel compassionate but, I just couldn't do it. The following week, she went in and it was the worst news someone could possibly get. She has cancer and will need to schedule chemo therapy. Another week goes by, my Mom was feeling really awful about the news and wanted to help her as much as humanly possible. Several times, asking if she wanted to go to another doctor for a second opinion and/or a ride to go somewhere else for another diagnosis, the answer was no. 

I ended up finding out that she was lying about the cancer when I had tailed her to the doctor's office and walked in with her. She was only going to get her anti depression meds. I called her ex husband, asked a bunch of questions and got to know him pretty well. Decent guy, told me basically the same gripes. I found out that she wasn't actually officially divorced and told him that she was going to her parents house for a month long vacation / break. 5 months later, there I was kicking her out. I helped pack her stuff because I know if I didn't, she'd pretty much try to stay or worse, keep calling because she forgot things. 

Yeah....I told my husband, Kevin, that I would make chicken pot pie this week for one of my dinners. It's not a new recipe, I've made it a dozen times. Normally, I make the pie crust from scratch but this week I didn't want to go through the trouble, so I asked him to get a pie crust "for chicken pot pie" while he grocery shopped, and I even explained where in the store they keep it. 

What did he bring home? Graham cracker crust pie.

I'm tempted to make it just so I can watch him eat the disgusting atrocity.[Biggest Kevin](https://youtu.be/CGeVl4_3Wss)Years ago, I began work in a callcenter for our national railway company.    
Somehow, Railways attract slightly odd people.    
I had a collegue who had occasionally be reminded to use her inside voice, otherwise agents several desks in every direction where unable to understand their callers.    
We had a guy that insisted on showing up to work in uniform, we didn't have any, but he owned a collection of train-driver uniforms from the sixties to present he would rotate through.    
And that where just the oddities on OUR end of the phones.    


I'm telling you this to make clear that you had to be an exceptional person to manage to be fired there.    
Kevin wasn't just fired, he was escorted out by railway-security and federal-cops.    
Management had figured out that he was buying and reselling train tickets.    
This would have been led to him being fired.    
Upon closer inspection, it turned out each of those tickets had been bought with a different credit-card, as Kevin had written down the credit-card details of every customer he interacted with for this purpose.    
Hence the security and police.    
How did management, who usually had a hard time telling their ass from a hole in the ground, figure out that Kevin was such a criminal mastermind? Would he have gotten away with it, if not for some meddling kids?    
Kevin, in his amazing wisdom, had offered his tickets on the blackboard of the callcenter-internal chat.I have a former friend who is a huge fan of Big Brother. They have said a lot of stupid things to me that involve that show, so I thought I would compile some of them in a post. This one will be more meaningful to you if you watch the show, but for those who don't, I will try to explain what you need to know.

The show follows a bunch of buffoons in a house where they are watched with cameras 24/7. People are able to watch it live online, except when the feeds are down because something is happening that production wants you to have to wait for the show to see. something called Big Brother After Dark is on for a few hours each night, in which you can watch the live shenanigans in the house on TV. The edited show is on 3 times a week. One of the three weekly episodes is an allegedly live eviction that is not really live.

When Kevin first discovered the "After Dark" show and that they could watch "After Dark" episodes online, they binged some. They thought it highly noteworthy that some of the footage in the edited show originally came from After Dark. I couldn't think how to explain that this is expected and not some production conspiracy of hiding the source of their footage. What would the alternative be? excluding anything that happens during After Dark from appearing in the edited show? Of course things happen in After Dark that become relevant to the story.

I was explaining some of the strategies in the game and how some people lay low so they will be brought along to the final two and at least get second place. Kevin: right because only first place gets a prize. I explain that second place gets a prize too and wondered why they would say that when I just told them some people aim for second place. why would someone aim for second "because only first gets a prize"?

Each week, players vote somebody out of the game. At some point, we were discussing votes and Kevin says "right because they don't count all the votes just whoever gets a certain number first". You have a minor in political science and you don't understand that the certain number of votes at which they declare who is out is the number that makes it impossible for the other to get more. In Kevin's defence, I suspect they have some mental disorder with numbers.

In another number-related confusion, Kevin had trouble wrapping their head around the fact that at a certain point there is only one person to vote. Thought it was a "twist".

Like I said, one episode per week is allegedly live. We discussed how production sometimes lies about things like that. Kevin got confused sometimes and thought all the edited episodes claimed to be live, even though the edited episodes generally go back and forth to footage of players narrating events after-the-fact and are therefore clearly not supposed to be thought live. Kevin pointed out how suspicious it is they say "tune in next time to see who wins veto" and then you can find out online before the episode airs.

We watched a season that had a twist where a pair of twins played as one person, switching back and forth every so often. We watched the premiere episode, where we see the buffoons move in and have their first competition. Kevin looks for subtle differences to try and determine who is the secret twin. We got into an argument when I tried to explain why there likely wasn't time for switching during the events of the episode.

Two players who were close allies were put up for eviction against each other. One was voted out unanimously and the other was sad. Kevin forgets that those on the chopping block don't vote and begins speculating why the guy voted his friend out. I point out the obvious fact that even if they were allowed to vote while on the chopping block, that player's only alternative to voting out their friend would be voting out themself!

Kevin complained once the episode was moving too slow because it hadn't gotten to nominations for eviction yet. I explained the format of the show that 90% of the time, the episode on that day of the week ENDED with the nominations for eviction. Kevin had been watching for years and didn't pick up on the pattern. Said they knew the host always said the schedule but Kevin wasn't sure it was accurate or just hype.

Edit: Here is another good one I forgot. Sometimes, during the (not really live) live show, they play a week's worth of game in one hour (double eviction). During this they of course have fast and relatively easy competitions. When watching the edited highlights of a veto competition that took hours to play in real time, Kevin expressed concern about what happens if they have a long competition like that during double eviction. Don't worry, Kevin, I am pretty sure production knows enough to plan which competitions will be done within an hour long live show.

Edit: I know this post is nearly two weeks old now, but I remembered a few more I think are interesting enough to share but not interesting enough for a whole new post:

During one of the aforementioned "double eviction" episodes, we were messaging each other while watching. Now there is normally a veto competition in the mid-week episode. The veto episode usually shows them selecting players for the competition. In the double-eviction, to save time they do the selection of players during commercial break. When Kevin noticed the double-eviction episode didn't show the selection of players, they were convinced it was because they were saving it to show next episode. that after we would already have seen who was eliminated that round, and the player selection for the competition would not be in any way relevant to the story moving forward, they were saving it to show after that. Now sometimes, things happen during commercial break that are dramatic enough they show it next episode, but never something as mundane as this. I tried to explain to Kevin that they weren't going to show that at all, not unless something of note happened during it, they did things during commercial to save time. Kevin's mind sometimes moves faster than I can type a message, and they insisted the commercial breaks were in the show solely to film things to show next episode. And that they had the player selection during commercial rather than live "in case players said something they shouldn't" (as if that part of the process was more likely to have that happen than the other parts). I finally got through to Kevin when I pointed out that the network/sponsors force them to have commercial breaks, production doesn't have a say in that. 

Now this next one may fall more into the category of general stupidity than Big Brother stupidity. The final competition of a season was between two players answering. series of true and false questions. There ended up having to be a tie-breaker because the two got the same number of questions right as each other. Not only did they have the same number of points, they actually had all the same answers as each other. They both answered every question the same as each other, getting the same five right and the same two wrong. I pointed out to Kevin "hey, it's pretty interesting they both had the same answers to every question". Kevin replies "there were two exceptions \[proceeds to spell out in detail which two questions the players answered incorrectly\] but since they both got it wrong it didn't matter". yes, you moron, what I said was that they answered every question the same, not that they answered every question correctly. My friend has a lodger who is a Kevin. A female Kevin. For some reason I dislike the term 'Kevina', so I'm just gonna call her Kevin.

When I met Kevin, I initially tried to be friendly towards her. She mentioned her church, so I asked which church she went to. I wasn't familiar with it, so she told me a bit more about it. It becomes apparent that this is a cult. She tells me that their pastor (almighty cult leader, possibly more important than Jesus) wrote the world's best selling book. I managed not to sarcastically reply with "He wrote Harry Potter?" and just made a mental note never to discuss religion with this person.

In recent times I've learned that Kevin's cult believes that coronavirus is a conspiracy to turn people away from God. Although Kevin personally believes that the virus was made by evil scientists in Wuhan because "A laboratory and a market in the same place? That's just too much of a coincidence". I'm not sure if anyone's told her that our city contains multiple laboratories and markets.

It's not just that Kevin is a cult member... Kevin is also just dumb. She had no idea how to change a lightbulb. She's nearly 30 years old.  
She has no concept of food hygeine. She leaves meat unrefrigerated for ages. She defrosts meat in the sink without even cleaning the sink first. I am unsure how she's not died from salmonella.

Her most recent achievment also involves defrosting meat. Apparently, she only wanted to defrost some of it. And of course, the best way to seperate the frozen meat would be to whack it against the window sill. A piece did detatch, with some force, and flew into the window. My friend has now billed her for a broken window.Please excuse me if I ramble but I'm still reeling from this interaction, and it's been a few days.

This female Kevin I met probably 10 years ago. When we first met she was a pressurised ball of enthusiasm. She wanted to do and learn everything, and thought she was missing out if she didn't try everything. She used to be so positive, but sadly over the years she has become very cynical.

Kevin always used to be quirky. One of the first things she told us was that she had a dream in which all her friends lived in this village of huts and how they were all Angels. She used to believe that myself and my husband were angels. I saw it as her seeing the good in people around her, but no. Later on we learnt that she actually thought we were angels.

Once she invited herself (she did this regularly) over on a night we had our Dungeons and Dragons session. She wanted to join in. We discovered that she didn't know how Dice worked. My husband asked her 
'Can you roll 2 D20 (20 sided Dice) and pick the highest number?'. She proceeded to pick up the Dice and inspect them both really closely.
 'What are you doing Kevin?
' I'm checking to see which one has the highest number on it. '
' Never mind, how about you just roll one dice?'
Kevin rolls the Dice, then looks up expectantly.' What do i do now?'
'You tell me what number you got.' 
Kevin again inspects the Dice. 'which number do I choose?' 
'The one on the top of the Dice!' 
Kevin never played with us again, but I think she did join another group for a bit.

Kevin took me on a wild goose chase around the city because she'd agreed to meet up with a friend but didn't bother checking the directions to their house. She literally walked around hoping to find the street.

Once Kevin and I got a Christmas job doing data entry together. I agreed to walk to work with her. We were both doing a night shift and I as advised that it would be safer to walk with someone. It took me a while to get Kevin to shift because she'd found a funny meme, shared it on Facebook and was waiting for someone to like it. Kevin lived less than 5 minutes walk from the office. I made the mistake of mentioning we'd be a bit early (5-10 minutes). Kevin took that as the que to walk slower. That was the first and only time I was late. After that I decided to chance it and walk by myself.

Since the pandemic Kevin has been sharing more and more memes and video's trying to disprove that Covid exists. She even shared an excerpt from a medical journal stating that Vaccines don't work and are dangerous. The journal was dated 1880's.

In the ended my husband found she'd shared another meme with misinformation on it. He tried to put her straight and she blocked him, but not before sending him a lengthy message which he couldn't read, because he was blocked. I messaged her telling her that he couldn't read the message. 12 hours after she blocked him she unblocked him say 'I use the block as a way to take a breather from the conversation, I only blocked him for 10 minutes. I didn't block him on messenger'. My husband took one look at the message and decided he'd wash his hands of her and I'm incline to agree with him. We've known people who have lost loved ones or have become very sick from this virus and I've just lost my patience with this her. This was a few says ago. She agreed that people were getting sick, but everything is blown out of proportion, it's more about the government brainwashing and gasslighting the public. 

I just don't know what happened to that bubbly optimistic woman I first met. She always had strange notions, it's what made her endearing, and I'd like to think that I'm open minded but this was the last straw. Reading her messages I could feel my last remaining braincells manning lifeboats and threatening to evacuate.This is my first time posting on this sub, so I'm not entirely sure whether this is dumb enough to be a Kevin. (And she's possibly racist). So if I'm posting this on the wrong sub, I apologize. Now, onto the story. (Sorry if it's kind of long)

&#x200B;

When I (F) was 12-13 I went to Home Depot with my mother and younger sister one day. We were buying some little houseplants for our rooms, because we had a little time before our next appointment.

We make it to the cashier, where we are unfortunately landed in the lane managed by *Kevina*. We put our items onto the register, a few small cacti, some succulents, and two planters. She begins *sloooowly* scanning each item, when she scans one twice, yet ignores it and continues scanning.

My mom opened her mouth to say something, but froze when she saw Kevina putting the planter into a plastic bag, rather than scanning the plants, and putting them into the planter, so that way the plants wouldn't be damaged.

She calls out several times, "Excuse me?" But Kevina was either hard of hearing or insistent on ignoring us as she didn't notice my mom's calls until AFTER she slowly double-bagged the planter, put a bag full of some plumbing parts inside the planter, then moved onto the next plant.

Mind you, it wasn't loud at all in the store, and my mom was standing maybe two feet away from Kevina, (with one of those plastic dividers surrounding Kevina). Finally, Kevina notices my mom, and asks, "what?", clearly annoyed, for some unknown reason. Like, we haven't had any interaction at all before this, so I was totally confused by her annoyance.

"I don't need the bag, is it okay if you take out the planters and put the plants in them?" Kevina looks at her, confused, then takes EVERYTHING out of the bag, then dumps the plants in them.

I had to stop myself from reaching over and fixing the plants, which would've been rude, so I looked in pity at the poor plants, and prayed we would make it out smoothly.

And then, Kevina takes the plumbing parts out of the bag, and puts them into the planters. I bit my lip to hide a groan of frustration.

My mom, again, restates her request, politely, although her voice was a little strained, and, to be honest, I don't really blame her. This was taking forever, and Kevina was damaging our plants.

Kevina just ignores my mom and scans everything. I notice she scanned one of the cacti twice, and missed one of the succulents, which my mom seems to notice as well.

My mom says, "Miss, I think you made a mistake scanning the plants."

Kevina lets out a quiet scoff and says "No, there's five succulents and two cacti."

I point to the keypad showing the list of purchases. "It says four succulents and three cacti."

Kevina lets out the Entitled Karen Huff **™**  and pretends to ignore me, and continues on to the checkout page.

My mother tries again, "Can you rescan the items?"

Cue *another* Entitled Karen Huff **™.** She then proceeds to rescan all the items. *Good,* I think to myself, *At least this is over now.*

WRONG.

She scans them incorrectly *AGAIN*, and it takes *THREE* tries before Kevina finally gets it right. Now that the items are all correctly scanned, she proceeds to the checkout page. My mom and dad frequently shop at Home Depot, so she wants to use her Home Depot account to get the discount from points (Or whatever they call it I'm not sure, this happened a while ago so I'm pulling what I can recall from memory)

Kevina then pretends not to hear, so I repeat what my mom said (Because I was closer to Kevina and thought maybe she was a little hard of hearing and couldn't hear my mom, even though she was only a foot farther than I was)

She asks for my mom's email, and when she enters it in she says, "Oh you have to create an account, it says you don't have one."

My mom is shocked. "No, I do have an account. I have used it many times. Are you sure?"

*AGAIN*, she ignores my mother. I repeat the message. *AGAIN*.

At this point, I'm beginning to wonder if this Kevina is not only entitled and lacking intelligence, but also *racist*. (My mom is Asian, while I look more like my dad, who's white) She seems to be pretending my mother doesn't exist, and only responding to me.

(Although she did ignore me several times) Something which I found very odd, considering I was only 12-13, while my mother was an adult, and much more experienced and equipped in handling these kinds of matters.

I know she wasn't just struggling to understand my mother, because while she does have a little bit of an accent, you can understand her crystal clear, and it's impossible to *NOT* understand what she is saying (Several people have "not understood what she's saying" in the past, even when I *KNOW* she is perfectly understandable. Trust me, I *KNOW* when you truly cannot understand what someone is trying to say. I've had lots of experience. Anyways, moving on.)

So then Kevina calls over another employee, (A) who instructs Kevina on what to do, before rushing to try and thin out the long line of people waiting impatiently behind us. At that point, we had been there for 10-15 minutes, and Kevina was the only cashier working until A realized that Kevina was taking forever, and started to help the impatient customers.

Kevina then still somehow manages not to follow A's very clear instructions. I try to intervene and help her figure out which buttons to tap (Apparently, even though I was only half-listening, I *still* absorbed more from the conversation than Kevina did, who *actually worked there.*

Kevina still can't manage to solve the problem and says "Oh, do you mean a Home Depot Pro account?"

"No, ma'am, I think that's something different." My mother says, Kevina really starting to get on her nerves. She glances at my little sister, who was shifting around rather impatiently. My mother then glanced at her watch while Kevina fumbled around with the computer. I leaned over and saw that we were already going to be late for our next appointment.

After another minute my mom sighs and says, "That's fine, I'll just pay without the discount."

Kevina then spends a good two minutes trying to figure out how to go back to the "Swipe card" prompt, even though my mother and I both pointed out that there was a button that clearly said "pay" She just ignored us and ended up clicking it anyways-- *2 minutes later.*

By then, my mom has a look on her face and you can tell she is clearly annoyed, but she looks glad that as soon as she swipes the card, this torture is all over.

*Until* Kevina *DELETES ALL THE ITEMS*.

Cue another *TWO ROUNDS* of making sure Kevina scanned everything correctly, and then *FINALLY* my mom was able to swipe the card, and the transaction went through. We all quickly grabbed our purchases and rushed out the door, just as Kevina began helping the next vict-- *ahem* \--customer.

What an *ABSOLUTE NIGHTMARE.*

&#x200B;

TLDR; Kevina is a racist cashier that wasted 20 MINUTES to scan 10 items, bag them properly, and couldn't figure out how to use our account to give us our discount.This Kevin is part of my family, we are very close and I love him with all my heart, but oh so help me god sometimes he is just plain out dumb, most of the time he's just clueless. He's also quite homophobic, this will be relevant to my story. 
One sunny day, we were discussing couple sex life problems and I was trying to give him tips to revive his. I told him that people with a penis can actually have multiple orgasms too and he got very interested about it. 
I then proceed with "all you have to do is stimulate your prostate", cue to Kevin looking genuinely shocked and asking me if he has one because he thought only people with ~that~ disease (prostate cancer) have it. I went poker face trying to understand if he was pulling a joke, nope he wasn't. His shock turned to confusion, so I, a female vagina owner, had to explain to Kevin (a whole ass young adult) that all people who had a ding ding dong had a prostate, that it is an organ and that prostate cancer is a disease.
I get back to the prostate stimulation thing. I start gently, with the external stimulation explanation, he seems to get it, I move on to the internal stimulation, Kevin doesn't make any comment other than "ooooh yeah I get it, interesting, will try it" then moves on to another topic.
His lack of a negative reaction to the internal stimulation part, makes me 100% sure that he, in fact, did not get it and if he'll try it I have no clue what he'll try.

PS: I know Kevin like the back of my hand, I know for fact that if he actually understood the internal part he would've had a negative reaction to it.So I work with Kevin. For background, we work in a niche industry within the manufacturing world, so I'm going to say it's an automobile plant for anonymity.

Kevin was hired about a year ago. A former coworker of Kevin's actually told our hiring manager to stay away from Kevin, because he was known for being an idiot. I can't tell every single story about Kevin because that would take hours and hours.

Kevin once broke a piece of equipment totalling $50k, because he thought that the button saying "DO NOT PRESS" was preventing him from getting the job done even faster. Took us 3 weeks to fix it again, Kevin was no longer allowed to use said equipment.

Kevin locked his keys in his car once. So he decided to break the window to get his keys, despite having a police station next door, which offered to pop the lock for him. Speaking of cars, Kevin once tried to unscrew something with his car key, when we have a room dedicated to screwdrivers less than 50ft away. This resulted in his car key getting bent, so he thought the best solution was to grind it down on a belt sander. He had to take the bus until he got another key because his obviously didn't work anymore.

After breaking nearly everything he touched, Kevin was only allowed to do custodian duties, which involved using the forklift to carry the large dumpsters to our industrial dumpsters outside. Kevin believed that there was no way the forklift could hold the weight, so he dumped all the trash *next to* the outdoor dumpsters, not *in* the dumpsters.

If you work in manufacturing, you're familiar with the "white suit", which is essentially a paper like suit you put over your uniform if you're doing something especially messy. We mostly use them for paint jobs, so the kind we use aren't fireproof in the slightest. (Our uniforms, however, are made with a blend of fabrics to be spark resistant because of welding, so very safe.) Kevin decided that a belt sander was too messy, so he put on a white suit. The white suit caught a small fire that he put out. He's done this 5+ times.

We frequently use blast cabinets, which are basically metal boxes that you can put parts into, and then use sand or another rough material to blast things like rust off of them. When Kevin uses this, he duct tapes his shirt closed, all the way up his arms, down his legs, and also duct tapes his mask to his face. For reference, using those only requires safety glasses because you're NOT INSIDE THE BOX. Except he has climbed into the box "to check it out".

Also, Kevin has once opened a shop vac while it was running....vacuuming up a product that has high levels of asbestos.

There are even more stories about this Kevin, but those are some of the high points. I have no clue how this man is still alive.

Edit: Thank you for the upvotes and award. I just wanted to add that Kevin royally screwed up a part, then tried to blame me for it today. Luckily he was laughed out of our quality control area because they all know I'd never make a mistake like that. Also, I pointed out his mistake to one of the quality control leads before he tried to submit it. Kevin just kevining along.Hey guys.

Usual I’m on mobile speech.

I promise that every word of this is true.

Now for a disclaimer, my dad wasn’t much of a Kevin, he just had terrible hygiene and a high fibre diet, which led to sum very embarrassing situations for me and the rest of the family.

Now due to my dad’s lack of hygiene he lost most of his teeth and never went to the dentist.
So his diet consisted of boiled vegetables, mashed potatoes with gravy and tinned meat, and washing it down with lots of sparkling water.

Needless to say that he was jet propelled most of the time, and the smell could peel paint of the walls.

His bathing habits (or lack there off) were even worse, he would wear the same clothes (including underwear) for weeks at a time, flat out refusing to shower and change his clothes.
When, on the rare occasion that he would shower he would put his old clothes back on, insisting that they were fine, he would turn his underwear inside out so he could wear them for another SEVEN WEEKS!!!

I’m not joking or exaggerating, he did this multiple times.

What made the rest of us suffer was the fact that we all worked together for the family business,
We were delivery drivers, so we were stuck in a van all day with him stinking and playing the butt tuba.

it was hell.

One time we were stuck in heavy traffic on a warm summers day, in the middle lane of the highway, everyone had their windows down including us to beat the heat.

We then hear the warning from down below...

Is it thunder?

is it an earthquake?

No... it’s something much, much worse.

My dad leans to his side, and proceeded to open his ass to release the longest, most foul and disgusting fart that mankind has ever produced.
It stinks so bad that my eyes are stinging and I can’t see a thing, I scramble for the door handle to get out of the van.

it was worse than tear gas.

I get out of the van and could swear that gas was Following me, but as I looked around me, I could see three cars in front of me and three behind me were all frantically winding up their windows and pulling up their shirts to their noses to suppress the smell.

On another occasion we had just delivered a package to an office building on the top floor, we were in the elevator on the way down, just before we got to the ground floor, his ass opens again to release the stink of a dead rat rotting away in a garbage disposal in the middle of a summer heatwave, but...just before the stank of Satan could reach us the elevator doors opened and we quickly walked out, only to see a poor innocent young woman walk in and press the button for the top floor, the door closed before she could smell it.

I could hear screaming and clawing at the door,( I really hope she survived).

The rotting stench of six month old Hungarian goulash stank out that elevator for a full day.

That’s all I’ve got for now.

Thanks for listening to my ranting.

If you want to hear more, let me know 

Laters 👋

Edit: this took place back in the 00’s, and my dad was in his 60’s.

Both my dad and my mom passed in 2010.

So be nice in the comments, he may have had hygiene issues late in his life, but he was still my dad.

Edit 2:

When I mentioned that three cars in front of me and three cars behind could smell it, I was talking about each side of the van.
He was bad but not THAT bad.Who the fuck is kevin this bitch getting roasted left and right with no reasonThis story is about my nephew Kevin (15m) that happend today.
Well during a sunny afternoon, we received a call from Kevin's school. He had gotten hurt while rough housing with his friends. This resulted in his leg getting hit with a bat. Because of this the school just wanted to make sure that Kevin was alright and that there wasn't any issues. The problem was that it was an hour since school had ended and Kevin was nowhere to be seen.
So another hour passes and Kevin is not home yet. I shrug my shoulders thinking: "He must be with friends. So guess he wasn't hurt too badly." (Feel free to call me heartless.)
So now it is 3 hours since school ended and no Kevin in soght. When a phone call comes through. I answer.
Me: Hello?
Kevin: Hey, so there is a cop that wants to talk to you.
Internally: WTF??!! What did you do?
Cop: Hello, are you the parent?
Me: yes. What is the problem officer?
Cop: we got a call that some juveniles were looking suspicious and needed to investigate.
Internally: Great! Kevin already has a history of trespassing and other criminal things. This is why we have always expressed for him to come home or call if he wanted to go anywhere. Kevin had lost cellphone rights because of his criminal activity and other reasons.
Cop: well when we arrived, Kevin gave use what we would call a suspicious look and ran away.
Internally: Kevin!! Of course you would look suspicious if you ran away before the cops could talk to you.
Cop: So we had to chase him. It looks like they weren't doing anything bad but did you know where your son was?
Me: No, actually there was something that happened at school. So we have been waiting for him to come home and check on his leg. 
Cop: Oh, so you had no clue where he was?
Me: Nope, Kevin knows he needs to come home first when he wants to hang out with friends. Or he could always call us if he didn't want to come all the way here.
Kevin: Well I don't have a phone.
Me: we always say that even if he doesn't have a phone. He can call from his friend's cellphone.  Especially since he has our number memorized.
Cop: Strange, cause we are using his friend's phone to talk to you.
At this point we are so mentally gone that we can't help but laugh and even the cop was laughing at Kevin's responses.
Cop: so he didn't have permission to be outside?
Me: Nope
Cop: Ok, well I'll make sure he gets home safely. He isn't in trouble but he might need a talk to.

So here we are waiting for Kevin to come home. Just wondering why would you run from the cops when you didn't do anything wrong?This happened on Saturday. Kevina came to the library and wanted to know why there were charges on her account. I help her and tell her that "according to our system you have multiple items checked out that are overdue. Do you have these items checked out." I list everything she has checked out (books, blu-rays, and dvds) and she says yes. She then asks me "what do you mean overdue?" Turns out that Kevina had no idea you had to return things you check out from the library. She thought that she got to keep them, and that us informing her of the due date and highlighting the due date on the receipt was a suggestion of when to return if she didn't want to keep the items. Naturally she made a big fuss of not wanting to pay the late fees because she had no idea she had to return the items. Unfortunately for me, the library director was doing a walk around and heard the big fuss she was making. After explaining the situation to him, he had me wave her fees and asked the Kevina that she just "make sure to return the items and you'll be fine." Although I'm pretty sure we're never going to see those items again because as she left she said "I can't believe y'all would lie about giving away free things to people who really need it. I'm never coming here again." So yea.I got a little nostalgic and read through a couple of these old stories and saw that there was a story about spiders I couldn't remember. Well, somehow I know what it was now. If you have no idea what this is about, go read the first 28 parts I wrote about this idiot I worked with on a cruise ship. I'll link to the first post in the comments. This took place around Kevin's first or second week.

Kevin: Idiot. Deckhand.

Shane: Me. Not an idiot. Deckhand.

Adam 1: Also not an idiot. Deckhand.

Engineer: Not Danny. The guy most trusted with chemicals n shit. Fixed things.

Mate C: Our supervisor.

On with the story. Our ship had a massive problem with spiders, largely coming from the locks we went through. They would hang out in the locks and sneak onboard when we went through them. It was even creepier than it sounds because they could "jump" off the lock and parachute down on a piece of web. It got bad enough that one day in port, our Mate sent the engineer off to buy the strongest grade bug spray he could find. It ended up being that stuff that comes in the gallon pump jugs with the spray nozzle and was super toxic. Operation Spider Massacre was to begin. It had to happen at night because that's when the spiders came out. An announcement was made to the passengers to please vacate the balconies at 10 pm for bug spraying, and not to be worried if they saw or heard crew members on their balconies between 10 and midnight. Still, Mate told us to work as quietly as we could. We put on Tyvek suits, made sure the hood was on tight, added some safety glasses because that shit was toxic, and readied our nerves.

We split into 2 teams of 2. One guy to go ahead first and open all the balcony compartments and another manning the sprayer. The spray killed the spiders fast and they would sag down and dangle on a single piece of web. The first guy would double back and start clearing the carcasses out. The the second guy doubled back to close all the balconies. Of course, I ended up with Kevin. We did the starboard side while the other team got port. Because of the way decks are designed, there's a lot of cross bracing meaning the "ceiling" parts of the balconies had a lot of hidey-holes for the spiders. While spraying, it was important to make sure you hit all the surfaces because the spray also deterred new spiders from nesting there. Kevin started off manning the sprayer which was fine with me. I went ahead and opened the balconies. While trying to get both sides of the cross-bars, he kept walking underneath the dripping bug spray. He would go forward, then turn around to spray, back up and spray that side. There was no need to go back and forth so much as long as you kept track of which bracing you'd done. Kevin was bitching to me about the spray and the fact he couldn't see because it was so dark.

Kevin: I just don't understand why we have to do this.

Me: Well, last trip they got a lot of complaints on the comment cards about the spiders.

Kevin: No, I mean like this. In the dark.

Me: Well, that's when the spiders come out. Also because the passengers aren't usually out on their balconies at this time of night and we won't be in their way.

At the end of the first deck, we met up with the other team and Mate C because we had miraculously finished at the same time instead of being way slower with Kevin like normal.

Mate C: How are we all doing?

Kevin: I'm a little woozy from getting that spray dripping on my face and breathing it in.

Mate: If you're working backwards it shouldn't be dripping on you.

Me: We can switch.

Kevin agreed and we got started on the rest of the decks. He still went through the dripping bug killer to double back behind me instead of going through the center hall that ran the length of the interior but it was a lot less inhalation of the shit than his method. I, on the other hand, managed to make it out of the project unscathed. After slogging through for almost 2 hours, we were on our final deck. We managed to finish about a half a deck ahead of Port Team so I naturally started heading to their side to help out. Teamwork makes the dream work.

Kevin: Where are you going?

Me: Over to help Engineer and Adam.

Kevin: But that's their side.

Here he was again, taking things so literally he was unable to extrapolate or think for himself. It was fine. We helped them finish the last section and it was fine. The operation was more or less successful (pro: we got rid of 95% or more of the spiders. con: it was a never ending battle either way). Kevin went off to shower with water instead of bug spray this time.So this was my favorite memory back in middle school. We all were in 8th grade then. One day during 6th period we decided to play a prank on Kevin (Not actual name). Kevin is a very dumb and gullible person. So we sat down with him and said there is a very cool ritual that makes 1 person become invisible and we want to try it on you. His face lit up and was like yes let's do it. So we all held hands in a circle surrounding him and started to chant Hi Invisible I'm dad x3. then we started to say a bunch of gibberish. we then closed our eyes and counted to 10. we opened them and acted surprised it worked. We told him we cannot see you so when we want to talk to you we will say I.K (Invisible Kevin) and you come at a normal distance and we can chat. So we did this for a bit. Then Kevin was like fuck this and went to the girl's bathroom. He thought he was actually invisible and thought he might get to see some girls. He was right about seeing girls there. They all screamed and ran out of the bathroom. Kevin came out later and was caught by the teacher. He was sent to the principles office. We all were pretending to work when this happened so we would not get into trouble. Also right in front of the girl's bathroom was a table full with like 8-10 girls there working. He later got expelled for some other stupid reason.I'm 24 now, but I've just remembered a story about a girl in my PE class when we were about 14/15. 

Our normal PE teacher wasn't in and we had a supply teacher for the lesson, who was white. She had a non-British accent, but I was 90% sure she was South African. 

One of the girls, whilst we were getting changed, asked where her accent was from. 

Another girl said she was from Australia or maybe New Zealand.

I said that I was pretty sure she was South African, at which point the second girl called me stupid because there's obviously no white people in South Africa. 

Of all the stupid things I've ever been told, that one's definitely up there. We didn't really have time to go into South African Apartheid, so I mentioned a white South African character in a popular tv show at the time that was set in South Africa. She was also adamant that the character wasn't South African because he was white and there are no white people in South Africa.

When we went into the sports hall for the PE lesson, someone asked where she was from and inevitably told us she was from South Africa.Kevin isn't the sharpest tool in the shed.
Me and my brother played an open world multi-player rpg together with one of our friends. We wanted some loot so we searched for events that would reward us some good ammount of currency. We are all experienced players, me and my brother bought it right after it's release date, and our friend who played from console bought it after 1 year. He is a very decent player in terms of pvp compered to console. So when we saw the only player triggered event we went there to steal the loot. Kevin and his crew were doing the event so we thought we can defeat them as usual we do. But Kevin isn't good at the game and he and his crew has to compensate for this by using illegal game modifications, macros and other kind of cheats. Also Kevin has to compensate for his lack of skill with swearing like a sailor and trying to bully others. Kevin is sad. But he couldn't bother us, we delayed his progression by a whole hour while they tried to humiliate us, but I could just laugh because even with cheats, the games notorious hit registration issues we almost managed to wipe them a few times, whilst they had every advantage they needed. They finally destroyed our spawnpoint, most likely they were angry that we laughed at their face and didn't rage. In one instance while I was waiting for respawn Kevin shamelessly plugged his twitch Chanel where he streamed that he cheated. Poor Kevin thought that it's a good idea to stream that he is breaking the games rules and using manipulated game files. Kevin is not a fourteen years old kid, he is an adult with private life (more on that later). We gathered more evidence that was needed to ban him including toxic voice chat, the hacks he was using on stream, and a clip from his stream clearly showing that he was locking onto targets. After a few weeks Kevin was banned, but he did not know that. Kevin was on a trip as he replied to my brother when he told him on twitch that he was banned. But Kevin had to show he is a mega Kevin. Mega Kevin bought a new account, installed the same cheats and streamed it. We immediately reported it. My brother and our friend reported him yesterday, I reported him today. He was banned today. Guess who spent more than 120$ on getting nothing but banned? Yes that's Mega Kevin.I used to work at this large liquor and drinks store,  managing the returns, restocking shelves, that kind of stuff. One day we got a new apprentice, Kevin. He was kind of unkempt, with really greasy hair and just really uncomfortable to be around, which is why the store he used to work at passed him on to us(we were really understaffed). He had to ride this busted scooter to work which took him like an hour because it wouldn't go faster than 25mph and he didn't want to take the bus. One day the kick pedal broke so he had to start it with an electrical drill, which he was supposed to do back at our ramp. Easy enough right?

 Instead of parking his scooter out back and  starting it on the ramp so he could just drive off, he started it in our storage and continued to push the scooter through the store, past our customers. The scooter was spewing black smoke and the whole store smelled of gasoline and exhaust fumes for the rest of the day.I (36M) have encountered stupid people in my life, but my uncle (49M) takes the cake. He's done a lot of stupid things in all the years I've known him, and the suez canal incident today reminded me a lot of a stunt he pulled when I was but a child. 

It was summer of '95, I was 10 years old, Kevin 23. My uncle Kevin (dad's brother) had just come home from college and his dad (my grandfather) brought the whole family of 6 on a vacation to lake superior (my parents had a boat and my mom was really into fishing). My grandfather thought it would be nice to take a family vacation, but thanks to Kevin we had far from a good time. 

For context later, the six on the vacation were: me, my brother (8 at the time), my parents, my grandfather, and Kevin. Kevin is WAY younger than my dad.  

The first day of the trip went fine, but Kevin's Kevin-ness was becoming obvious immediately. Upon arriving at the lake on the first day, Kevin spent all day talking about bears. Non-fucking-stop. As we fished all we heard was bear this bear that. Eventually my dad lost his shit and cursed out Kevin. This set a bad tone for the first evening, in which Kevin decided to skip camping with the rest of us and instead went illegally offroading through our campground in a rental pickup truck from the nearest town. No cops were present, sadly- especially sad given the next days events. 

At 5 a.m., Kevin woke us all by shouting "BEAR! BEAR!" and screaming for help, eventually shouting "NO! DONT BITE ME!". My dad actually punched kevin in the face when he walked outside and Kevin uttered the phrase, "it's just a prank!" I'll hand it to kevin for being ahead of his time with that phrase. 

The rest of the day we spent trying to ignore Kevin's dumbass antics, but the real disaster struck at about 6pm ​when my dad was getting ready to set sail in the boat. Keep in mind we are talking about a substantial boat, not quite a yacht but a large boat. As the rest of us pack up our stuff and get ready to embark, we hear a loud shriek, "ADIOS!" 

Our heart sinks as we run to the shore and see Kevin sailing away in our f@cking boat. He turns around after about ten minutes and picks us up, and once again insists it was "just a prank". 

Fast forward three aggravating hours of trying to fish with an enraged kevin. Suddenly kevin takes out a motherf*cking pickaxe (1995 so no idea where he got the idea, it wasn't minecraft) and says that he needs it to "break up shoals". My dad yells at him to put away the pickaxe. Not wanting to be wrong, Kevin fumes and says "I'll prove to you there's shoals here, shithead!" He grabs control of the ship and steers us into the f*cking rocks at high speed, punching my dad in the face. Yeah. The boat capsizes and both my brother and mother nearly die in the dark under a collapsed boat. I break a leg, my dad an arm. Kevin ran into the forest but the cops found him the next day after my granddad called 911. 

Kevin spent 6 months in jail for assault and destruction of property, a pretty minor penalty for what he did. We haven't talked to him since 2009, but google indicates he is somehow still alive, no doubt still worried about "shoals".I have been friends with this Kevin now for roughly three and a half years. She just seem to live so far up her own ass though, me and my other friends can’t seem to help but laugh at her cotton wool view of the world. Because of the pandemic, a lot of these stories are Discord related. 

Kevin and our other friend (who is also a Kevin) were arguing about how to get their shopping. For some reason they have to get it at the same time? The friend wanted to get it delivered but Kevin said “no that is too much effort. Bare in mind a delivery will literally bring a whole week of groceries to you. Her reasoning was that “she had to carry it up the stairs”. For context we live in student accommodation and we live in flats up a few floors. This argument 
started out kind of dumb, but the coup de grace was when she suggested the alternative of “walking to the local Tesco and getting an uber back”. I interjected and said “surely that’s more effort?”. She seemed confused so I said “well you still have to carry it up the stairs. The uber isn’t going to drive you up two flights of stairs.” She then told me to shut up. 

For further context we’re both games students and have been for 3.5 years now. This is how we met after all, at the same class in college. They had us using 3dsmax to prepare us for industry and university. Instead she opted to use Blender because it’s a “swiss army knife”. That’s all well and good, but despite the college lecturer telling her several times “I don’t know Blender I can’t help you” she kept asking for help with modelling. To top it all off, she absolutely, kicking and screaming refused to learn the software because “someone will pay her to learn it one day”. I asked “what?” And she told me, without a single ounce of evidence or proof to back up this claim “games companies will literally pay to have you trained in the software and pay you to learn basically”. I somehow don’t think they will. Now halfway into our 1st year of university, she caved in and learnt the software because the lecturers literally burst out laughing as soon as blender was mentioned and believe it or not, just like college they don’t offer support for blender and any files given to us can only be opened in 3dsmax. It’s almost like every time out college lecturer told her she wouldn’t be using blender in university he wasn’t lying. I also don’t see any companies paying her to learn 3dsmax. 

Covid has made things harder for everyone. University students and lecturers have suffered especially. I’ve been unfortunate enough to have had the virus so I know how horrible it is. When this all kicked off a year ago we were in our final year of college. This was the third year and it was roughly about 6 months before we were scheduled to start university. The future was uncertain but I was prepared to do online learning for a while. I knew it would be a while before any kind of face to face interaction could take place again. Because of this our scheduled assignment which involved working closely with clients and which was a VR project was cancelled. In turn we had 2 replacement assignments which could be done online. Kevin however was feeling brave and said “no I’m not doing this shit.” We asked why and her response was “I didn’t sign up for this shit.” My friend’s response was the thing that set her straight. He said “nobody signed up for a global pandemic, suck it up.” After that, she got mad (she doesn’t like being told she’s in the wrong) but eventually caved and finished the assignments anyway. 

There is a light at the end of the tunnel to covid, with the vaccination being rolled out. Kevin however was ready to do something quite selfish. We were in a discord vc with some other friends and it was a standard evening. She’d been informed she could have a vaccine. She was hesitant to get it. Not because of any form of rational reasoning or scientific discussion but because “it meant talking to people”. She said this in a vc with 4 other people. One of which being me, who had the virus and another who had family die as a direct result of the virus. As you can imagine we were quite angry. I understand social anxiety is a thing, but literally risking your own life and potentially the lives of other people over a phone call is selfish. I told her this, I was mad. She then started listing off other excuses like “oh I barely leave the flat anyway”. No shit you barely leave the flat, nobody does, it’s a national lockdown. Her best response was “don’t tell me what to do”. I’m sorry, but don’t sit there and literally complain about getting a life saving vaccine to people who have been negatively effected by the virus, because you don’t want to pick up a phone.Good morning, Good afternoon or Good night everyone, i´m here to talk about one of the many stupid Brazillian politicians and biggest Kevins ever.

Our (not so) Dear President, he is a totally insane person, but for your amusement and our sadness he's also dumb as heck. He's like Trump, even the supporters are the same, just more dumb.

The supporter are so dumb, that even people showing prove of his son stealing they don't believe. Are so dumb that in our current situation they insist to agglomerate in front of his house, without using a freaking mask.

Here are a few of he's best momments:

1- He's a former military (not sure what rank) and when COVID first hit, he's said and i quote "For most people this disease will be like a flu, but other will have more serious symptoms, for me and athletical history will be nothing more than a little flu!" after that, tons of videos of him not being able to make a simple push up went viral, making fun of him obviously.

2- When Trump was supporting the drug Chloroquine (That in Brazil is pronounced "Cloroquina") he began to support too, but harder. Even after a bunch of studies showing that drug is not only no good, but also can make things worst he said "Those who don't want to take "Cloroquina" take "Tubaina"" That is a Brazillian soda.

3 and last one for this post - This is maybe the one quote people outside Brazil heard about. After months of a terrible pandemic, finnaly alight on the tunnel, the vaccine. He was suffering a lot of pressure to close a deal for the Pfizer vaccine he said in a interview "If you take the vaccine and turn into a Alligator i don't have nothing to do with it"

So, yeah, that's our president, and those are just a few of his Kevin ways. Maybe i'll post more about him or our old president that are just as dumb.
This was during winter a few yrs ago. 

So, one of our heat pumps broke and we didn’t have heat in the living room/kitchen and downstairs family room. I brought up a heater and plugged it in the family room to take the chill out. We were discussing the issue and how long to get a repair man out when my daughter said 

“well at least you have the heaters so it’s not a big deal”

and replied with

“ yeah it heats the living room nice but it’s going to kill our BGE bill if we don’t get the heat fixed quick”.


She looked at me kinda of bewildered and said

“ it’s just plugged into a regular outlet, like the lights, why would it cost more?”

My wife looked at me and I back at my wife and I said

“ (daughter’s name), you do know It costs a lot more to run a heater right? It pulls a lot more electricity than a light does. Like the stove or dryer. The stove is plugged into an outlet but it costs a lot more than a light”.

God as my witness she said

“ We pay for the stove? It costs money to run the stove? I thought the electrify was just for the lights and plugs. “

We all staring laughing. My wife, my son, my other daughter. It was hilarious. So we went on to explain to my 23 yr old ,reasonably well educated , daughter that more than just the lights and plugs cost money to use in the house.

TLDR my 23rd old daughter didn’t know the stove and dryer cost electricity to run it. She thought it was included or something.Okay so I have so many stories about this Kevin I could literally go on forever but this is one of my favourites.

Kevin had just gotten a job at McDonald's and it was his 1st shift. He had been staring at the menu board on front counter for a solid 10 minutes before his manager came out and asked him what was wrong.
Kevin looks very confused and replies, "Whats A.D.D bacon? Is it a special bacon we use?" 

Kevin's manager is silent for a moment before he almost pees himself with laughter and replies, "No Kevin its ADD Bacon like add bacon to a burger..."

Kevin looked like he had just discovered water is wet and went very quiet. Until he told everyone about it for some reason.This was a couple of years ago in 5th or 6th grade. I was in my science lesson when the lesson was interrupted by a message from a school staff. The staff said that a kid (kevin) had gone to the bathroom while the lesson was occurring, found a condom in the bathroom, put it on, and walked all around the school. The kevin was indeed reprimanded although this story has several holes in it, but I managed to patch them and get closer to the truth, which brings me to the conspiracy: 

When I went to use the bathroom later in the same lesson, I saw the teacher assistance have a stern talk with a girl from my class (let's call her M). I didn't hear what they talked about but I got to the conclusion that M and kevin had underaged school bathroom sex.

Several years later, I met kevin and brute up the story. He told me that he didn't find the condom in the bathroom, rather he stole in from his brother's bedroom.

I want to believe that M didn't agree to sex and that the stern convo was about how to refuse and defend yourself sexually, but that doesn't explain how the school knew that kevin had a condom.

if you want I have another (less interesting) story from that schoolIn high school, and for a few years after, I was friends with a guy who, after getting fit, turned into a total bro (we drifted apart as we got older, but I still check in on him here and there). He was pretty clueless to begin with, but it seemed that what little common sense he did have, was lost along with the weight. Here are a few stories I can think of off the top of my head.

Kevin's Party Problems:

Whenever Kevin was invited to a party, he'd show up with like 4-6 random people. Each time he'd be confronted for it, and each time he'd say, "But dude, it's a PARTY! We need a bunch of people for a party!" Usually my friend was the one holding the parties, and she'd ask him every time not to do it again, because none of us knew these people he brought. He'd finally promise he wouldn't, then do it again the next party. He would claim he forgot, but that was probably an excuse.

One time, at my best friend's going away party, he managed to break three things within the span of about 4 hours. First, he broke my best friend's husband's (boyfriend at the time) car sunroof. He decided he was going to stand in the passenger seat while her husband was driving, and stick his upper half out of the sunroof. Well, this was before he got fit, so he got stuck, and broke the seal part off. 

After that, at the house, he was partying hard and idk what he did exactly since I wasn't in the room at the time, but he somehow broke part of the chandelier off... The chandelier was up pretty high on the dome ceiling, so I have no clue how he even got to it.

Finally, we were passing around a bowl at the end of the night. There were about 5 of us at the table, and Kevin begged me to go get my best friend's brother's bowl to smoke out of. My bff had gone to sleep already, so I was the only person who had access to it, since my husband (fiancé at the time) and I were staying in said brother's room, and were told not to let anyone else in while he was gone. I finally caved and went and grabbed it. It went around the table once, then got back to him. I had already said to be careful with it like 4 times, and I was in the middle of saying it again, when it disappears from his hand, and there's a loud shatter that makes everyone go silent. Kevin is just staring down at the floor with an unfazed look on his face, and I finally recover enough to yell, "WHAT THE HELL?! WHAT WAS I JUST TELLING YOU?!" He picked up the shattered remains, stared at me for a few seconds, then smiled sheepishly and said, "Well, we'll just glue it back together." I could not believe he even thought that was an option. It was in several pieces, and glue would NOT hold. Plus, my bff's brother would notice as soon as he saw it. I told him as much, but he insisted it would work. He searched for super glue for like 20 minutes, then when he finally gave up, opened the trash, and threw the remains of the pipe in. I told him he had to buy a new one for my friend's brother, and he said he wouldn't notice it was gone, and if he did, say their mom threw it out. Obviously, my bff's brother noticed almost immediately.


Kevin's Yoga For Charity Confusion:

So my friend (the one who was closest to him and always lectured him about bringing people to her parties), has a Yoga charity for AIDS each year. Kevin had a massive crush on her, and constantly did very cringy things in an attempt to flirt with her. Well, the first year of the charity, he showed up, then just sat at a table instead of rolling out a mat like everyone else. When asked where his mat was, he proceeded to say, "Oh... I actually have to do the yoga? I thought we were just watching her do it, like a performance..." (referring to the friend he had a crush on). She's a licensed instructor btw. So, she gave him a spare mat, and for the entire session, he was unsubtly pretending to struggle, so that my friend would come help him get into poses.



Kevin Accidentally Takes Out A Business and Gets Arrested:

Kevin worked at a local vape shop briefly after high school. Now, this vape shop discreetly let weed smokers choose if they wanted to have part of their pay in weed each week. Well, when Kevin started there, he got so hyped about it, he decided to go tell anyone and everyone. Obviously, the news spread, the shop was shut down and went under investigation, and all of the employees were taken in for questioning about it. It was huge news around town. 


Kevin's Fall:

Once Kevin got fit, he decided, on a whim, that he wanted to join the military. His "training" was basically doing stupid parkour stunts. A week after he tells us all that he's gonna train and then enlist, his arm is in a cast. I can't remember exactly what he fell off of, but I think he was trying to run across monkey bars, or something like that, for his "stealth" training, and ended up breaking his arm. 

Those are the stories I could think of off the top of my head. I'll update if I think of another good one.This happened a couple years back and I still will burst out laughing at the thought. Not sure if this is a Kevin moment or a karen moment, I'll let yall decide.

This is a story about my current manager. We'll call him Donald as his is a lot like a certain ex-president, but without the money, and that'll give you a good idea of what I'm working with.

I was coming down with a cold at the time and had mentioned it to my manager, as I thought that I might have to call in sick soon. No big deal. He said something like, "Well take some Vitamin C and you'll be fine". He's the type of guy to question any health condition because he feels no matter what, he has it worse. 

I'm a big "fun fact" person. Filled with random trivia and tid bits. I like to say I know a little bit about most things. Some of this comes from my lack of friends in school and a fascination with scientific journals. 

So I responded in a fun fact type of way: "Oh did you thats actually a myth and there's been no study that correlate Vitamin C intake with recovery time of a cold." 

And omg, his face changed from mild amusement to stark anger. "What are you talking about?!", Donald retorted, "Everyone knows that Vitamin C helps with a cold!" 

I told him, "Yea its a pretty popular wise tale, but there's no proof. In fact that company that made that citrus flavored fizzy powder cold remedy got sued over making those exact claims and loss", now confused over his change in mood. 

"I don't understand why you're even arguing this!" Donald said, as he turned his chest towards me and pushed it forward. 

He's a really into obvious and deliberate body language expressions bc he thinks he's really intimidating looking (obviously, based on this convo alone, to mask his deep insecurities with his ego). 

And then I saw a light bulb go off in his head. He had got it, the one thing to shut me down and proove him right. He yelled, "Haven't you ever heard of scurvy!!"

I. Am. Floored. 
I think to myself, *yea...the disease caused by Vitamin C deficiency?!?!* 

I think for a second and decide it's a lot funnier if I let him go on believing he won this. Not only did he believe that Vitamin C will help with a cold, but that scurvy is a transmittal disease.

I smiled, held back laughter and said nothing. 

I prepared to leave and get to work, but he was not done. He said to me, "Ya know OP, you're probably book smart but you need to learn more about yourself" 

Now in addition to having very few friends in school, I've also seen some shit. I live with ptsd from the experiences. The recovery process from my experiences had forced me to grow up and the mental illness I acquired, and born with, forced me to understand myself greater than others in order to properly manage my symptoms.

I will not have someone who knows nothing about me say something like that. 

But

I am a fun fact type of person to the bone. 

I turned around, walked up to his desk, leaned down to his face and said: 

"I don't think you know me well enough to say that." 

And I smiled. It was just a fun fact after all.

He was speechless. He stammered out a weak, "oh...ok, well" while he did his best to avoid eye contact. I stayed a few more seconds to make sure he was done.

After that I went back to work and had a real good laugh. 

Now, whenever ever he is being a real jerk or tells me to do something a certain way that I know will have to be redone later the correct way, I just think of him yelling "WHAT ABOUT SCURVY?!" and then looking so smug with himself. 

Always forces me to laugh.

Edit: spellingI was watching a YouTube video about a man and a woman discussing when is the correct time to stop breastfeeding a child and there was a lady in the comments who didn’t believe that a baby was genetically related to the mother. Her logic was that there is no blood in the egg only sperm and DNA is in the blood so the blood must be in the sperm so the DNA is purely the father’s.  

She then used this to justify why the mother never had to take a DNA test to prove that it’s hers because it’s not related to her.I am dyslexic and on mobile. 

So I had this Kevina a in a few of my classes. She once 
argued with our professor who litteraly wrote the book most colleges use for this class in human A&P that genetics played no role in weather you were a boy or girl and that after the brain develops then the baby decideds weather it wants to be a boy or a girl. This was way into the semester and we had been talking about x and y linked disorders

She thought blood was blue because that's show it is in the pictures and she could see it was blue through her skin

Thought black people could not get sun burns or skin cancer 

Was a vegetarian and shamed a girl for drinking milk because it killed cows

Thought chicken salad was not meat because it was a salad and salad=vegetables 

Thought egg whites/powdered/boxed were okay because they come from a powder and not real eggs and even if they were it's not the baby any way (for those who don't know the baby grows in the white the yellow is its food until hatched)

She though blood types determained personality

I also had micro biology lab with her and had a question about next weeks homework while Kevina was stuck on this weeks of asking how epi pens help people breath during anaphlatc attack. Would be a fair question had we not just gone over this and did the reading material. I'll give they by play.


K: so how dose it open the air way

T: by constricting the esophageal lining 

K: wouldn't constriction make it worse?

T: no see the air goes between the lining so when it constricts they pull out away from the airway.
(I forget the next 5 ways he tried to explain it with Kevina not getting it and I'm Hangry at this point)

Me: Oh my God enough! (Grabs pressure cuff from the table and grabs Kevina's arm and puts it on her) the pressure cuff is your esophageal lining your arm is the air pathway. Got it?

K: yeah

Me: ok so now an allergy attack (pumps pressure cuff enough to cut off circulation) now just like the blood in your arm air can not get through because of the swelling. An epi pen will constrict the tissue (pointing at the cuff) so introduce epinephrine (let pressure out) and air or this case blood can flow.

That is the moment the light of realization dawned on her she finally got it. I really hope she dose not become a nurse.

I know a lot about the food because our class was right after lunch and alot of us would bring our food in to class to eat, Kevina especiallyI met Kevin at Uni, where he was studying nursing, which is in itself incredibly concerning. We were taking the same course and had to do some group projects together. During one of these group meetings it somehow came up that Kevin had a) Failed his driving test several times and b) Had bought a car and was driving it to school every day. 

What followed was the most maddening, circular conversation I have ever been a part of. Kevin could not comprehend what was so wrong with him driving a car. 

It went a little something like this:

Me: You can't drive without a license.

Kevin: Yes, I can. I drive to school everyday.

Me: But you don't have a license?

Kevin: Oh no, I didn't pass the test.

Me: So you can't drive!

Kevin: Yes I still drive. It's fine. 

Me: It's illegal and dangerous to drive without a license.

Kevin: Oh it's fine, I haven't been in any accidents.

Me: But it's a crime.

Kevin: No it's not. I haven't been arrested, so it's fine.

Repeat 5x

A few months after that I heard he got expelled for plagiarism, which was probably for the best.This isnt a story for the casual or lighthearted reader.
Mandatory Disclaimer: Phone user and not English native speaker.
This might have already been posted once, bc it was published in the local newspapers. 

Before we Beginn here are some important informations. In Austria it's common for hiking trails to cross fields where farmers keep their cows, sheep or whatever over the summer. There are in 90% of the cases ways around them (as in our story) which are just a bit longer 5 to 15 min. 
Cows are herd animals which are extremely protective of their young, so its just common sense to stay away from a ~1250 to ~2500 pounds heavy muscular animal. 

If you cross a cow field with a dog, you must unleash it, so if the dog is attacked, it can flee on its own and you don't get attacked too.
 If you didn't know that, there are literally signs everywhere (atleast 3 to 5 on most trails) stating this. If you happen to stumble across one of these large yellow signs with danger symbols, in the middle of nowhere, you might want to consider reading these. 

With that out of the way, here's the story:
In July 2014 a female Kevin was "hiking" with her dog, when she thought of the great idea to take a shortcut through a marked, but not fenced in cow field.
 She most likely was in experienced and very ill equipped (bad shoes for hiking, bad clothing etc.) Furthermore she didn't unleash her dog. Which will come to bite her later, hard. In her absolute wisdom she most definitely walked to close to the cows and their calfs!
 The one thing everyone with a brain should know is a bad idea!
 She and her dog were attacked by the mother cows protecting their calfs from a potential threat. During this attack, the Kevina was trampled by the herd of angry mother cows, what happend to her dog I don't know.
Sadly Kevina was fataly injured and died.

The incident made huge waves and led to the farmer having to pay 500000 euros. (569000 dollars atm of the court order in 2019 February) which nearly led to all mountain farmers closing down the hiking tracks and forbidding everyone to cross their lands.I’ve always known my sister is a special kind of dumb but holy shit. She’s pregnant now and this is a treasure trove of the dumbest things I have ever heard another human say. 

My sister is really religious. Our brother has chosen not to come out to her because she’s a bigot and justifies it with the Bible. She also believes sincerely in astrology.

When she found out she was pregnant she texted me complaining that the child would be one of two signs. She said “what if our signs aren’t compatible?!” I had to ask if she was being serious. She was. 

She was initially unhappy to find out she was pregnant. She intentionally went off birth control last year. She just did it so her husband would stop asking to have a kid. She didn’t think that she’d ~actually~ get pregnant. 

She pouted for a week after finding out she was pregnant, then she put a down payment on a space for the baby shower... before confirming with her doctor that she was pregnant OR telling anyone in our family other than me that she was pregnant, including her husband. 

She had her first ultrasound and at less than two months old when the baby still looks like a jelly bean, she decided that it “looks like a boy” and is refusing to accept that it may be a girl. I tried to tell her, a doctor tried to tell her. She won’t hear it. 

I’m sure there are others, but we are only 4 weeks into discovering that she’s pregnant. I have a feeling that there will be many more.I worked with a person I now understand was a complete Kevin.

He was in his late 30s but I swear he had to be part of some kind of freaky friday-scenario and he was really 14!

During introduction he and the other employes was taken through the roster of employes at our office, on every picture of a woman he loudly said "oh she's hot". 

During training he had to be told several times to put his phone away.

When we took in temps for the summer and the e-mail with names came out he literally danced around his office cause they were all girls names, he then asked another employe which one of the new girls he would fuck. 

He called our IT-guy "fatty". 

He had his office moved right by our managers office so that she could keep an eye on him. 

He did everything wrong, every case he had, every e-mail he answered was wrong. We had to remove things for him to do cause he literlly couldn't be taught how to do them.

He made up the most insane lies in the breakroom for example: he had converted his car to run on saltwater. 

He overstepped his duties, like he would do stuff that he was not permitted to do AT ALL. 

He asked a customer if he was "a queer" cause he sounded feminim on the phone. 

When he was given feedback he took it okey, for like a second, the he proceeded to threaten the person giving it cause he didn't want anyone to know he did wrong. 

He brought peanut covered snacks to a office building where it is strictly prohibited to bring in peanuts, he then tried to get people to eat these snacks, one of them being a girl who days earlier had told him she was allergic.

Oh! He asked a lady at our work for her number, she got uncomfortable and said no. A while later he asked her if he could borrow her phone, he then proceeded to call himself so he would get her number and then started to text her on her private time!

He came to work smelling of alcohol. 

He tried to force a whole office building to stop sitting with their legs crossed, showing the underside of their shoe, cause in his home country that was an insult.

He, SEVERAL TIMES, used a firedoor to go out and smoke which caused the fire alarm to go off.

He hit on EVERY younger female employe at our office, when they had all said no he started hitting on other girls in other offices by writing "so, you live in so-and-so-town? I was thinking about going there this summer, can I sleep at your place?"

When his test trial was ending he got the news that he would not be employed-employed. He then walked into the the bosses office and tried to convince him that the company had made a huge misstake. The boss then had to tell him "as long as I'm the boss at this company, you will NEVER work here again". Kevin didn't return for the rest of his employment.

Years later I was training some new people at our office and I used a quick example of something that Kevin that as "you should NEVER do this". A girl I was training then said "haha sounds like a guy my boyfriend is working with at the moment". 
I asked "is his name Kevin Kevinsson?" and YES it was. 
He apperantly got  job at a mechanic even though he knew nothing about cars, apperantly if someone told him what to do or that he was doing something wrong he got angry and threaten them! He got fired soon after.Let me introduce you to my brother Kevin. Kevin is 26 (I'm 19) , and he has been wreaking havoc for at least ten years now. Not quite sure where to begin so I'll start with childhood. 

When I was very young, I remember kevin being a teenager- when I was 9 he was really at his peak of being a teenager. Kevin intersected with Kyle quite often, complete with drinking monster and backwards hat, though surprisingly never did he punch any drywall. Kevin spent most of his time in high school skipping class, trying to surf on a lake (we live 2000 miles inland in iowa) and trying to start campfires in the backyard. He didn't really hit full idiocy until his summer between his first and second year of college. 

Kevin's first spectacular adventure was in a hotel downtown in my mid sized city. Not exactly a good place for an adventure, but a Kevin does not have the logic skills to figure that out. He decided it would be a good idea to go there dressed as a spy (he was like 6'8" tall and really thin at the time so it kind of worked). He walked into the hotel lobby wearing a suit and tie and tried to convince random people he was a russian diplomat who needed their help. Kevin predictably tried to fool the security guard into giving him a luxury hotel suite. It didn't work. Kevin's ass got arrested (bit of an overreaction by the cop tbh) and my parents sent me (remember I was a young teen) to get kevin out of jail. Charges were dropped. 

Next up was his marijuana phase, which was later that same summer. He smoked a metric f*** ton of weed (it's illegal here) and sat in the backyard listening to reggae music all summer (he's white). Fairly harmless, right? Wrong. Kevin, stoned out of his mind, bumbles into the house at two a.m. after falling asleep outside. As he climbs up the stairs, he falls backward and breaks both legs and a wrist. Does he stop there? Of course not. Instead of sitting still and yelling for help, he tries to drag himself upstairs, worsening the injury. 

The next summer, Kevin was considerably more malicious than before. He developed one especially shocking obsession and that was giving random strangers enemas. He taped a fucking printed off porno of some asian lady getting an enema to his wall and claimed it was "his art", and screeched like hell when my dad tried to take it down. Soon, he was trying to hook up with girls who would let him give them an enema. This was a daily fixation. We spent most of the summer watching him type away about how he wanted to give [insert girl of the week] an enema. He also spent $500 of my dad's cash on raw honey to use in enemas. 

In recent years he hasn't gotten much smarter. He's also tried out for a high school baseball freshman team (not his school and he's 26), sold my dad's class ring to a pawn shop to buy enema porn (we paid 7x sale price to get his ring back) and melted down an expensive kitchen knife and made a dildo out of it. He bought a copy of every religious book (bible quran etc) and pissed on it and put it on youtube (he raged about being banned for weeks). He stuck a whole jar of tabasco sauce up his own anus and hat to go to the hospital. He bought fifty brooms and claimed they were "enema rods" . He tried to surf on a lake during a tornado warning and nearly got hit by lightning. He tried to fry an egg on a sidewalk... in -10 degree weather. He claimed the egg would burn because "cold and hot are the same at the extreme". Overall an asshole obsessed with assholes. 



He shows vile contempt and rage toward my dad every day. My mom has mostly escaped unharmed but she has done this by ignoring Kevin, not by any magic. My parents still feel the need to re-tape his "triple hell anal fisting" poster in the main hallway everytime he comes home so he doesn't know it has been moved (he goes CRAZY if someone moves his precious poster).I've been listening to Stories About Kevin for a while, and it just NOW dawned on me I had one lurking in the back if my mind. No clue why I didn't share this sooner.

Background: About 3 years ago I was hired onto work at a major American retail giant with a golden star/shape/thing.  Before getting to work, of course there was mandated orientation. This was redundant for me as I've been formerly employed there, but as a cashier for 4 years. I knew the ins and outs of that store and the people in it. I had to leave, but then come back as if I was a Greenhorn. 

...

All of us new hires were all seated and there was one guy, we will call Kevin. Tall, dark hair, full bushy beard with long hair in a ponytail. We strike conversation and it was actually pleasant in the beginning.

However, it was one of those weird conversations when we started head first talking about inner chakras, spirituality, then it moved to light conspiracy theories like aliens and mind control. I'm not perfect, I admit I am perhaps 25% Kevina therefore I can speak the language. (No disrespect towards ANYONE who believes in the concept of inner chakras and spiritual growth. I own several amethysts, quartz crystal, etc passed down from my mother).

...Anyway, he then goes on to tell me he's vegan. Okay, cool, not going to criticize one's diet. Mine was far from perfect. I'm 5"2 and, at the time, weighed 320lbs. I was CHONKY! (**I promise this is relevant**)

I let him talk and explain himself as he felt the need to. Kevin confidently explained to me how his diet of all organic food without meat or dairy product was generically formulated to **stop the aging process**. I flat out asked him then, "So you're saying, your diet keeps you from getting old?" (Therefore immortal). He said yes!

Not only that, but he looked me up and down and told me that I should probably get started on something similar "given my size".

...My self esteem was so low my 25% Kevina brain didn't immediately catch on this dude just fat shamed me. I shrugged and agreed I needed to learn to eat better and I made a little fun of myself. I was such a pushover back then so desperate for people to like me, I'd try befriending you if you punched me in the face!

The other fellow new hires were looking uncomfortable as we two weirdos chatted continuously when the training manager left the room to get something or speak privately with someone else. 

At one point safety ladders was brought up. How to properly use one, where to store it, etc. When management left he shared with the group how Osha regulation was pointless and bragged how he simply built his own ladder at home instead of buying one. About half way into orientation day, everything Kevin said finally hit me and I was uncomfortable and baffled. Also, I was angry at myself for letting Kevin fat shame me. I laughed about it and had fat shamed myself with him, so it wasn't like I could change my mind and report him for harassment. 

I didn't speak to Kevin the rest of the day and it was actually the last time I saw him. One reason being, I had to be hospitalized the very next week (emergency surgery, different story for later lol), and, even when I came back he was gone.

Gee, I wonder why.

Kevin had hurt my feelings without real warrant, so maybe that's what stuck out. I've lost like, 60lbs since then and look back on it and still hold some resentment. I've still got a long way to go, but I'm eating far healthier. Vegetarian/Vegan low carb dishes ARE VERY YUMMY, but you will not take egg whites from me lol

Veganism in itself isn't terrible but in Kevin's case it doesn't hurt to stay grounded in reality. He truly was one nugget short of a happy meal.I can't believe I never thought to post this here. 

Kevina was a girl I went to high school with. She was smart... I guess? She got into the advanced level math and science classes at least. But common sense wasn't her strong suit. We shared a Pre-Chem/pre-physics class with our teacher, Mr. B. 

One day, the class went off on one of its frequent tangents about something unrelated (it was really easy to do in a class of 9 people). We somehow got on the topic of famous people that had visited our small midwestern town in the middle of nowhere. Mr. B was listing off names and where their memorials/monuments were around town: Abraham Lincoln, JFK, MLK Jr., it was an impressive list. 

Then Mr. B said "Oh, I almost forgot! Richard Nixon visited here once too, there's like a plaque over in the park or something for it."

Kevina chimes in: "Who's Richard Nixon?"

I don't know why, I dont know how, I don't know here the thought came from (maybe I had just recently had to research Jesse Owens for something?) But without a moments hesitation, and with the straightest face I've been able to pull off since, I said,

 "Oh, he was the first African American Olympian." 

Kevina hesitates. "Wait, really? I feel like that was someone else."

Damn, it was a good try, I thought. Until I hear Mr. B say "Yeah Kevina, you didn't know that?" 

Then my friend Mark joined in. "Yeah he ran the 400. He won the gold like 6 times."

I sprinkled in that he was a curler in the Winter Olympics, and a champion at that. Everyone in the class just went with it. By the end of the class, we had her convinced Richard Nixon was a 400 runner and a Curler for the US Olympic team, and Mr. B had even told her that he has a plaque hanging up in the hallways in our high school. She spent the next THREE MONTHS searching for that plaque and believing that Richard Nixon was the first African American Olympian.

She didn't find out until English class that next semester, when for some reason the student teacher brought up Richard Nixon in relation to sole book we were reading, and Kevina, in her perkiest, most excited voice, said,

 "Oh! I know who he is! That's the first African American Olympian!" 

Keep in mind, half of our pre-chem class was also in that English class. We all stifled a laugh, and the student teacher seemed like she was about to dismiss it as a dumb joke when a classmate said something that made our hearts break.

"Uh, what??? No he isn't. He was a president."

Kevina, ever the brightest bulb, then went to Mr. B to rub it in his face that he was wrong. Mr. B just laughed because he had no idea she still believed it for so long. 

I've got a few more stories about this particular Kevina, ones I dont actually feel a little guilty about because Kevina managed to pull some real big brain Kevin moves all on her own. But mayhaps that's another story.I’m here to tell you a tale about the worst Kevin that I have ever had the displeasure of working with.  As you know, McDonald’s isn’t known for the intelligent employees that run the store, but this this Kevin wasn’t even the bottom of the barrel, more like the gross molding dirt under the barrel.  He recently got fired a week ago and I wanted to commemorate his legacy by sharing to you all the awful and down right stupid things that he did.

Now when you think of fast food, you probably think that the employees have to be fast, well you’ll be partially right, you need to be fast a making the food, but you don’t want to run around and flail about, this Kevin decided on his first day to run around like a mad lad bumping into everyone and pissing them off, and he always wondered why people didn’t like him.

He thought because of my age that I was only working there for about 1 month when I told him that I was working there for over a year, and even after I told him that, he still would explain how everything in the store would function, even though I operated everything he explained.

He was our maintenance man for the store, so he was tasked with fixing everything, but he would run off when he was in the middle of another job and the manager would get mad at him for keeping our times down.

He was openly sexist, making joke like calling to girls that he worked with “Hey Women”.  Then he once complained to me about my close friend, who was telling him to pay attention to his station that he wished l was calling things out.  I made it clear to everyone that me and her were very close friends due to how I acted around her.

He would break just about everything because he would bang on baskets to get nuggets out or throw things recklessly around.  This made his job a bit of an oxymoron as he was a maintenance man who broke more things then he fixed.

He dropped a bag of nuggets into with the fryer with plastic and not once, but twice.  This ruined our both of our skimmers as they got coated in plastic.

He once tried to fix our dishwasher as it wasn’t turning on.  He immediately assumed that it was our breakers acting up, so he decided to go to our breakers and flip the one for the dishwasher on.  The thing was he couldn’t find the one for the dishwasher, so he decided to start flipping off and on every one that he could find, shutting down half the store before he was stopped.

He got his final write up came when he got caught smoking in our storage house out behind the store, this was a big issue as a few years back, the storage house caught fire because an employee decided to go smoke in it as well.

What finally did him in was when he decided to call 10 minutes before his shift started stating that he couldn’t be in that day.  The manager told him that if he didn’t come in, he was getting a write up.  He said that he didn’t care and was promptly fired.

Kevin was a weird guy and you could tell by his mannerisms, which made me believe that he was either doing drugs or had a mental disorder, he supposedly put butter on everything and hated vegetables.  He would tell people this despite him being in his 40’s and nobody caring.  I also heard him say he took 3 5-hour energy’s on his break, which was only 30 minutes.

I also want to mention this as it wasn’t ever traced back to Kevin, but he was the most likely.  The manager once found a stash or beer cans below the trash bag in the boys bathroom and nips outside as well.  While they never found out who did it, I have a feeling it was Kevin as he was the only person allowed in the bathrooms during as part of his job and it would explain his wield decision making.

So that’s the story about Kevin, there might be a few incidences that I could have missed but that seems to be most of it.  Where ever you are Kevin, I want you to know that your now the butt of ever joke at work and you will not be missedOkay, i am out of school now over some years, but tonight this Kevina came to my head again while lissening rslash story’s about Kevin’s, anyway their where multiple stories about her but tonight I want to focus on 2.

1. we watched once in history class a documentary about the Middle Ages, in it where some scenes of actors playing some historical events, when the documentary was over and the teacher asked if we had any questions she asked him ,, how did they recorded it, I thought they didn’t had cameras back then?“ the whole class looked at her, she believed the scenes with actors where originally from the Middle Ages. Mind you, we where in the 8th class in Germany, so about 14-16 years old, my teacher was speechless for good 5 minutes, then he explained her that these where only actors recreating historical events.

2. during 10th grade, wich is one of the 3 classes you can graduate in Germany, I was sending out many applications for apprenticeships, so I often missed in class because I was then at apprenticeship interviews, now my classmates where rather lazy, so they asked me if I could write applications for them, I did it for 10€ per application, now I simply created a base text where I had blank spot where I simply filled in the information for the job and company I was applying to, most realized it once they bought it, but Kevina, now I don’t know if she really was so lazy to not even empty the blank Spot and simply reuse the base format, or if she never realized it, but she bought 14 applications for different company’s, she basically payed 140€ for 14 times almost the same application.I don’t know if this qualifies, but I don’t know where else to put it. I was once in a competition kind of festival where different schools in my district competed against each other. There were academic challenges and athletic challenges for everyone to choose to compete in. I was in several of these sun-competitions, a lot of which were in the performing arts. But I was in one academic one. This was called Music Memory. The premise for this competition was that you would memorize the composer, major work, and selection of a certain song (there were 20 of these) and when they played ~20 second part of any place in the song. (To make it harder of course) So there was this one guy, who had apparently only remembered one song out of all of the 20 songs. It was by Falla, The Spanish Dance. So for each and every one of the songs he put down that song. And I mean it was a better strategy than guessing everything tbh.  He got a 1/20, very predictable.My stepfather was a Kevin and I might post some more stories as I remember them. He was this naive yet kind guy who was corn-fed raised in Eastern Tennessee in the 1950s and 1960s. Here are the two stories that I remember right off my head.

EATING HABITS

My stepfather refused to eat anything that he wasn’t raised with in East Tennessee. He especially hated ethnic food, and, by that, I mean that, for my stepfather, Taco Bell and Fazoli’s  were too ethnic. His son used to tell stories as a kid about begging my stepfather to take him to Taco Bell, but he would only do it once in a blue moon because it was just weird to him.

His typical lunch was a Spam sandwich. 

In my early twenties, I became a vegetarian and my mother was supportive and tried to accommodate me when I came over for Sunday dinner, but it was difficult making separate meals and I didn’t want her to go to a lot of trouble for me. She soon discovered that the veggie ground round was an amazing substitute for ground meat in chili, to the point that she wanted to switch exclusively to it given it was much easier to cook with since it didn’t need to be pregrilled. She and I agreed that, with the way she made it, we couldn’t tell it was vegetarian.

My stepfather, on the other hand, refused to even try it. He was just totally convinced that you couldn’t make chili that was good and wouldn’t even take a spoonful. He went so far as to make a sandwich when my mother made the chili, frustrating my mom.

But she had a plan.

The next time my mother made chili, she made it all in one pot like usual with the veggie ground round. However, she soon poured a little bit into a smaller pot before my stepfather saw and told him that the smaller pot was for me. That night, he ate bowl after bowl of the veggie chili, telling my mom how delicious it was. My mom never cooked her chili with real meat again and, to my knowledge, took her secret to the grave.

THE LANGUAGE OF ENGLAND

In my junior year of university, I was overjoyed to be accepted to study abroad for a year in Canterbury, England. I had never even been out of the country to that point, so the opportunity to spend a whole year in Britain was a dream come true. I told my mother the good news, who proceeded to spread it to the rest of the family.

Now my stepfather, to my knowledge, only visited three states in his life, and he never would have gone to two of them if he could have helped it. Going outside the country was just a concept he didn’t quite grasp, though he tried.

But I’ll never forget his first question to me about my upcoming adventure:

“Do you have to learn a new language to go to England?”

I just looked at him, mouth agape. He wasn’t typically the kind of person to pull an elaborate joke, but I just couldn’t believe he was asking if I, a native English speaker, had to learn a new language to go to England. AND HE USED TO WATCH BRITCOMS WITH MY MOM AND ME ON PBS WHEN I CAME OVER SUNDAY NIGHTS!

After starring at him in silent disbelief for a moment, I responded, “No, England is where English came from.”

“Oh, I never knew that!,” he replied, and walked away.

Bless him, he meant well. His family wasn’t quite as naive as he could be, but I never figured out why my stepfather could sometimes seem like an alien visiting a foreign world for the first time.This post is about my brother Kevin, (Fake name). He is starting to go done the way of the Karen. I won’t tell you a story, but I will tell you what he does.

He says that the Earth is flat now, and was flat before the Big Bang. It means he is of two minds, and he knows the Earth exists after the Big Bang. 

He said “It is my job to make sure you do good in life and meet your dreams.” When I asked him why, the only thing is: “Let me or I will egg your college dorm windows”. Let it be known, I am older than him, and I can get my drivers license in three years. 

He thinks because he is younger than me, I will do anything for him regardless of if I need to do anything. 

He thinks when your born Catholic, you stay Catholic.

He also thinks if I do everything for him, he doesn’t need to do anything for me.

And lastly, he thinks I will end up treating him like a god, which I won’t do, because I am going to convert into an Atheist. And brother if you hear this or see this, I am old enough to know 6 million ways of kicking your butt.I used to work at a narrowgauge steam railway a few years ago. Descent collection of engines ranging from total rebuilds, to 2nd world war trench locos. 

Three steam locos on the roster, with one that was too small to be used regularly. 

At the time, i was training to be a fireman, stoking the fire, shovelling coal and maintaining the boiler water level. A fairly complicated job if you dont know much about it already, and quite a responsible job too. If you aint got enough coal on the fire, you have no steam to move. 

so i was on the footplate (in the cab) keeping an eye on the water level while the actual fireman was poking about up the shed trying to find some oil to refil our oil cans with. Left me on the loco to check the water level, and the driver wasnt far away if anything went wrong. Its not unusual for people to come up to the engine and want to have a look in the cab, if theres children 9 times out of 10 we open the fire hole doors to show them the fire. 

Then, Kevin turned up. He was asking how old the engine was, why it was built, where it worked all the normal stuff people ask. THEN, he asked where the petrol (gasoline) goes. 

Me: Its not petrol powered, its a steam loco, so it uses coal and water. 

Kevin: Water dosnt burn! Wheres the petrol go?

Me: It dosnt use petrol. It uses coal, and water. 

Kevin: Whats coal? 

I took a step back, asked him to clarify his question, then showed him the coal in the coal bunker, the fire, and i even throw a shovel full of coal on the fire too. 

Kevin: So does the petrol go in these tank things on the side then? 

Me: I.....It DOSNT use petrol Sir. It uses coal, that black stuff I just showed you. That heats the water in the boiler from the tanks, there is no petrol, or diesel or any form of liquid fuel on this locomotive. Its coal fired. Solid fuel. 

I was starting to get stressed out and pretty angry at this guy, the driver noticed and came back to me and asked how the water was looking. It was fine, and Kevin walked off. 

I then looked at the driver, who looked at me. Both of us blank faced. 

HOW could someone not know what coal is? Actually, genuinly how? 

At the end of the day, i was helping with loco disposal. Shoveling clinker and ash out of the ashpan, and ash from the smoke box ready for the next days use. I also had to refill the coal bunker too, which is hard work by your self on a summer evening XD As i was finishing up running about with shovels and wheel barrows, i overheard kevin talking to someone. 

Kevin: So where do you get the petrol from for the steam trains? 

I wanted to throw myself into the firebox and smash my head against the firebox wall untill i passed out.God help me...
So as you might know I have a cosin, Kevin,  he's a very "interesting" person. Well besides that fact that he things vegetables are meat and other crazy things, he thinks the world is ending in 7 days. Why you might ask, he heard some conspiracy theory that the world will end in 2021, and he thinks it will end 7 days from today. His reasoning is "God made earth in 7 days so in seven days it will end!" I asked him why THIS WEEK it will end instead of literally any other week. His response "i dunno, but I will BELIEVE ME!!!" 
This crap gives me a headache.
I'll update you in 7 days lol.

Edit:the world didn't end and he actually admitted to being wrong.I used to live with a roommate who was this weird Kevina-Karen hybrid. She had a college degree, probably made more than my boyfriend and I did at the time COMBINED and seemed to be an intelligent, cultured individual.


She was not.


My personal favorite and the title of the post was about the hot water in out apartment.


Kevina and I lived in a community of apartment buildings. Ours was at the top of a hill. Her boyfriend lived in one that was at the bottom of the hill we were on. She’d frequently spend the night at his place and shower there before heading to work. One day, she commented on how long it takes for our water to turn hot in our apartment:


Kevina: “When I stay at Boyfriend’s house and I take a shower, it turns hot, like, really quickly. But here, it takes a long time.”

Me: “Yeah, it’s probably something to do with the boil—“

Kevina: “Yeah, it’s probably because we’re way up here on the hill.”

Me: “...wut.”

Kevina: “Yeah, and he’s on the bottom of the hill. It takes longer for the hot water to get up the hill to our apartment. Plus we’re on a higher floor, so it must take even longer for us to get it.”

Me: (stares blankly) “...what...”

Kevina: “Yeah, that’s probably why.”


Conversations with this woman were typically a losing battle and I genuinely didn’t have the patience to explain to her how boilers work. I have a few other stories I may post later. She had a lot of moments like this.

EDIT: Changed the formatting a bit.I'm honestly not sure if these people can be classified as Kevins but because of their stupidity, I'm gonna try. 

So this story begins from the fall of last year. In my country (I live in the EU) it's mandatory for men to go to the army. I went to the place where the conscription was held. We were organized in alphabetical order, by our last names. I realized that I'd be seeing some of the most idiotic people I've met in my life... old Middle school classmates, Goddammit.

So I drove there, parked close to the community center, that the event was held at and lo and behold, I see Kevin 2, Kevin 1 came shortly after... and he was brought there by the police. Kevin 1's conscription should've been yesterday, since his last name began with an h, but he had been in a cell the previous night after some drunken behavior. 

This reminded me of a few things they did in middle school. 

Kevin 1 was a person I met in 7th grade and he was really really stupid, his dad was a mess though so I can't blame him. Kevin 1 tried to switch off the power to the entire school, while the teacher was watching, and tried to blame it on me. He hid in the bathrooms during recess, as staying inside was not allowed for some reason. He wrecked some places an bragged about being able to get booze and drugs while underage. 

He was also, sadly, very patriotic. He bragged how he would go to the army and become a tank driver and a commander. (this will be important later)

and then Kevin 2... He was a lot like Kevin 1, but more stupid and more aggressive. He did similar things as Kevin 1, he walked around hitting the air around him, saying he was "punching the ghosts" and he got into fights very often. One time Kevins 1&2 decided to stare at a light for a minute, switch them off and fight in the dark.

Kevin 2 had been kicked out of several schools before. (Kinda rare I guess) Most of the reasons being his aggressive behavior. He was in the same IT class as me and one time when we had a substitute teacher, (who was a comedian and a total badass) Kevin 2 started to wreck shit. Again. The substitute teacher just lifted his head from the computer and told him to calm down, to which he replied: "Fuck you! You can't do anything to me!" The teacher just looked up again and said "Whatever." Kevin 2 didn't like this reaction and decided to try something else "Well fuck you! I'll jump out of this window after killing you all!" The teacher, again, lifted his head and said: "You do that."

Kevin 2 was also eager to go to the army. He said that he would become a pilot. (Not with his education lol) He went also on a rant on why the immigrants are ruining this country.

And now we return to the conscription. Kevin 1 was brought in by the Cops, and Kevin 2 is there because his name. 

What you need to know is that you get to divided into different classes based on your records and the situation. the classes are:  
A: Fully healthy  
B (1 or 2): The army poses a minimal or a big threat to the person.  
C: Incapable to go through the army due to a disability or a health issue. (so No army)  
T: Incapable to go through the army due to possessing a great threat to themselves, or others. (Again, no army)

Kevin 1 took out a knife and cut open a secret locker in his backpack (I guess due to him being drunk they didn't fully search it or something) And got some MDMA's out, and handed them to Kevin 2. He told me that it was MDMA, and he was doing it in front of about 10 military personnel, who all technically have the authority to arrest them. 

Needless to say... they probably got assigned to Class T or lower.So I told myself I’m gonna get off social media for a while. And I couldn’t leave Reddit with out telling y’all about my moms friend.

So I’m not sure where to start. Well I guess I’ll start he a felon. He was trying to sell drugs, when he should have been in school and he ended up shooting a woman in the face. And apparently tried to flush the gun. She survived and he’s made amends. But I don’t know why he tried to flush a gun.

He was in prison for nearly 20 years, we have yet to figure out what he done with his time. You know some people read, some workout, and some people just make the most of it. He denied doing any of this. 

1. He looks up to TI because he like how smart he is he specifically likes the big words. Actually he says he made them up but we showed him it was in a dictionary. 

And he says “Man how does he knows all those big words” 

my mom said “oh I believe he said he read a lot in prison” 

he goes “what?! Nah he can’t learn that kind of stuff reading” 

my mom (an avid reader) “well, I learned a lot of those words reading, I can help you get books” 

him “TI dictionary?!”

2. Mac and cheese

I was making Mac and cheese and he was in the phone with my mom. I’m really just now experimenting with making my own cheese sauce and so I was just using a bag a noodles and making a bechamel. I guess he ask how I’m making it at home? She looks quite confused.

My mom “well she’s using a bag a noodles and making her own cheese sauce”

Him” YOU CAN USE BAGS OF NOODLES!!?!?!?!!?”

My mom “uhhh... yes?”

Him “HOW?! YOU WONT HAVE ANY CHEESE OR ANYTHING?!”

My mom” she’s making a cheese sauce using milk”

Him “oh my god I didn’t know this, this ... is. Can you make me some?”

My mom “ sure I will”

3. Ford Expedition

My mom, me and my aunt like to shop in small towns. Near where they were raised. And he never been so he offered to drive us. My mom doesn’t like being drove around so she said we can go in your car but I rather drive. Ok with him. 

I’m sure something happened that I’m not remembering but a lot of thing made me make a confused face. But cutting through my families home town, a Ford Expedition cuts us. 

My mom said something like “darn Ford Expedition, we’ll beat his butt right y’all!”

He said “YEP! Expeditiously”

Kind of shocked he knew that word and a small debate on wondering if that was the correct context. (Not seriously but in a fun way)

He said “oh that isn’t a real word TI made it.”

My mom and aunt “wait what?! It is a real word.”

I said “if that’s not a real word what’s a Ford Expedition?”

He corrected me “it’s Ford especially”

We laughed but we realized he was serious because he looked confused. It was airpods in after that. I’m not allowed to question him. 

4. Game nights

We my mom and I were only around him and my aunt so we decided to have game night. We started playing monopoly and other stuff. We thought Pictionary would be ok with him, he struggles with scrabble and he was up set he has about 50 points while everyone else had 100+ (he’s also horrible to play with he rushes when I’m trying to count)

We tell him “we got Pictionary, ya know the game you draw and we guess” 

He warned us saying “oh I can’t draw”

Thinking he knows basic shapes “oh it’s not like you have to be perfect. None of us can draw”

Y’all we should have believed him. He couldn’t draw!? I just didn’t understand how he could draw a house. I’m gonna see if I can attached my recreation of his drawings.

[Pictionary 1](https://flic.kr/p/2kKSzrB) 
[Pictionary 2](https://flic.kr/p/2kKSzrw) 
[Pictionary 3](https://flic.kr/p/2kKNPLD) 

One of them is a dog house. 👍

But I think this is enough...

Oh he’s 49- 55 years old I don’t remember.My little sister is smart but she definitely has her moments of Kevinism.

My favorite moment is when she shotgunned herself. 

For those of you who aren’t familiar with the term “shot gun” it’s basically when you poke a hole in a canned beverage and let it pour into your mouth after opening the top.

One night we were chilling in the kitchen, I was browsing Reddit and she was watching tiktok than got up to get something to drink. I wasn’t watching her because she’s 16 and I thought that meant she’s old enough to do so without casualties.

I was fucking wrong 😂

A few minutes in and I heard her go “oh shi-“ alarmed I went to see what she did and I found her with a leaking 7-up in her left hand. And a fork in the other. It went like this 

Note: she was taking small sips from the can while doing this.

Me: What the actual duck did you do?

Sis: I was just getting something to drink and than this happened .

Me: why do you have a fork if you were getting a drink?

Sis: I dunno I just saw it on the counter and picked it up.

Me: and you decided to shot gun that can?

Sis: No I was just tapping it with the fork, I didn’t expect it to poke a hole in the can from a small tap.

Me: you do know how thin they make soda cans right? 

Sis: look I wasn’t expecting it to poke a hole in the can.

Me: still why did you tap it with a fork?

Sis: why are you asking so many questions?

Me (a little louder): What the hell do you expect me to do, think that it’s just normal to tap tin cans with a metal fork?

Sis: SSSSHHH Don’t be so loud your gonna wake up mom and dad. 

After that we pretty much continued what we were doing before except this time she was sulking a can of 7-up and I laughed at her every time she did and tease her about it whenever I hand her a canned beverage.

This is only one of multiple moments of her moments of Kevinism she has had others you wouldn’t expect a junior to do.I Used to be a clerk at a tech store. we sold x boxes computer hardware and stuff like that. we also fixed broken phones and stuff like that. and one day someone named kevin decided to get his xbox fixed because it wouldent turn on. when we saw it it was in horrible condition. (also ps this was about 10 yrs ago so this was a xbox 360.) we took it in and when we looked in it and the motherboard was snapped in half. i worked at that store for 4 years and thats the only time ive ever seen somthing like that. and my boss in his 52 years of life he has never seen that either. alot of the wires were damaged so we called him back in and told him that he needs to get a new xbox as this one was done. but kevin was not having it. he said that he wants a new motherboard witch costs almost as mutch as the xbox itself costed. we said u just need to buy a new xbox. we argued for a sold 30 minutes untill he said he would fix it himself. he stormed out and never paid us the 40 dollars it costs to just take a look at it. 2 days later he came back and the xbox was smashed. he wanted it fixed and we told him to go to a store that actually cares. i will never forget kevin.

&#x200B;

Edit: Kevin was well over atleast 25 in case ur wondering.One of my coworkers, Joe (name changed), has a boyfriend, who we'll obviously call Kevin (again, not real name). These guys are in their 40s or 50s and have a healthy loving relationship from what I understand. Joe told me some stories about him, and I thought I'd share them here.

A short list of some of the stuff Kevin has done:

- He thinks Montreal, Canada - which they visit twice a year - is in "the midwest." He comments this every time they visit, and will continue to insist even after googling and arguing about it. The kicker: Kevin minored in geography in college.

- He tried to wash a cat litter box - that still had things in it - with a pressure washer, and got surprised when it literally backfired.

- According to Joe, something he does often is, while watching a pretty recently made movie, he'll see a young actress and comment that it's some actress that is now in her 60s (i.e. Jodie Foster), and argue otherwise.

- He didn't understand that turkeys come from eggs, and was surprised to find out.

And now for my personal favorite:

Kevin once bought cheap laundry detergent from the dollar store. Joe told him that it's not good stuff - Kevin didn't listen, so eventually Joe gave up and just told him not to use it on his clothes since he has sensitive skin. After a while, Kevin angrily called Joe while he was at work. When he got home, Kevin accused Joe of cheating on him - because of a rash he got in some unfortunate areas. After a doctor's visit, it turned out to be contact dermatitis. From the cheap detergent.

I'll gladly share more stories as I hear them from Joe.Here's a Kevin story from my time as a fast food worker.

I was taking orders the other day and had a Kevin and his wife come up to the register.  Keven reached in his pocket and pulled out a coupon, proudly displaying it to me.  It was one of our coupons that basically provided two meals for...let's say...$12.00.  I rang up the meals and then looked at him with a smile as I told him the total...about $13.50.

The smile dropped from his face.  "Why are you charging me $13.50?"

I cringed inside (this wasn't my first Kevin rodeo) and told him that the meals were $12.00 and that the tax brought it to $13.50.  He looked at me in confusion.  "Why is it $13.50?  The coupon says $12!"  Once again, I tell him that this was indeed the price of the food, but we have to include the $1.50 sales tax.

With a sour look on his face, Kevin reaches into his wallet and pulls out $2...to cover the tax.  "Here, I guess!" he grouched at me.  It was then that it struck me...This Kevin thought that the coupon covered the entire price of the meals so that he didn't have to pay anything!!!  I struggled through trying to tell him that it didn't, when he looked at me and said "Well then what good is the coupon then??"  Well, without the coupon the food would cost you almost twice as much!  Finally, his long-suffering wife just looked like "I've had enough of this AGAIN" and directed him to hand me the full amount.

I don't think he ever really understood that a coupon reduces a price, not removes it!

EDIT: This IS in the United States where the coupons don't include the taxes, which are a percentage added to the coupon price.  I've lived with this my entire life and never had seen anyplace where the tax was included.  Sorry for the confusion to those in other countries where this isn't the norm. (Btw in the last post the first 2 stories were jokes true, but they were jokes)
Also this is a different girl

For context for this next story  neither of us had cell phones. (I was 9 and she was 12)

Kevina: “I’m scared of the dark can you walk me home?”
Me: “sure, let me just get a jacket” 
*puts on light ~ish jacket*
Kevina: “okay lets go.”
*We leave the house*
Kevina: “it’s really cold”
Me: “you can have my jacket if you want”
Kevina: “can I have a bigger jacket ”
Me: “sure, let’s go back inside. Here pick a jacket”
Kevina: “were is your really big jacket”
Me: “sorry, I must have miss placed it, you can just stack some jackets on top of each other”
Kevina: “I cant go home now”
Me: “why?”
Kevina: “I’ll get sick”
Me: “why would you get sick?”
Kevina: “because it’s cold”
Me: “ you don’t actually get sick from colds right?”
Kevina: “yes you do!”
Me: “why would you think that?”
Kevina: “because true kevina told me”
Me: “Kevina, do you mean hypothermia?”
Kevina:”also hypothermia, but you can get stuff like the flu, and salmonella“
Me: “the flu. And do you even know what salmonella is?”
Kevina: “ of course I know what salmonella is!”
Me: “sorry.”
Kevina: “ i’ll just stay here, I wanted to have a sleepover anyway”
Me: “but I’m not allowed to have a sleepover cuz last time you were to loud and woke everyone up”
Kevina: “I promise to be quiet”
Me “that’s what you said last time plus, you just live on the block over”
*first left and first house on the right*
Kevina: “do you want me to get sick?”
Me: “no Kevina, how can I prove it to you?”
Kevina: “ask your mom”

I end up asking my mom and she obviously says no and let’s kevina wear her jacket for the way back
Edit:if anyone was wondering it was like 30-40 ish degrees outsideI just remembered this story,he was a crazy Kevan aloe me to set the seen. It was kevans birthday he had gotten around 200$ or so from birthday cards and from people etc.we we're like 5th grade or so. He had a play station,when he bought fortnite stuff before his mom's credit card was saved to the consul.thare we're several kids thare but the only ones that matter are me kevan and steven(fake name).now on to the story,So kevan had his money in a jar on his desk. Me and Steve were running around outside we would yell at home to come outside through his window he refused. So we whent inside he told us that he was gonna spend his "2,000"$ on Fortnite. Steve tried to correct him but kevans snapped back at him with a "Shut up steven you bitch". We both look in ah confused we both shut up and just kinda sit down and just started chatting. Kevans tells us that he's spend his 2,000 doulers he spend that 100$ fortnite thing and buys everything in the shop then he dous this over and over and over for like 1hour or so me and Steve were just chatting and playing with a big lego tub he had in his room kevans was mating everything he did. Untill he couldn't any more he had maxed out the card... He looks at me with a expeting look in his eyes and stayed"Seeeeeeeee I spend my 2,000$ it did work you stupid bitch" I ignore him he plays the game and we whatch him untill we here a alvin and the chipmunks style,"KEEVAAAAAAN!!!!!"falowd by a loud ponding. His mom comes rafting throught the door screaming. She barks at him..."I just got a email that my credit card on a fortnite!" He looks at his mom with a happy look and hands her the 200$ and sayes I just spent my money don't worry she count it out she inhales "YOU SPENT MORE THAN 3,000$!!!!!!!!!" Me and Steve are just sitting thare acwoerdly.hus mo. Sayes what in the hell kevan she was so mad I'm not sure what happened next she called of the party after that and we all whent home. he refused to talk about it. I have more story's from this same kid this is just the tip of the iceberd. If your interested let me know.Saw a post earlier about someones story of an entire group of Kevins and Kevinas being dumb. It reminded me of a similar, yet in a way opposite experience of mine.

Make no mistake, this teacher was completely oblivious, at the same time she had moments of absolute genius and was genuinely loved by almost all students.

Context/background: School trip for around 20 students who were involved in a Mandarin language program. Trip was to China, specifically the cities of Beijing and Xian. It was a 3 week long trip during the summer.

Mrs. Kevina was a tall white hippy English teacher in her late 50's who clearly dropped WAY TOO MUCH ACID in the 60's and 70's. She was always pleasant but had the reputation of being a little bit a space case. She was the person who planned and put the trip together and she was afforded just one other chaperone who was a parent of one of the students and was an immigrant from the PRC.

One of our first big outings on this trip was in Beijing. We were going to all get treated to a traditional Chinese foot massage/bathhouse experience. Mrs. Kevina said she set this up so we could "channel our chi". Now I expected some kind of spa experience so I was first a little confused as to why we pulled up to a 6 story building with no windows. We were ushered into a room that was set up a little bit like a movie theatre. Rows of very nice lazyboy style chairs were set up. Suddenly the light dimmed and some music came on. A door opened and a line of Chinese women in their early 20's started to file out. They were all dressed in very small silver bikini's and even had numbers attached to their hips. Mrs. Kevina was clearly appalled. Sixteen year old me was clearly fucking delighted. Mrs. Kevina tried to play it off like it was planned but it was clear that she did not do her homework on exactly what was being set up and brought us to what was essentially a bathhouse/brothel. From this moment on I KNEW this trip was going to be awesome.

We were staying at a school in Beijing for students from the country side, so we had to stay in their dorms. They were about 110F degrees at night, with no fans. After the first few days we were brought to the supermarket/fishbasement/videogame emporium across the street to buy "essential supplies". I walked out of the store with a what must have been a gallon bottle of "firewater"no idea what kind of alcohol it was, but it was clearly alcohol. Mrs. Kevina commented and said "oh, im happy to see your staying hydrated" yes Mrs. Kevina, yes.

Beijing was a blast, and while I was there I had to absolutely buy some mall ninja shit. I got a short sword and a 6 inch tanto style knife. This became a problem when we were going to board the train to Xian. Absolutely no weapons were allowed on the train. I raised my concerns to Mrs. Kevina, who then proceeded to do the most badass thing a teacher has ever done for me, and IDK maybe anyone else. Mrs. Kevina had bought a number of paintings while in Beijing and was carrying them in those scroll holder things. As we were waiting in the security line which numbered in the approximate population of Wyoming, she took out her paintings and deftly hid my deadly weapons inside the scroll holders. She then pulled off a perfect slightly older confused white woman act, because it wasn't an act, and was allowed to pass through security by handing the rolls to a person on the other side of the security line and saying "no xray fragile". It fucking worked. I spent my night drinking weak ass beer mixed with "firewater" and playing with my mall ninja shit on a train that was none too stable.

That's pretty much the end of Mrs. Kevina's involvement but one other highlight of the trip was eating breakfast at our hotel in Xian. For the entire time we were at the school in Beijing we had been eating what the students there ate. Basically shitty packaged sausage, soup, and rice. After about two weeks of this everyone was ready for a nice western style breakfast. Now strangely enough, none of us had gotten food poisoning on the trip so far. That morning we had toast, bacon and eggs. We then went on a bike ride on the historic Xian city walls. This promptly turned into a horrible case of food poisoning for everyone on the trip and we had a very nice vomit party literally spilling our guts on a 700 year old piece of history.

Overall it was a great trip, and of course there was plenty of actual learning and cultural exchange done. But these were just some of the great yet slightly unfortunate events that happened.

I miss Mrs. Kevina, I hope she is doing well.

TLDR:School chaperone brings group of 14-17 year old kids to a brothel, smuggles deadly weapons onto public transportation, and completely overlooks blatant teenage alcoholism.kevin 1-3 are all extreme degenerates. kevin 1 is so much of a degenerate he goes to find whatever thing has anything anime related. kevin 1 plays fortnite just to put on that new anime skin that they have in the battle pass and he has no other reason to play but to use that skin. kinda weird for a degenerate cause most degenerates might play genshin impact like me but i ain't as much of a degenerate as everyone else who plays the game. kevin 1 also has this posse of other degenerates who aren't as bad as him but are just plain up retarded. kevin 1 acts like he is in a anime and is told not to speak in class cause the teacher finds him soo cringey that he shouldn't speak at all he also is very rude and isn't that smart even though he says he is a genius.

kevin 2 also acts like he is in some anime and is in another posse but lead by kevin 3. kevin 2 just thinks that he is tough and quirky which don't fit in together. kevin 2 one time made some dumbass anime quote on a teacher poster thing for some sporty event that everyone is a part of and the teacher got pissed and yelled at him so bad it lowered his self esteem the teacher told us to only write our names and he didn't and he also did it with permanent marker and snitched on himself when we were told who did it. he wanted to gain it back his self esteem so he wanted to get in a fight for a dumb reason. i was trolling him one time in basketball throwing the ball at his back. i didn't do it hard just enough to hit his back. he got pissed and tried to throw it back and i became neo and dodged every single one. he tried to fight me by grabbing my shirt like he is some badass from a movie and i thought he was trying to choke me so i pushed his arms back and tried to choke him because i thought he wanted to go that far he did something and idk what he did cause i was in adrenaline mode so idk and we both fell back and he tried to jump on me but i kicked him away and the teacher came and let us off and i was praised for choking him because he annoyed people that much.

 kevin 3 is the worst he acts like a bitch and is overly gay which idc about people who are gay but he was way too overly gay to the point that he caused everyone to hate him except his posse. he is also stupid and when he is told not to do something he acts like he acts like he is a karen does it anyways and gets angry when he gets in trouble. even the teachers hated him. he is rude. wore some clothes that a guy doesn't wear and he didn't want to be trans so that is stupid af. he talked like a black woman who goes way too much into drama and he was a extreme anime lover. one time i asked nicely to let me have a seat on some stairs but he rudely said no and to go fuck myself so i got behind him and kicked him down the stairs for being an asshole. he disappeared after that.So this story os back from 11th grade. We were the seniors and just like every year, this year too the seniors were given the choice to go on an international tour and the the country we ended up visiting was Malaysia. Our school this time around arranged separate hotels for the boys and girls and also arranged the dates of travel in such a way that both the groups were not in the same city at the same time because there had been an “incident” last time. There was however, a brief window of time of about half a day when both the groups would be in the same city and the kevina administrator didn’t realize that booking two hotels for the two groups at just a walking distance would never mean that some teenagers would break some rules and meet up and god knows do what. Well a few of the girls and the boys did meet up at a 7/11 midway from each of their hotels and you talked around, shared some stories and took some pics. This seems all very smart and clever but the group pf students who met were in reality all just kevins and this escapade was but a brief moment of intelligence. What each of the students, not one, but each of the students posted the pics on their snap stories and what the helplessly dumb kevins and kevinas didn’t realize is that they had added some of their teachers on their snapchat, so our principal soon got to know about this escapade and what happen next is firmly ingrained in the minds of each of the students’ on the trip and is something for which everyone holds a grudge against the group of kevins.

Tl;Dr

Group of girl and boy kevins met up at 7/11 during a school trip against school instructions, took pics and posted it on snapchat where they had added some of their teachers. Pictures reached principal and everybody on trip faced the punishmentI recently read someone’s post here that a girl opened their bathroom stall. That reminded me of a similar occurrence that happened to me. 

It was way back in 1st or 2nd grade. There was this kid, you know the one who’s failed at-least 3 times by the time he is in 2nd grade and looks like a dad to the rest of the kids. While this guy thought it would be funny to try and open the bathroom door while i was taking a shit. Kevin started banging on the door for no apparent reason. He didn’t call me to come out and with all the ruckus, my 6 year old self was too afraid to say anything. I remember being pretty confident that the lock would hold but like i said this kid was a giant for the 1st grade and he seriously broke the lock. The asshole Kevin opened the door, looked at me, laughed for a while until my savior in the form of a little girl my age, who was standing by, shooed him away and closed the bathroom door sheepishly while i helplessly looked at her. And no none of the lady peons that were usually present to look after the little kids in the washroom were present or if they were, they didn’t try to help. 

FYI the little Kevin remained in my school and he failed yet again so that by the time i graduated i was one year senior to a then full grown Kevin. Oh and yes, he did some real-Kevin style shit along the way. I’ll tell it some other time.Kevina used to live all the way at the back of a very big RV park. For a while, Kevina worked at an auto parts store that was across the street from the RV park entrance, at a fairly busy intersection. 

Kevina figured that she would put the bag of garbage on top of the car, and toss it in the dumpster at the RV park entrance on the way to work or other destinations. Kevina hated the smell of garbage, so she didn't put the trash bag inside the car. 

Problem is, Kevina kept forgetting about the trash bag on the car, proceeding to the auto parts store (or other destinations) without remembering to stop at the RV park dumpster. Kevina isn't a litter bug, so she always went back to pick up the trash bag and dispose of it properly. Walk of shame, or perhaps, drive of shame. 

On one occasion, the trash bag fell off the car on the way to work, and landed near the busy intersection. The trash bag got run over, unbeknownst to the oblivious Kevina. Trash went all over the place. Because Kevina was tasked with auto parts deliveries much of the time, Kevina soon recognized her own trash all over the thoroughfare. Kevina had to get another trash bag, pick it all up, and get it to a dumpster. Walk of shame...

You guessed it; I'm Kevina.Hey guys as I promised in my previous [post](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/luytp4/kevina_does_not_understand_evaporation/).

So as I have mentioned before, me and Kevina were housemates. So one day, I was studying in the dining room together with some of my friends. And after studying for a bit, we decided to take a break and we were just chatting. Soon, Kevina entered the room and we started chatting together with her. No idea how, but somehow we ended up on the subject of porn, Kevina being Kevina as always spouted out "Since you guys like porn so much why don't you guys watch porn together. wouldn't it be more fun?". At first we thought she was joking and we laughed at her statement, but she just looked  confused when we were laughing and it became evident that this was an actual question. I then said:"Kevina, do you know what guys do when they watch porn?". She replied:"Yeah, they just watch porn right?? Why can't they do it together??". At this point, it was pretty evident that Kevina did not know what guys usually DO WHEN THEY WATCH porn, and EVERYONE in the room was laughing like mad. Kevina just looked very confused and kept asking why were we laughing. Eventually, I had to call my friend (Friend B), who was a girl to explain to her what guys did when we watched porn, the look on her face when she actually found out was priceless. Even Friend B was like "OMG KEVINA WHY THE FUCK ARE YOU SO STUPID!!"

Every now and then, I would rib her by asking if she wanted to watch porn together with me and the boys.

Note: Kevina was in her twenties and I'm pretty sure she had knew what sex was(I think?)

TLDR: Kevina did not know that guys usually masturbate when they watch porn and wanted to know why guys don't watch porn together

&#x200B;Ok, I have the strong feel I might be a kevin. My first reason is that last summer it was after the fourth of July, we visited my grandma and we had sparklers. I don't know how, but my mom ended up saying that the first sparkler wasn't not anymore (it was about a minute after it burned out) I felt it, it was just a lil warm. So I got another one and let it burn out. And I knew it was dumb to touch it within less than 30 seconds of it burning out.





                               W I S H  I C O U L D  S A Y  T H A T



Yes, my stupid ass went to touch it was the fire ember glow, but my slow reaction caused me to touch the hot ember (Which was over 300 degrees Fahrenheit) the thing is I knew it was dumb. But I'm a very curious person. Come to find out that son of a bitch was hotter than when they burn glass, according to the fire dept. Another story is when I was giving my toddler cousin a horseback ride. I wanted him to feel like he was riding a horse. Guess what I did. Scroll down after you guess.











I ate motherfucking grass. My dog takes shits in the yard, and stray animals in our yard.






Oh yeah, I'm a flat earther. I know a lot of people would think I'm a kevin for this, but I respectful of other people and beliefs.

Do y'all think by any chance I am a kevinI’m working on school work in my universities building with the Starbucks in it and suddenly nature called. 
I go into the bathroom and close and lock the stall and sit down to poop. 
I finish quickly and notice someone walk to my stall door and start tugging at it. I think “ok she will leave when she realizes it’s locked.” 
But no. She keeps pulling the door handle till the thing pops open (it didn’t have the best lock but still you would have to tiff pretty hard). 
I tell her “I’ll be out in a minute” as I stare at her with my pants around my ankles about to wipe. 
She quickly apologizes and goes into the stall beside me. 
I’m not usually this ballsy but that was just ridiculous.

Edit
I guess I could have told her I was in there as she tugged on it but I felt she deserved what was coming. 
I wasn't really embarrassed at all. I was more irritated than anything lolThis is the sadder update yet. Here is [part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/lhgkku/kevin_makes_coffee_pt3_of_night_shift_kevin/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

Kevin suddenly felt he needed money and started volunteering for OT shifts. In our unit, OT is often extended shifts.

Patients have lots of impulses and act upon them a lot. Our job is to contain it. 

Kevin let two staff members get hurt during other shifts. It was preventable, but he never lifted a finger, keeping his face on his cell phone, probably on tinder.

Our unit moved to the third level of an old building. The one patient we spend the most time with is the most impulsive of them all, but he's very predictable. Stay close and all should be fine.

Kevin took a walk with him on the balcony. Upon entering, the main area of risk is the entry and exit doorways. The hallway makes a T and on the left is the unit, on the right is a door leading to the stairwell to exit the building.

The patient had his "impulsive walk" when he walked in. He bolted through the exit door.

What did Kevin do? He looked at the patient for a good 5 seconds before running after him.

Kevin got hurt in the stairs and a staff member tried to help him. She got hurt. Had trouble walking last time we heard from her.

We all hate you, Kevin.I just moved in with 4 other graduate students and promptly adopted two cats, with my roommates' permission and/or encouragement, of course. I am the only one who has ever had cats, so the other 4 sometimes ask some questions that are funny to me, a cat connoisseur. But one roommate, Kevin, asks questions that, I feel, are naive for anyone. And by naive, I mean pretty fucking stupid. The best one I can think of is when Kevin was playing with the kitten (Quark) and petting his tummy. Kevin stops petting the kitten, look at me very concerned and says, "Are you sure Quark is a boy? He has nipples..."

Kevin, you're a boy. Do you have nipples??I was a shift manager at a fast food restaurant in the southern US. Some of the things I saw will stay with me forever, but Kevin was one of the most memorable. Kevin had drank kerosene as a child and was a little slow. Good guy but dumb as rocks. He had no filter and everyone messed with him. He was a good sport and we were all pretty close. 

One night Kevin comes up to me looking extremely uncomfortable, the conversation goes as follows:

Kevin, very quietly: "I need to go home and change my underwear...."


Me, shocked and completely understanding exactly what had happened: "Ok, I don't need any more information. Just go to lunch and do what you need to do. You're good, just go."

Kevin, continuing to whisper: "I shit my pants."

Me, horrified but trying really hard not to laugh: "I said I didn't want to know. What the hell man?"

Kevin: "I didn't want you to think I was lying..."

Me, head in hands: "It's fine, just go take care of yourself."

Kevin left and I went to the management office and laughed so hard I threw up. I told everyone, because I'm a bad person and we all had a good laugh. Kevin got back and we got back to work.This was a few years ago pre-pandemic. I met kevina at church and we exchanged numbers. She was sweet but just not all there. She was new to our church and wanting to check it out.

Sunday morning she texts me and asks what she should wear to our meeting. I told her that it wasn't important what she wears more so that she shows up, however most people there will be wearing dresses or skirts so if she has something of that nature it would be best. If she didn't have a dress or a skirt a nice shirt and pants is appropriate and I even offered if she didn't have that I'd come in jeans and a t-shirt so she could not feel alone or like she was standing out. She replied that she'd wear her nicest outfit and she'd meet me there.

She showed up in a bedazzled bra and a mini skirt that didn't cover her butt. Not really what I had in mind when she said her nicest outfit but you know that one could be on me I wasn't really clear what to wear and hey at least she came. 

We kept in communication and she kept coming every week. She took me out for sushi since I'd never had it and made fun of me when I separated my chopsticks. She said they came together on purpose and asked the waitress for another pair for me since I broke mine. 

One night around midnight I get a call from kevina. Her car is dead in a mall parking lot 45 minutes away. I hop in my car and hurry to her location. Now kevina is young, thin, short, beautiful and dumb so by the time I got there a man who looked to be in his 50's was following her around. (She was 19 I was 20 both female). He wasn't really tall but pretty heavyset and grungy. She smiled and waved at me. She happily explained that she no longer needed my help because Jim was going to help her.

 I asked if she called him too and she said no he just came up to her in the lot. He had a sleezy grin on his face and was carrying her takeout bag and her car's battery. He insisted I should leave right away and that he would take care of everything. He told kevina to get in his truck and they'd go buy a new battery. She aggred and said bye to me. 

I stepped in saying no I would just take her home and we'd fix the car tomorrow. But oh of course Jim knows a guy whose shop is always open and even though it was nearing 1 am he could get her problems fixed if she'd just come with him alone. (he didn't like me very much) I took the battery from his hands and insisted he leave. Before he did he got kevinas number which she happily gave him.

She got in my car pretty annoyed with me telling me that Jim was really nice and how he took her battery out of her car and carried it for her while I took forever to get there. He was so kind and so nice offering her a ride and to fix her car for free while I was unnecessarily rude to him. I tried to explain that a man who approaches you in a dark parking lot at midnight is not someone to make friends with, when you're in a vulnerable situation but she lectured me on church values of loving everyone. 

I'm not sure how she survived living in the city as she was so naive. Also if he really had been following her around since she called me and she trusted him, why not call me to tell me not to bother coming to get her? Oh well I'm glad I went because who knows what might have happened. 


TL:DR Kevina gets stranded at midnight and while I'm on my way makes friends with an older guy who tries to get her in his truck. She gets mad at me when I arrive and tell him to get lost.Kev needed to know the number of her bank account.  She tried calling the bank and asking for it— turns out you can’t just say ‘I’m kevina smith, what’s my bank account?’


So, while she was telling them how stupid it was that she had to show ID to get her own account info, and looking for a way to convince them over the phone that she really was her, it transpired that she actually had her checkbook.


(Side note: the bank doesnt consider telling them over the phone ‘I have my checkbook right here’ a valid form of ID)


Anyway, she had the checkbook, so why didn’t she just read the account number off the check?

BECAUSE THOSE ARE ROBOT NUMBERSWhen I was in high school, back before Google was a common concept, I had a teammate Kevina. Now this particular Kevina was a great in class student and did particularly well in science. 

Well one night Kevina, my sister and I are out in a field, laying in the middle of a giant rolling hill looking up at the stars and gossiping about our ball team and their class. We might also have been sharing a stolen drink from my parents liquor cabinet. We are all lined up on a hill and have been out there awhile when Kevina suddenly got the urge to pee and pee right now. 

So being a town kid and very much a Kevina, she had never peed outside on a hill before and asked which way to face on the hill. Being farm kids, we both had lots of experience. I try telling Kev to pee up the hill and my sis tells her to pee down the hill. We have different body types and athletic skills, so we have different opinions as to how this should be done and start bickering over it like teenage siblings are prone to do. 

Well Kev in all her infinite wisdom decided that she would split the difference and pee sideways.  That way she wasn’t picking a side. We didn’t really care what side she picked we just wanted her to pick a side. Well as you may know gravity is a real b* with newly formed rivers and her cleat (as she’d forgotten trainers at home where she put them on) happened to be in the newly created river path. 

Let’s just say she played the next morning with one wet sock as her cleat wasn’t quite dry after we cleaned it out with the hose. Not sure if her lesson was learned or not. My sister and I have had that conversation with other people since and no matter which side I argue that day I still start with, “Unless you want your shoe to be in the puddle pick,........”So friend A, me and Kevina were housemates once. Me and A usually cook and eat together and on that day we were cooking curry together in the kitchen. We were discussing whether if the curry was done, and I preferred a thicker curry while A thought the current curry was fine, so I ladled out half of the curry in the pot and gave it to A while the remaining curry was left there to simmer. Kevina then entered the kitchen and noticed A was already eating while I was still cooking curious, she asked me why I was cooking while A was already eating. I explained that I was currently simmering the curry to make it thicker because i preferred a thicker curry. Kevina looked confused and said,but won't that just make the curry in the pot less? I then said yeah, it will cz the water evaporates and it makes the curry thicker. She then looked even more confused and said , "but wont the curry just evaporate and leave less curry and how does that make the curry thicker??" . A then interjected and explained it to her, and by the end of his explanation,she kinda accepted it, she didn't seem to fully believe us and just looked at us weirdly like we were idiots, typical.

Note: Kevina is a STEM major student and is in the top of her class, so I'm pretty sure she knows what evaporation is (shame it's always the smartest that are the stupidest)This Kevina isn’t really dumb just doesn’t care

Most people say that if you just talk to someone a little then they will actually put on there seat belt
 
Me: “did you know that if we were to crash right now you would die, we’re going 80 miles per hour”
My best friend: “well what if I want to die?”

Most people say that people drink because they don’t know the “harm” it does

Me: “hmmm”
My best friend: yeesss
Me: “did you know that when you get drunk that alcohol is just killing your brain cells”
My best friend “oh no wonder I’m so dumb”

Most people say that they know there best friends well especially when you’ve known them for 9 years 
Me: “ I put on mascara last night for the first time in 8 months”
My best friend: “I thought Chinese people don’t have eye lids”
Me: “you’ve done my makeup before, you used to watch wenge and she wears a ton of mascara,
And you still watch gloom and she wears mascara and there both Chinese”
My best friend: I thought gloom was Japanese and I haven’t watched wenge in awhile.
Me: “how did you think Chinese people blinked”
My best friend: “I just thought there bottom eyelid came up”So there's this guy who I've known online for over 10 years at this point, many people think he's a troll but I've known him long enough to know he is a legitimate Kevin. I could tell you hundreds of stories like this about his opinions, logic etc. but I'm gonna keep it topical.

So, here's the thing. He judges people a lot for not following COVID restrictions in our country while systematically ignoring all of them himself and even arguing about why it's ok for his family to do so. His view on this whole virus stuff has been going all over the place but around the time the global lockdown happened, he became very worried about it seemingly. He was constantly rambling about people bringing it to our country and being careless etc. Well, there was an area in our country that had such a bad situation, it was literally made illegal to go in or out without a convincing reason, such as work. Well, Kevin's brother happened to have a girlfriend living in this area and before they closed the border, he went in to see her. While he was in there, they closed the border and HE SNUCK OUT THROUGH A SMALL ROAD IN THE WOODS SO HE WOULDN'T GET CAUGHT. What did Kevin say about this? "It doesn't matter, he only saw his girlfriend and was in a car the whole trip out there's no way he got the virus."

And by this same type of logic he still to this day, like a year later, keeps justifying his family and himself going to different places etc. But at the same time he feels that I should not meet my friends because there's a risk of spreading it. He was also very much against using a mask at work, he works at a grocery store. He literally only wears it because his boss said he has to. At the same time he, naturally, judges people not wearing masks and putting him at risk.

Basically his approach to this whole thing is "Please everyone, stay home and wash your hands so I don't have to." In a way I'm kinda hoping he gets it just so I can see who he blames.[Part 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/lk0hnm/my_experience_dealing_with_a_kevin_part_1/)

ages at this point: E 16f  Kevin18m  C20m  D19m  Me18f  J18f  L18m  (D is my bf and E's ex)

A couple of days after the groups initially went dead, A created a group without E and Kevin. He wanted to discuss kicking Kevin out if the friend group because he was actively ruining the relationship between A and E. For a while everybody agreed until E caught wind of it. E asked for a meet up at C's place with everybody. Nobody really wanted to, but also nobody wanted to be 'that person' to decline hanging out just because of one person so they all went. 

During the hang out, Kevin found it an amazing idea to spice up their time and suggested using weed and XTC in combination with alcohol. Nobody went in on the offer until the week after during another meet up, this time at Kevin's place. It was already made clear that C was going to stay clean, as well as J and D.

D and C already has a talk about it being an attempt to get E and A high in order for Kevin to have alone time with E. They and J were on edge about it, as it was a well known thing in the group that Kevin would try something as he has before on a lower scale. (my first time actually hanging with them, Kevin's first line was asking for a good place to smoke a blunt, even though he was asked by d to not bring any of that up. Kevin kept walking close to E, even though she avoided him he kept coming closer into her personal space. At a certain point she ended up walking on the street to get away from Kevin but she still didn't get the hint to not walk too close)

In the beginning of the evening, before they would start the drugs, D left as it was getting late. Kevin kept trying to touch the upper inner thighs of J as well as petting her hair. C gave comments to Kevin to stop. J obviously didn't like the fiddling and left with C because she felt unsafe. C went back after bringing J home to keep an eye on Kevin. With all the videos that were taken for the people not there, Kevin was always close to E.

After that evening they made a rule that it would only happen once a month as it was expensive and they didn't want to get addicted. But of course Kevin had the great idea to smoke weed in the other weekends, which E wanted to join in on so A came along to keep an eye on it. 

At those moments C, J, D and I didn't hang out because we didn't want to get involved with drugs and their bs.

A few weeks after, there was a birthday party we were all invited to (housemate of D). This would be my first time meeting the group as a whole, and meeting C and A. J didn't want to come because she doesn't like the housemate.

I stayed mostly on the couch in the beginning, surrounded by LED balloons, observing them and being awkward as I don't go to parties usually. D was having fun with his friends and checked on me every now and again. As he was skanking, I grabbed one of the normal balloons and instigated a balloon fight which the others joined in as well. I was told what happened between Kevin and J and decided to get some sweet revenge for her. I first smacked him as hard as I could with the balloons a few times, then his ass and as he was bent over to pick up a balloon, I kneed him in the stomach. (note there are more reasons that just the fiddling that I kicked him, he is just a horrible person and did some other crap stuff that made me just take my chance as nobody had really done anything about the fiddling)

D forced me to apologize and grounded me to the couch for a bit as Kevin and E went outside together for a smoke. C came to talk to me and I explained it. He was a bit thankful. before Kevin's fiddling, C and J were almost dating. J is a very closed off person, and she pushed everybody away after that incident. D, C and I talked for a bit and were doing really well. It appeared to be an unspoken rule that the LED balloons were mine, as A took one that E had taken from the couch, switched it out and brought me the LED balloon back.

 As the night went on, E started getting more annoyed that I was getting the attention from the friend group, including her ex and current boyfriend. C enjoyed talking to D and I, and A joined us after E was blatantly ignoring him in favor of dancing with Kevin. E's way of getting attention was to go lay on an empty couch and act sad/sick.

A while after D retreated to his room as he had a headache from the loud music. C and I went in as well after a bit as he didn't come back out and we decided to stay there and talk a bit more. As we were talking, A came in too and decided to join us as well. A and I were having an honest talk about everything and I made it clear that I had some issues with his relationship with E and she seems rather selfish and was blatantly flirting with Kevin while ignoring A right beside her. We were all discussing this and almost convincing him of breaking up.

As far as we knew, E was still outside at the party and Kevin was getting friendly with the druggie friends of the housemate.

While we were having a semi-therapy chat with A, and him ignoring his phone blowing up with texts from E as he wanted some quiet time, he got called by E. Apparently E had left the party and was somewhere outside in the city passed midnight. A was freaking out worried about her, but all she did was breathe and sob every now and then. After a few minutes of this bs, we all agreed to go on a search party as there were a few places she could be. A asked me not to, as E would get more upset seeing me, but I volunteered for the pure reason of it being unsafe or a girl to be out alone in the dark of night. We gave A D's bike to go look for her faster. After struggling to get the bike outside, A got us to stay home as he was rather sure where she was.

Kevin didn't even know she was gone and only started freaking out about her being gone after we had to get the bike out passed him. He was both too drunk and high to notice she left.

Kevin started trash talking me in the group chats, to which my unconfrontational ass bf, D, didn't say stuff until E started joining in on the insulting too.

More in part 3I once knew this girl in passing who was the embodiment of what one would call "uncultured swine". She had graduated college as a theater major and had an internship in Broadway so its not like she was uneducated. 

A few of my favorite incidents: 

I have a tattoo of a moon and stars on my ankle. Just a simple crescent moon with 2 stars around it in a full black outline. Seeing this she immediately asked if I was Muslim. Despite knowing me for 2 full months and knowing I was Pagan. And a lot of followers of the Quran believe tattoos are expressly forbidden, when this was brought up she was unaware what the Quran was and said " Is that some place in Saudi Arabia?"

Another instance, we were talking about the Lion King and we mentioned how we loved that they use swahili. She thought we were fucking with her and making the language up. She proceeded to yell at us to stop making fun of the African people by making up words and implying it was apart of their culture. It took 2 hours to convince her the language was real. 


She also was absolutely convinced Jewish people were mythical and the Holocaust was a fiction story. Every photo of video showed to her she believed was just a fiction movie. She believed this because and I quote "I've never met a Jewish person." Two of the people in that room were Jewish.To set the stage, this took place in a small town 100s of miles from any city centre, there's 70, 000 people among a dozen towns/villages and only one major hospital with only one ventilator. We had just gotten our first confirmed cases the week before a Keven decided to start screaming at this sweet little old woman working the hotel front desk (small area, she's a sweetheart that many people know) and she was calmly trying to explain why he needed to wear a mask in the building and that it was for the safety of people like her, when he decided to spit in her face and run away.. Her anxiety started to skyrocket given our areas situation...plus nobody wants to be spat on in general... But she couldn't calm herself down and ended up having a major heart attack almost an hour after. She was first rushed to our major hospital but we couldn't help her here and she had to get an emergency airlift to the big city, now in our area it generally takes too long and it's rare people survive in that situation.. making the act effectively seen as them flying you to heaven by locals... Miraculously she managed to survive and made a full recovery after a few months in the city hospital. One of the sweetest things was she didn't want to press charges because given what ended up happening she was sure he was already feeling really bad about what he did and didn't want to make it any harder on him... Such a sweet lady and such a GD KevinA group of my friends, the Kevins, decided to go camping on the beach a few weeks back. They found a deserted beach a few kilometres out of town, pitched their tents and had a nice beach party before going to bed. 

One Kevin wakes up around three am, gets off his stretcher and finds himself ankle deep in water. None of them took the tides into account. 

They did their best to beat the tide, but lost a bunch of stuff to the see. Including one whole tent. I don’t think they’ll go camping on the beach again.Okay, this Kevina is in her mid-30's, married to a dumb guy about 20 years her senior, and they have three kids together who are between the ages of 10 and 15. I feel deeply sorry for the children, because I've never met anyone nearly as stupid as their mother and she's fucking all their lives up. That sounds mean, but hear me out. I don't really know where to start because there's just so much shit to unpack here, so I'm just gonna pick a story and go from there. 

First off, Kevina doesn't have any teeth. None. She's actually not a druggie; she just has such an awful diet and poor oral hygiene that she had to have them all pulled last year (at the hospital, where she had been admitted for severe dental pain, because she doesn't have dental insurance, or money, for reasons that will become clear further on). She refuses to acknowledge the bad diet/hygiene and instead insists that it's because her kids "took all her calcium out of her teeth" during her pregnancies. Pregnancy \*can\* cause issues with one's teeth, but surely not a decade after the fact? She's also \~300 pounds. She has mentioned wanting to lose weight, but refuses to go on ANY kind of diet because she's convinced herself that she'll become anorexic (which has never happened; she's been clinically obese her entire adult life). 

Kevina dropped out of high school because she wanted to party, but a couple of years later she met her then-40ish-year-old boyfriend and they got married and had their kids (deliberately; all three were planned). She doesn't have a diploma or a GED, much less any college education, so her job prospects are extremely limited. She does in-home health, part-time, and makes about $9 an hour; she also gets a few hours a week at an auto parts store which pays about the same hourly wage. Her husband, Kevin, had some sort of injury many years ago that left him on disability (which he was already receiving at the time they met); however, he was kicked off disability once it was discovered that he had secretly taken a part-time low-paying handyman job without reporting it. Once he lost his disability, he also promptly lost his job and decided that he'd rather not work after all. So her two part-time jobs are their only income. 

However, Kevina has been incredibly, inordinately proud of the fact that she "made $400 in sales" at her auto parts job recently, and is extremely hopeful that this is the start of a great sales career. The only problem is that the auto parts store she works at is a well-known chain store that is neither commission-based nor involves "sales" in any way; what actually happened was that she was the one working at the cash register when a couple of customers came up to pay for a couple of relatively expensive parts. She's a cashier. That's it. There's no amazing sales job looming in her future.

Neither Kevin nor Kevina has a driver's license. Kevin hasn't had one in probably 15 years for various reasons, and Kevina has NEVER had a driver's license, because she cannot pass the driving test. The last time she tried, she ran into a pole. She drives anyway, of course, just illegally. Yes, there have been several accidents. I don't know how they both aren't in jail.

They have had a succession of overly-expensive vehicles which they buy from seedy little used-car places with their increasingly bad credit, and which almost immediately and invariably turn out to be total lemons that they then spend even more money attempting to repair before finally giving up and repeating the process. The most recent iteration is a new (for them) 2003 Ford truck with \~150k miles and a variety of engine problems, which cost them approximately $17,000 and cannot pass inspection. She wants to ask a mechanic if she should replace it with yet another vehicle or "fix it up," which will cost her around $10,000. To be clear, she doesn't have $10,000 (or even $100); she's talking about using her entire income tax refund + some of her stimulus check to pay for the repairs to this truck that's not worth half the money she spent purchasing it.

Kevina and family were, until recently, living in a trailer that had multiple holes in the floor and no running water. They couldn't afford this trailer; they were being allowed to use it for free by a friend of a friend who had been planning to have it scrapped and instead kindly offered it to this family in need. Instead of saving as much as possible during this period of time when she didn't have to worry about rent, Kevina decided to purchase a $4,000 living room set. Once the friend of a friend discovered that Kevina had also filled up the trailer with cats and dogs (who were dying from lack of veterinary care because she couldn't afford it), Kevina and family were evicted. Kevina had to pay for an apartment and could no longer make the payments on her living room set. It was repossessed, so she was out both the furniture AND the roughly $2,000 she had already invested into it. Once she found a new place and got her income tax refund, she promptly spent another $1,000 on her "dream couch," which then became so infested with roaches that she threw it out when they got evicted and had to move again, only to find that the new (current) place has just as many roaches so she might as well have kept it.

Kevina is very stressed about her current living situation. She now rents a cheap, run-down, two-bedroom apartment (against the rules because there are 5 people living there, but it's all she can afford and the apartment manager has looked the other way so far) and has a giant hole in the ceiling that she wants maintenance to come fix, but she's afraid of letting anyone into the apartment because she has a huge dog and ten cats, whereas she's not supposed to have any animals at all. She said she knows she's not going to be able to get her deposit back when she moves unless she replaces a lot of things in her apartment, such as the carpet, the refrigerator, and the stove. When asked why she would need to replace the appliances, she shared that it's because the cats PISS AND SHIT ALL OVER THEM. When asked why the cats would relieve themselves on the appliances (or the carpet) instead of in the litter box, Kevina explained that it's because she's the only one who cleans up after them, even though her husband is at home all day and the children are doing virtual schooling, and the litter box "gets so nasty that the cats won't use it." The dog is also 6 years old and not housebroken. She has become accustomed to the dog pooping and peeing on the floor. She admitted that several of the cats have Feline AIDS, but she can't afford to take any of them to a vet. She doesn't want to take them to a vet or a shelter anyway because they'll think she's an animal hoarder and she's worried CPS will get involved because her kids are in that environment. 

Speaking of the kids. These poor children. Kevina is one of those moms who has an excuse for everything her kids do, don't do, won't do, or can't do. When the teachers at their previous school tried to meet with Kevina regarding some concerns they had about her kids' behavior and academic performance, she became incensed and began shouting about how the kids are all dyslexic (they're not) and that's why they can't do their work and how dare they try to tell her how to raise her children. Her solution was to pull them all out of school and homeschool them. Recall that Kevina has no qualifications to do this whatsoever, and add to that the fact that she's functionally illiterate with the working IQ of a beanbag, and also possesses zero critical thinking skills. She finally gave up a couple of years into this misguided effort and enrolled them back into public school (different school system this time; they move around a lot because they keep getting evicted). The kids were so far behind that they each had to be held back a year, and they're still significantly behind their classmates. The middle child had to be held back twice, so she's about to turn 13 and is in 5th grade. The oldest is about to be held back in 9th grade again as well.

There's more, but this is already a novel and you get the idea. Kevina essentially has no friends because everyone she comes into contact with is, of course, baffled and disgusted. I'm ashamed to admit I mostly stick around (on Facebook) out of a combination of pity and morbid, horrified curiosity as I watch each fascinating new chapter in this absolute shitshow unfold. I do try to offer help and advice whenever possible, which is difficult because Kevina bristles at any implication that she doesn't already have everything well in hand. My current attempt at assistance involves my fixing up Kevina's resume and sending her information about local job fairs. I don't know that it's going to work though because she seems to be holding out hope that her "$400 in sales" is about to result in more hours at the auto parts store, so she may stop searching for a better job. We shall see.

Tl;dr - Idiot with no money & shitty part-time job gets all her teeth pulled, buys multiple run-down vehicles for far more than they're worth, fucks up her kids' education, gets evicted a lot, hoards animals that piss on her appliances.This b.... Added me and this is how it went down
For some backstory im 18 and im in a relationship (good one)  so today i see someone added me on snap. I added back thinking its a potential business thing ( not legal not gonna get into it) and she started to blast my snap with these sex adds saying she in my area. Witch is incorrect cuz i live in a Forrest. The closest house is 6km away.  So on i try to tell her thats not true and that she needs to move on and for the last 3h i have been getting notifications from this girl every 3 min so imma go ahead and block this girl before my soon to be wife comes home and thinks im cheadingHappened a little while ago so I’ll try remember everything that happened.

Started off when a someone added me on Snapchat and I don’t remember exactly what he asked for but he went straight in and said 

Kevin: hey I’m from sydney don’t you remember me we went to school together do you reckon you’d be interested in buying from my business

Me: what I don’t know you and no!

Kevin: yeah you do if you would like to pay with gift cards that’s fine.

For those who don’t know scammers can use gift cards and change it to Bitcoin. But because I already new this I jumped on snap map to see he had left his location in and was located in Nigeria.

Me: 😂😂😂😂😂 you left your location on you complete moron I know you’re in Nigeria you scammer.

Kevin: no I’m not my snap glitched and I can’t change the locations from there

Me: fuck off that’s the biggest load of crap I’ve ever heard!

Then BlockedKevina was a teenager who was old enough to know better, yet she didn't. She wanted to make popcorn but never had before. There was a popcorn button on the microwave but that didn't make any sense. So Kevina read the instructions on the popcorn and added an extra minute to make the popcorn nice and crispy. Well that was clearly too long because the bag caught on fire and ruined the microwave... Oh and another time she was making hot coco and put a metal travel mug in the microwave which also caught fire...So a kevin added me on Instagram, he lived in my area and was around my age and asked to hang out and drink with him and his group of other Kevins.

 So me being a rebelous teenager was totally for it and i got ready and waited for some shenanigans.

So kevin and his group picked me up and we went to his friends house and we all drank some beer and chatted. I don't have many friends so I was having a good time.

Then they ran out of beer. We were pretty bummed out but whatever.
That's when kevin came up with the bright idea of substituting the lack of booze with ... Rubbing alcohol.. 

Kevin and his buddies checked the percentage of the bottle and celebrated "70%! It's strong !"

Kevin grabs a Sunny D bottle and pours the rubbing alcohol in the bottle, shook it up and drank it. I couldn't believe what I was seeing.

Kevin offered me a swig and obviously I said no and when they dropped me off I blocked him.I do not know enough about the neighbor o know if they are a complete Kevin or not but this would the kind of story about one.

So around noon Sunday my friend, lets call him John, went to the kitchen to make some lunch. He spies out is back window smoke. John goes out the front door and to the right side (if your looking at the house from the street) where smoke is rounding the corner and goes to look. around the corner his yard is on fire and a quarter between the back of the house and the front. He went back inside to grab his cell phone to call 911. 

John comes back out and notices a flash to his right, the left side of the house, and fire is coming around the corner he has fire on 3 sides of the house he calls 911. I know you are thinking what about Kevin? Well my John notices Kevin out carrying a 5 gallon bucket of water and splashing it on the fire. John asked Kevin if he has called 911. Kevin holds up the bucket as he runs back for water and says I got it. 

Guys Johns yard is big he owns 3 acres and at least an acre is on fire and the fire is with in 2 feet of Johns house. They live out in the country so 3 different fire departments showed up and so did an off duty fire man who lived in the area and got Kevin to get his riding lawnmower and mow around the fire to make a fire break while he and John beat the fire around the house with shovels to make a fire line around the house. With the ice storm John has no water to use because his pipes are frozen. It took a total of 6 fire trucks and a team of guys with that foam spray fire retardant back backs to put out the fire because it was in the woods on the other side of the lake.

They started asking how this started. Kevin had taken some trash to the property line into Johns tall dry grass, John is disabled and cannot mow his yard and the friend that dose it for him's mower broke, to burn some trash. not in a barrel or anything just put a bunch of stuff on the ground and set it aflame.My neighbor’s daughter, we’ll call Sheila, married Kevin. I’ve only had the displeasure of meeting him once. He has an opinion on everything and he thinks it is very important that he tell you his opinion. When Kevin, who is a heavy equipment operator, told me how to better use my backhoe, I listened because I figured his 20+ years of experience had taught him something. When Kevin tried to tell me how to farm on Florida sand, when he has lived in Alaska all but a couple of years of his life, I ignored his advice. He kept chattering away but in an effort to be polite and friendly to his in-laws, my neighbors, I said nothing.  

Kevin and Sheila were moving back to Anchorage and visiting Sheila’s parents for one last time before they set out. They rented a moving van and loaded up everything they owned. I was happy to see them go.

When they got to the Canadian border, the Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA) asked them if they had anything to declare. Kevin declared that he is an idiot, but used other words. He was argumentative and according to Sheila, told the border guards that as an American and they had no right to ask him anything.  

CBSA, unmoved by the logic of Kevin’s American exceptionalism, then asked Kevin if he had any guns to declare. Kevin loudly explained to the CBSA officers that as an American he has 2nd amendment rights that “SHALL NOT BE INFRINGED!”  At that point, the infringing began. Kevin was asked to step out of his vehicle while it was searched. CBSA found an unloaded magazine for a semi-auto pistol. That in itself is not necessarily illegal in Canada, but failing to declare weapons, even for transport through Canada, is illegal and oddly enough, the Canadians don’t really give AF about US Constitutional rights.  

The magazine and Kevin’s attitude gave them probable cause and Kevin was handcuffed while a team was brought over to search the contents of the moving van.  All the boxes were removed and placed on the shoulder of the road while they were unpacked. Eventually a gun was found and Kevin was marched off to jail.  

CBSA then told Sheila she was free to go…but all her stuff was unpacked and lying on the road.  It took her the rest of the day and into the night to repack and reload the van.  She didn’t have food or drink to help her get through the day, but she was eventually given a bottle of water by a sympathetic soul. Keven spent a week in Canadian jail, paid a fine, and had to purchase transportation to get him to Anchorage, AK. 

Sheila and Kevin were divorced a few months later, much to the relief of Sheila’s parents. This story was told to me by Sheila after she returned to Florida to live with her parents. 

Final score:  Kevin 0, Canada infinity.A bit of context for you, Kevina is unfortunately my roommate, and she is a raging narcissist, so she believes that her word and presence are above all. We used to be really good friends, but she's incredibly insecure and so she dismisses everything I say by saying 'ugh you're such a fool" or "you're an idiot". Its incredibly hard to have a conversation with her because the entire convo is either her calling me and idiot or her bragging about herself. I'd like to think of myself as a somewhat knowledgeable person, and one of the things I am surprisingly very knowledgeable about is the meat industry, how to cook meat, what meat to use, etc, as a result of my job in a butcher shop for the last 4 years. 


So this story begins about 3 weeks ago. We took a trip to trader joes together and while she was there, she ended up buying this pesto marinated chicken breast or something, I can't recall exactly what it was. Kevina has a bit of a problem with buying food and forgetting about it and letting it sit in the fridge for weeks on end. This is a bit of a point of contention between us because she believes that food never goes bad and will let food sit in the fridge for weeks, or bags of chips are left open to go stale, etc. I am one to throw away food when i no longer want it or believe that it has been sitting in the fridge for too long. She finds this utterly ridiculous and calls me an "idiotic picky eater". Kevina will literally eat anything, even if it fell into a toilet bowl. The reason I mention this is because I knew that she would probably forget about the chicken breast in the fridge. As a rule of thumb, chicken usually goes bad after about 5 days in the fridge. That is why after 5 days you should freeze or cook the breast. I knew that Kevina doesn't give a fuck about what she puts into her body, so I decided just to say something to her, knowing that if she let the chicken breast spoil it could be detrimental to her health. I told her that she should put the chicken breast into the freezer because she had other foods she needs to eat first and probably wouldn't get to the chicken until next week. She got super mad at me and tried to tell me not to be so controlling and said to me, "I think i know how chicken breast works, you idiot".


So fine, I let her be. She found the chicken breast at the bottom of the fridge 3 weeks later, as I knew she would. She decided to cook it right away too, as I knew she would. i was working on some homework at the time and she came into my room asking for some instructions on how to cook the breast. I asked her if I could see how thick it was first, so we walked to the kitchen together. One of my other roommates was in the kitchen at the same time too. Now what happens next could be very triggering to some, so stop reading if you are easily disgusted. Kevina takes the chicken breast out of the marinated bag. Her fingers were covered in the pesto marinade and the raw chicken juice. We were discussing how long to put it in the oven, when she turns around to the garbage bin to throw the marinade bag out. She lifts the lid, drops the bag in, and proceeds to lick each of her fingers off. My other roommate and I looked at Kevina with pure disgust. I've always found her to be kind of a gross and slobby person, but I never expected that. I was absolutely speechless when Kevina came to realize what she just did. Her face turned beat red, and she started screaming at me, yelling about how it was an honest mistake and how I shouldn't embarrass her for an honest mistake. At my work in the butcher shop, I've seen men accidentally splash chicken juice in their faces/mouths and then they were calling in sick the next day from an E.coli infection. I told her this and she got so mad. This was a couple days ago and she has barely even talked to me or my other roommate since. 


I just find this story incredibly entertaining since she assumes that I am the idiot and claimed to understand how chicken breast works yet licked her fingers of raw chicken juice.  So me and my family went to an outdoors store to look at stuff and while we were there this guy is screaming at the manager. The manager asks his name and the guy is like IT IS DOCTOR KEVIN! the manager is pointing to the exit saying OUT NOW. through the commotion we hear that kevin BARGED IN on someone in the bathroom and started screaming at them for no reason. crazy...I missed a call from my old co-driver and it brought up memories about him. He is from Ukraine and moved to Canada back in the 90's. He refuses to learn English because according to him "it's sounds gay". This iditot put himself out of service for 24 hours after saying to Texas dot (department of transportation) officer, that he has has an accent (9 hours of parked at scale before I could start driving). The stupidest thing he kept on doing is bringing unauthorized food to USA (you can bring whatever but some vegetables/fruits/raw meat is not allowed). He kept on doing it and was always surprised why we got detained. Border officer told him "until you learn we will keep on searching the truck" to which he said "USA land of bitches" not the best line at border/cbp. Reason he got caught with illegal food you ask? He got caught smuggling alcohol into states which is a big no no. He asked me once when I moved on to solo trucking "are you getting stopped too at the border?" To which I said "no. Im not mentally challenged as you". This guy was sexyst af too and would harass people playing hunting arcade arcadets at truck stop in his own language.Stripper Kevin fell asleep in front of his girlfriends house. Apparently he thinks everyone lives on strip club hours because when he was woken up at 5a.m. by someone putting out their garbage can for pickup said “go to bed bitch” because it was five in the morning,So this is a story many of my DA fans know as it resulted in me developing post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). At this time my only diagnosis was Asperger's Syndrome, an Autism spectrum disorder, and OCD, obsessive-compulsive disorder. I still have both.

Some backstory: this happened at a SPECIAL NEEDS SCHOOL. Where kids with special needs should be privileged with safety and security. And in ninth grade, I met the first bully: a guy who was not a Kevin and not a Karen either. He was just a guy who loved making others feel awful by cussing, spitting, and insulting. Golly, what a jerk.

The real story begins before tenth grade began. This Kevin--whose name was actually Kevin, no joke--was actually nice in the beginning, at a party my friends had. And then tenth grade began and he was in my class this year. That's when we saw his true colors.

He started by babbling about baptizing his friend's future pet rabbit. Now, you should never put a rabbit in water, as they can thrash about and hurt themselves in the process. Water to them is scary. Even holy water. Eventually, he got mad because his friend decided on a turtle instead and "you can't baptize a turtle".

So after that he started targeting me as a victim of "religious bullying". Mainly because I liked anime, magic, and Final Fantasy (and still do). I would openly talk about the stories I would write and he started telling me I would end up in hell because I was a demon who God hated. Now, as you might not know, I'm a devoted Christian, and I believe that God doesn't hate anyone--even Satan himself. I might like anime and magic, but I also love my Lord, and He would never hate a person for their interests. And yet this Karen of a Kevin would constantly berate me for loving Satan!

I went to the teacher for help, but instead of asking Kevin to respect me, she asked ME to stop causing it by talking about my stories. Holy fricking spit. Why was it my fault? But even then, it didn't stop.

The teacher's fix to our rivalry? Put us next to each other and have us learn to get along. That was AFTER multiple letters to the school asking for Kevin to be moved far away from me. Thankfully, my mom pulled me out of the school that very day. However, the damage was done, and I constantly had nightmares and daymares about Kevin's combination of stupidity and disrespect. It took up until last year to find the right help, and only then was PTSD an official diagnosis. I got help, and even learned that Kevin himself had been kicked out of my old school ,and then committed his own sin by marrying another man. But it's not my role to judge--we can do what we want to do, and I can just hope he learned his lesson. At least he's probably happy now--again, I hope.

As for me, I have finally recovered from PTSD and now have a bright future in animation and game design. I have a boyfriend who loves me, and he supported me while I was at the PTSD Anonymous meetings (or whatever they were called, we did Twelve Steps so I guess it was Something Anonymous). My YouTube channel is growing, and I plan to make it my career someday. And most of all, though I still wish I had been respected for my interests back then, I forgive Kevin. He was a troubled young man if anything.

But I still want to sue the school for making me look like the problem. That just wasn't fair.

UPDATE: I recently reunited with the principal of the school Kevin and I went to. He said he was sorry for what happened... I feel like sorry isn't enough, but sometimes you have to deal with not enough. It's just... why do people act like this is no big deal? I also started having PTSD symptoms again but thankfully being in PTSD Anonymous has helped me deal with the negative thoughts that pester me. So it's not as bad as it was since I know better how to handle it.

I'll never see Kevin again. His claims were ridiculous, and I feel better knowing he has a place here on Reddit. But I might end up moving this to r/entitledpeople.I’m not 100% sure if this is the right place to post this but a few days ago I found out my classmate genuinely thought that the person behind nine eleven was "Mufasa bin laden"In this woeful tale, Kevin is my dad. I have three older siblings, but despite this Kevin never really learned the ins and outs of child care.
 When I was a baby, Kevin was tasked with giving me a bath while my mom watched my siblings. She set up the baby tub for him in the bathtub with water and everything, but he didn't notice and decided the bathroom sink was the only option. So without clearing off the counter of anything that could be dangerous, he puts me in the sink and lays my head on a curling iron that he didn't know was still ON. 
 Curses to whomever used that device that morning!
  I spent my whole life with a scar on the back of my head creating a bald spot that is just a straight line on the back of my head. Thanks dad.First big issues with the local Kevin, Kevin alfa.

For the most part Kevin was a pretty normal dude, albeit a bit weird around girls but not so bad you would think something was off.

First thing we noticed was during gaming with the boys. If it didn't go his way, he got mad and insult everybody, ruining the mood. After telling him to quit his bs and him ignoring it, we made a group chat without him just to keep some peace during games.

After that, he started taking interest into the one girl in the group (E). In the beginning it was fine but he quickly started to act like a creep. Not keeping distance when she obviously moved away from him, always asking her about her opinion, being extremely possessive of her, constantly texting her, etc. Simp extreme. E rejected him and told him multiple times she only sees him as a friend.

When he didn't get enough attention in the group chats from E, Kevin would turn on the toxic meter and turn the group to shite. Then he would either leave on his own or get kicked out. Eventually E would always end up adding him back even though the other guys in the group wanted him gone for longer than a few days.

E started dating another dude in the group (A) and Kevin did NOT like that. He started to create issues between the other friends and blamed his so called "autism" so he would be forgiven, or claiming degeneracy and throwing an attempted pity party for attention.

A noticed the red flags around Kevin but E would not listen and kept wanting to hang out with Kevin and get mad at any attempts of kicking Kevin out of the friend group.

One time, a year ago right before Rona, when hanging out with each other at Kevin's place, A was trying to stay between E and Kevin. E didn't like A being in-between her and Kevin, which created tension, which Kevin fed upon.

Kevin was defensive/possessive toward E, which pissed off A, making A want to protect E more even if it wasn't necessary. Kevin wanted E's phone since E and A were texting instead of talking. Kevin got mad and grabbed A in a choke hold. Third friend (C) had to pull Kevin off while e was screaming at them. After they were untangled, A went out and went home after E didn't go out with him. E stayed over at Kevin's place and A came back to make sure E was safe. Kevin and E were acting like nothing happened.

A group was created without Kevin or E to explain to the other friends what tf happened and to talk freely without them knowing.

After this, the group chats were dead for a while until it slowly started back up again

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/lu0wva/my_experience_dealing_with_a_kevin_part_2/) So a while back [I posted a story about the same Kevin](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/i32c2k/kevin_called_my_mom_hot_said_that_my_boyfriend/) where he basically said that my boyfriend would cheat on me with my "hot" mother and when I told him that she had passed away, he said that was "for the best". Since a lot of people enjoyed that story, I figured I might also share another conversation I once had with him. 

So in my freshman year of college, my friends and I would often go to a bar on our campus on Friday after classes ended to celebrate the end of the week and the start of the weekend. One Friday evening, Kevin was also there and because we were friends with the people he was hanging out with, we all ended up sitting at one large table and sharing drinks. At one point, Kevin ended up sitting next to me. Now, I already knew he was a pretty weird guy so I was hoping we wouldn't end up having a one-on-one conversation but as such evenings of drinking go, it sometimes is inevitable. 

Despite knowing he's kind of weird, I still struck up a friendly conversation with him to avoid making it awkward and all went well until the topic of same-sex relationships came up. I honestly can't even remember anymore how we even got to that topic. He expressed that he simply couldn't understand how you could be "attracted to what you already have on your own body" which I already thought was small-minded but oh well, I (foolishly) attempted to explain to him how it's about much more than just the body and that gay people likely also couldn't understand how he could only be attracted to someone of the opposite sex. He then got defensive and asked me if I happened to be gay, to which I replied that I'm bisexual. (I'm a girl, by the way).

He got this profound frown all of a sudden and looked at me as if I had just told him that I'm an alien. He then responded with "Bisexual?! No, way. You're way too feminine." 

I was pretty flabbergasted when he said that and honestly was kind of speechless at first. I had read stories of people who had been told similar things but I thought that surely people of my generation wouldn't have such bigoted and small-minded views. Well, apparently I was wrong. So I tried to explain to him that you don't have to be either feminine or masculine if you're a certain sexuality, that that is a very big misconception people have about lgbt people, but he wasn't having any of it. He even started to accuse me of being straight but that I was just saying that I was bisexual to attract more guys or to make myself seem "open to threesomes". 

At that point, I had enough of him. I just grabbed my drink and stood up and left to go talk to someone else, because I was absolutely fed up with him and his absurd comments. Thankfully the rest of the night went very well, and at least now I have a funny story to tell, but man that was fucking absurd. 

TLDR: Kevin didn't believe me when I told him that I'm bisexual because I'm "too feminine to be bisexual" and then accused me of actually being straight and just saying that I'm bisexual to be more interesting to men.Kevina was alone at home one day. She was hungry, also decided she to make Can Ravioli. She often saw how her Mom did it, so she got the Can and went to the electrical can opener.

20 minutes later her Mom got home to see her Daughter standing before the can opener triying to figure out how to get the can to the blade. She apparently didnt got the Idea to use her hands.

My Mom still makes fun of me for it.

Sorry if my english is bad! English is not my first language.This is about my sister and she is a real Kevina... much to my chagrin then it puts me on the edge of despair on a regular basis. Also english is not my first language so please excuse any mistakes.

So here is one of her latest demonstrations of her lack of common sense. My parents recently bought a smart TV and I showed them how they can turn on a virtual fireplace. They love it and have it on quite often while sitting in the living room and not watching TV. So one evening we were all sitting in the living room, playing games or reading with the virtual fireplace happily guttering on the TV in the background. Then my sister, who was sitting right in front of it turned around said that she was cold and asked deadly serious and a little bit concerned why the fireplace doesn't produce any heat and if there is anything wrong with it. It went quiet and all me and my father could do was just stare at her in disbelief.

"Because it's VIRTUAL! It's not a real fire. It's on TV!", I finally explained while my father (who is an almost scary intelligent man) was probably asking himself how his genes could lead to this.

"But there are TVs who can produce heat", she insisted.

"Yeah there have been, but this was 20 years ago, they have been called tube televisions and people tried to get rid of this energy wasting problem!", I told her.

She was not having it and tried to convince me that there are TVs who double as a heater. It took me ages to explain to her that this is not possible, because the heat would damage the electrics of the TV and in the end I thought I was about to go crazy. Why would you have a TV that doubles as a heater anyway when most houses (every house in my country I think) have built in heating systems? Where did she even get this ridiculous idea from?

I am thankful for every advice about how you can turn a Kevina into a sane human being, because I desperately want to convert mine!

&#x200B;

Edit: In the comments it was said that my sister being an Kevina is my parents fault. I just want to clarify some things and put my answer to one of those comments up here. My parents are great parents. Me and my siblings all have been raised equally and we got all the love, time and support we could ever have needed. It just happened that my sister turned out to be a Kevina. Some people are just not the sharpest tool in the shed by nature.

You can't seriously telling me that the parents of a child with a learning disorder or something similar (which my sister has not, this is just an example) are responsible for their child not being super bright? Some children or people are just not able to achieve a certain level of intelligence by nature despite every possible support and there is nothing you can do about that. They have other things at which they are really good at. It doesn't make them inferior people or their parents bad parents. Am I a little bit annoyed of my sister being a Kevina? Yes. Is she really stupid sometimes? Yes. But on the other hand she has great social skills, is very hardworking and managed to get her bachelor degree. I would rather give my parents credit for what my sister has achieved due to their parenting than making them responsible for someting that just is like it is and not their fault.Like most I’ve been grounded since Corona, so this story is from pre-corona.

As per my [previous story](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/cpwp2r/kevina_the_corporate_assistant/) I work at a company that does Hardware (Security) testing and I have to fly all around the world for our customers. We also have a program at our company to take in and help young people that are down on their luck and are bright enough, but never gotten a chance in getting a proper education due to a lot of different circumstances.

After the previous Kevina the interview and placement process was updated. But Kevina squared  managed to slip through. Let’s call her Kavianna.

====

We had four new recruits in this program. One of them was a girl named Kevianna. She wasn’t the next superstar of the company, but decent enough to do (basic) prep work for us in the lab. Some of my requests for work to be done had been given to her and it seemed to be up to standards.

I had planned a blitz series of client visits (Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Korea) for the coming 2,5 weeks, I would take a 3 week vacation in Japan afterwards to visit friends there. My boss called me with the request to take her with me on the trip, as part of his efforts to show these kids the world in hopes of motivating to do even better.

I had a lot of backlog with clients that I needed to catch up with. Most of my work is back to back with tight schedules, especially when clients keep changing deadlines and changing specs. Being alone or with someone that is the same as you on trips like these just makes everything so much easier.

Quite a lot of discussion ensued between me and my boss, but in the end I still had to take her with me on the travels. I was already in Thailand on another engagement and instead of flying back home for 2 days I just stayed put finished up my work and took a day off. Kevianna would fly out herself to Thailand and we would meet up at the hotel. She told me she would arrive Tuesday morning.

Tuesday morning came and went and she did not show up. It wasn’t until the evening she came over to the hotel. Turned out she did not know that time-zones existed and just did a simple calculation of Local Time + Fly Time = Tuesday morning. She also learned about Jetlag the next morning.

It was going to be a long 4 weeks with her.

**Thailand**

The morning after she had checked into the hotel in Thailand we were to meet for breakfast and would go to the client after. I showed up already in business attire, she showed it like an Instagram influencer going to the beach. Turned out here entire suitcase was full of dresses and leisure clothes. She was just here to support me right? When I was working she could go out right? I ended up having to buy her proper clothes at the spot.

Last day in our Thailand visit we went out for dinner with some people from the client. I still had a lot of work to do, so I (foolishly) left Kevianna with them and returned back to the hotel that was just a few minutes away. I told her not to stay to long as we had to go out early to catch our flight to Malaysia.

When I went to her room at 8 in the morning  to see if we could have breakfast and leave she did not respond. I ended up with hotel staff having to open her door to wake her as the phone went unanswered multiple times. Turned out she had come back drunk in the middle of the night with a random Thai guy she met in the bar and ordered around 250 euro in room service during the night. Thailand is cheap, but room service is expensive everywhere, especially when alcohol is involved. Company is paying right?

**Malaysia**

After her one night stand with room service in Thailand, she spend the next day traveling with me to Malaysia with a hangover. We barely made our flight. Roads in Thailand and Malaysia are not always as smooth as they should be. So she was rather beat up afterwards. I left her in the hotel the first day of the 2 days of meetings and deep dives. I ended up finding her at the end of the day at the hotel swimming pool living the influencer life.

2nd day I took her with me; during a meeting/presentation she was in the back; obviously bored because it was about very niche advanced topics specific to their hardware she ended up starting to paint her nails. Remind you; this is a new client and regardless of how chill they might be; painting your mails during meetings isn’t something I ever want to have a discussion about with a client. Took well over 5 minutes before she understood my hint; as I think she was going to take her shoes off to do her toenails. Client luckily never noticed, at least I think.

**Singapore**

We had a 2 day weekend in Singapore before another 2 day workshop with a client. It was a planned recharge and I luckily did not need to prepare anything for this workshop. I’ve been to Singapore often and always have a few stores and restaurants I frequent. I’m a woman and I like looking good have nice things (the techie in me) and eat delicious food. Over the day Kevianna noticed I had spend quite a lot of money (3k SGD); but this was all planned and budgeted for.

Over dinner she point blank asked me if I was a escort on the side. Cause only her friends that escorted  had that kind of money. It wasn’t until I told her how much I make a month that her demeanor changed.

Learning how much I made in a month, she felt like she could do it too. Completely ignoring the hard work I’ve put in to be where I am now. On Sunday she came to my hotel room and wanted my help to start studying. I knew for sure she would give up within a few days; but I’m a nice person and gave her some simple documents to read and come back to me when she had read them to discuss them.

She came back a few hours later; complaining that I am giving her the basics only; how was she supposed to make my level of money without her explaining me the advanced stuff.

Now; I am a fundamentalist in the sense that I want someone to have a solid understanding of the fundamentals first before moving over to the complex and advanced topics. Especially for someone that barely understands the field. I explained this to her. She went of in a rant how I am keeping her from being successful, and how as woman we should support each other.

I just wanted to enjoy my Sunday catching up on a book I was reading and catching up on my private life. Instead miss Kevianna was here demanding I’d be a private tutor to explain her topics she would not understand without any fundamentals. I told her I would not do so until she understood the basics. She left angry.

I took her to the workshop the next day and was thinking she had given up and would spend the rest of the day being bored. Instead she felt she mastered the basics in an afternoon and proceeded asking questions in the “I already know this; that means X happens, right” variety. After about 1 hour from the start she had asked enough stupid questions to disrupt the workshop enough that I was getting questioning looks from the other participants; and called a quick break in order to talk with her.

She maintained nothing wrong with her desire to learn. I told her they were paying good money for my time and should not be bothered by her. She started the argument again about how I sabotaged her; and I ended up sending her back to the hotel.

In a bold (and idiotic) move she ended up calling my boss to complain in an incoherent story. Given the time difference of 7 hours between Amsterdam and Singapore (she again forget about timezones) she ended up calling him at around 4 in the morning. Even he was pissed.

She was still angry by the time we left; despite having done nothing but lounge around the hotel for a day and a half. We left for Korea the next morning; only 3 more days and I would be taking my long overdue vacation and be Kevianna free.

**Korea**

At the first night being in Korea she came by my room to ask if she could use my notebook; cause hers broke. Asking her about how it broke she told me she was watching video’s on her notebook in bath and it fell in.  She was surprised that it was broken; cause her phone fell in as well and was still working.

I was surprised she even thought for a second I would give her my notebook. I am completely useless without a notebook to work with. I will protect it at all costs.

The kicker was that I actually had use for her during this time around in preparing a lot of files for the participants. But at this stage I can’t get a new company notebook overnighted, so she ended up being useless the rest of the trip, and I spend another hour during the night prepping the files myself.

She spend another 3 days lounging in the hotel and area because - sarcastically - she would only get in the way of my workshops. At this point I was already done with her and let her do whatever she wanted.

After the work in Korea was done I was scheduled to go to Japan for my holiday. And she was to fly back directly to Amsterdam. I had already told her this back in Thailand; but she was thinking she would be going with me despite me telling her she would be flying back on her own. Our flights lined up within a 2 hour windows so we went together; but  when she found out at the airport she was livid about it; I was cheating her out of a holiday in Japan! She clearly did not understand I was paying for this myself was under no obligation to take her with me.

Nearby airport security checked in on us because of all the commotion she was causing. And rightfully was a bit pissed about the commotion about nothing and send us away to our different check-ins. Thank you Korean airport police!

About a week into my holiday in Japan I got a call from my boss; asking what happened on the trip (and where the room service charges came from); because Kevianna was at the office telling everyone how horrible a person I was. I spend an hour on the phone with him telling the entire story. I was annoyed again just by talking about it that I ended up that night drinking till morning with friends and a group of rowdy businessmen.

Sorry boss, but for putting me through another kevina; this nights drinking will be billed as an expense to the company.

Kevianna’s behaviour in the weeks after she had returned was bad enough for her to be let go.[I'm at my wits end](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/lgo08j/kevin_invests_in_stocks_and_uses_a_key/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

For real... he is a total moron and I can't wait to not be on the same shift as him.

To summarize: I've had some overtime prior to my regular shift, so I had already prepared the unit for the night shift. This includes the main fuel for night shifters like myself: coffee.


Well, it turns out Kevin wanted more. Fine, just add **water and coffee**. Water + coffee, not a complicated equation, right? Right?!


It seems even this is too complicated for Kevin.


He just overfilled the coffee filter... no water. The filter overflowed into the pot...! FFS Kevin!


I like a strong brew, but that was straight coffee grounds with water mixed to it. Ugh..! 


Right now, he's sleeping on and off on a chair, saying he isn't sleeping... while snoring... sure, Kevin.Possible TW. TL;DR at the bottom.

&#x200B;

Allow me to take you back to the distant year of 2014. I was a college freshman and lived in the dorm, sharing it with the star of our story - Kevina. You see, she studied law. And apparently was one of the better students. She did study hard and was committed to her uni, I'll give her that, but she wasn't exactly the sharpest tool in the shed.

Kevina is from a large family, and she is second to youngest out of 6 siblings, which made her pretty hungry for attention. Her attention-seeking escapades included but weren't limited to:

* Having a loud phone conversation in the dorm's hallway with her boyfriend, loudly exclaiming in one of those "Nick, you cheated on me with my sister!" then proceeding to wail and roll on the ground (she had two sisters, neither of which lived in the same country like us and there was no way he could actually do that). Again all of this was happening in the hallway of a rather small dorm (just for freshmen), very loudly. We all knew she did it on purpose.
* She came back from the weekend home and told me she's pregnant. I asked how did she know, she said her period was late for two days and she threw up twice while home. Then she went home again and traveled with baby daddy to the capital to have an abortion and then came back. She left on Friday morning and was back on Saturday evening. It's a 700km one-way trip with multiple transportation changes and it's simply impossible to all of that in barely 30 hours. When asked how did the abortion go, she couldn't really give me a straight answer. First, it included the pill but by the end of her expose she said it was actually a curettage.
* Leaving dorm for a party at 9 PM and coming back at around 10:30 PM "wasted". Sure, people do get super wasted super quick, but she said that she walked to and fro the party. Our dorm was on the top of a hill and it would take her 20 minutes just to get to the bottom of it on foot. Another 20 minutes to the place she said the party was at. So she somehow got super wasted in 10 minutes and didn't sober up in the 40 minutes she walked back. Sure.
* Continuously stumbling, tripping, and falling on any and every decent looking guy at the parties.

She was Kevina because she thought we all are dumb, stupid and that she had us fooled. As stupid as all of the above is, there is one incredibly, unbelievably stupid thing she did and which is the reason for the title of the story.

It was the finals week and I had a **really** important exam the following morning, so did my boyfriend at the time. He invited me over to his place so we could revise again together, with some of our classmates, and his apartment was just right next to the Uni so instead of getting up at 6 AM to get on time for an 8 AM exam, I could wake up at 7 AM. The five of us gathered there fueled by coffee and energy drinks and decided to pull a half a nighter. When I told Kevina that I'll be gone for the night she asked if I'd mind if she invited her boyfriend over. I said I don't mind and left. After a lot of panic and stress and annoyance with the studying, I called it a night around 3 AM and decided to get some shuteye before the exam. I was barely sound asleep when my boyfriend and I were woken up by knocking on the door. I yelled "what" and our classmate, who stayed the night as well, told me my cellphone was ringing. I told him that I don't care, it's late, I wanna sleep, but he insisted I pick up because it was past 3 AM, it was a nonmemorized number and it called three times already. So I picked up and it was one of the girls from the dorm, let's call her Mary, telling me to "calm down, everything is okay, don't worry..." I was utterly confused and asked wtf is happening and she told me "Kevina jumped through the window". I was shellshocked. I first thought that her boyfriend attacked her and she was trying to escape him, then I thought she tried to commit suicide, or something like that. Mary told me the room is locked and that they had to give my number to the police and that they'll call me. I hung up and I was shaking when my phone rang again. It was the police, they wanted to talk to me and needed my key. They couldn't give me much info on what really happened since nobody really knew. She was urgently transported to the main hospital in the next city over and she refused to talk to anyone. I gave them the key, they told me to come to the station the next morning and I went back upstairs. I didn't sleep the whole night and needless to say I failed my exam after so much stress. I finally got to go to the police station to give my statement and then went to the dorm and finally got to find out what the hell happened.

You see, Kevina wanted to go out. And since our dorm building was separated and some 50m away from the main building where all the guards were it would be locked after midnight. All you had to do was to call the guard and somebody will come to unlock. Hell, you could also hold a piece of paper saying "come unlock the door I want to go out" in front of the camera and they'd come. It's a damn no brainer! But no, my brilliant, intelligent and super smart roommate decided that wasn't good enough so she decided the best course of action is to leap from the second-story window. But she was smart and she threw a pillow to land on. On a concrete. A pillow. It wasn't high enough for her to die from fall, but it was high and hard, enough for her to break both of her heels and a shin. Why did she want to go out so urgently at 2 AM? Because her side boyfriend (who was old enough to be her father but who am I to judge) was waiting for her in the car. Drunk. When he saw the ambulance and police coming he hightailed from there. The weirdest thing was that she broke several bones in her body and she barely made a sound, a girl was in the bathroom on the first floor and saw her laying on the ground with her leg under a strange angle and called the guards who called the emergency.

So that's a story of a Flying Kevina. I know, it's hard to believe someone can be this much stupid, hell I had a hard time believing it when the policemen told me, and trust me I wish more than anything this didn't happen. But it did and I had to live through it. Commiserate with my pain!

&#x200B;

TL;DR: And idiot roommate wanted to get out of the dorm and decided that calling the guard to unlock the door didn't bring enough attention, so she jumped out of the second-story window. And threw a pillow to land on.

Edit: wording, English is not my first languageI know a Kevina, in a pop quiz something came up about Australia and she said 'I dont know were Australia is.' And when confronted she started crying. Kevina also thinks the moon is a holigram becuase 'the moon landing is fake.' and that the earth is flat. One time she texted me 'why doesnt the sky fall on us?' I was so confused and then she typed up 'but like, why doesnt it hurt?' I didn't reply.-Thought masks were only for people WITH covid.

-Doesn't know the difference between political parties so just votes based on the look of the candidate. 

-Doesn't belive in vegetarianism 

-Doesn't understand why there are two lanes on the road.

-Has no idea why he can't fly on an airplane WITH HIS GUN!

-He thought if he put my puppy in a play pen with his cat they would fight to the death 🤦‍♂️

-thinks hamburger are made out of pigs, I can kind of understand this cuz like ham, idk.

This mostly it.So as you might have seen in my last post my cousin is a total Kevin. It doesn't just end in his driving, he also doesn't belive in vegetarianism. 2 years ago at Christmas (2019) my mom brought a mixed salad for the extended family (mostly the aunts). My one aunt is a vegetarian, you might see where this is going. The whole family sits down and my aunt plate consisted of only salad, green beans, and some of my grandmas famous mashed potatoes. As we begin to eat my cousin looks up at my aunt and asks "so...why didn't you get any of the turkey or ham I brought?" She looked at him strangely, "because I'm a vegetarian?" Kevin has a confused look on his face. "But..your eating plants." My aunt looks even more confused "plants are vegetables?" Kevin gives her the most Narcissistic smirk and says "no they're not they're meat!" The whole family looks at Kevin who is looking like the just told a child santa isn't real. My uncle chimes in "Kevin plants are vegetables not animals. They don't contain meat." "Well, they're alive aren't they? So that means they are animals." We tried to explain to him that just because they are alive doesn't mean they are animals. "Are trees animals Kevin? Huh?" My brother asks. "No trees aren't alive." We gave up after 45 minutes of arguing and went to open presents.
Thanks for reading

Edit:Wow woke up this morning and the support is incredible! Thanks guys i posted a list of other things he has done in the past year!

Edit:Some of you asked if he thought viruses are meet so I called him today and he said and I quote “ No, what kind of question is that do you think I’m stupid?” I would have said yes but...I not that mean.[here is pt 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/l1svz7/my_coworker_kevin/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

Kevin has worked a shift with Mike and has now decided to invest in the stock market. Kevin says he analyzed the stock market for months and has dropped 2000$ on a single stock. Why?

"It's the future, man!"

Why is it the future? 

"Because it's a delivery company!"

You realize Amazon is either buying them, hopefully giving you a profit OR they get crushed by Amazon, right?

"Nah! It's the next GME! I'm telling you!"

So... they're being shorted and you're leading the next short-squeeze?

"What's a short?"

The reason Why WSB bought GME stocks..?

*blank stare*

"But... what's a short?" 

-----

Then, for our breaks, we have to go to the break room for various reasons, one being... noise and smells disturb the patients. (Hypersensitivities)

Break room is locked, but all the locks are opened with the same key. Kevin has a key.

He goes to the break room. It's locked. He wiggles the knob... nothing.

He comes back with his plate to the hallway, close to the patients' rooms and starts eating. Noisily, with his headphones blaring hip-hop music.

Thankfully, he didn't disturb the patients.

When I went to my break, I... took my key, opened the break room.

"Oh! You can open it?"

You have a key, right?

"Yeah, why?"

To open the door.....??

*blank stare*

"But... which key?"

Take a guess, we have three.

Note: We have one for the doors, one for cupboards and such and one for the lockers. They all look very different from one another.My sister, a Kevina, has proclaimed a whole bunch of ridiculous things, so I’m just going to make a list:

She was confused about whether Wisconsin was a country or a county. When laughed at, she asked the follow up of whether it was a state or a city. (For our guests across the pond, Wisconsin is a state in the US)

She once proclaimed that people only have two ribs.

She was convinced for a while that it was illegal to say sorry in Canada.

And last but not least, she has recently started insisting that space was pitch black.First time poster so don't destroy my too much in the comments. I'm 15 and my cousin is the most Kevin person I've ever met in my entire life. I think the most appropriate place to start is with his driving skills. He is single handedly the worst driver I've had the misfortune of riding with. He thought that if he parallel parked side ways with the front of his car literally blocking the road he could, "Pull out faster." (He hasn't done this yet because he doesn't have a license) I asked him how would the cars on the road get around his car? He said "that's what the other lane is for." He explained to me with his twisted logic that the other lane was for passing and he "didn't know why the other cars were driving the wrong way in the passing lane. I said "what are you crazy!?!? That lane is for cars going the other way!" He still won't admitt he's wrong. Luckly he is still in drivers training and judging from how he handles a car,  he won't pass.
Thanks for reading let me know if you want more stories.My dad can be such a Kevin some times. never in his life has he read instructions leading to me building any thing that needed instructions since I was 7. He also as chronic bronchitis and every year needs to be on a breathing treatment like an inhaler but not exactly.

So I got a lung infection and went to the hospital they almost hospitalized me over night but I rejected since I was getting married in 2 week so they gave me medicine in the exact same for had his bronchitis meds. we had just gotten back from the pharmacy and suddenly I can barely breath at all and my body has started this terrible ineffective rhythm of trying to suck down air and my vision was fading. I point to the bag in my dads hands very audibly gasping and be tween gasp "give - my - med -is-" I could not get more out but he got the message and pulled out the device and opened it then he started to unfold and read this giant page of instructions. Unable to talk I hold my hand out for the device and he hands me in the instructions I can barely see at this point before this bad breathing rhythm my oxygen saturation was at 81 they hospitalize you at 80 so I don't have far to fall to being bad off. I rip the paper from his hands and throw it on the ground and hold my hand out again and he finally hands me the device and I take the medicine and get my breathing under control.

I ask him why when I was struggling to breath would he read the folded instructions

"So I would know how to use it" he said

I stared at him and said, "first off 1 more second and we would bet havening this conformations in the hospital second its the exact same as the device you have used for 4 years  third there are simple 3 step pictures on the box. forth its so simple even with out any of that my panicked oxygen starved brain figured it out instantly"

for those curious its one of theses, they are called dry powder inhalers [Dry-powder\_inhaler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dry-powder_inhaler)

Edit: because some people think I can magically know my o-sat score without going to the doctor and somehow get my hands on prescription drugs without a doctor and not the fun kind that are everywhere but the kind only used when needed- one time Kevin sent dick picks through his school email

- posted a photo pretending his “gf” hacked his snap saying how great he was... all the photos said “from camera roll” 

- slapped me in the face on two separate occasions 

- after a girl rejected him, he posted a stock photo of a gun in his story (don’t remember what he said exactly, but he said something about being like Nicholas Cruise). This was also on the day of a school assembly so everyone was scared. He got expelled. Then he asked me to send an email to the school saying that he was a good person who, “wouldn’t hurt nobody.” He didn’t understand the gravity of what he did and thought a letter from me to the school would help some how??? Idk

- Thought that male chickens lay eggs

Edit: I made a long comment under the post about why he slapped me (since a few people asked). 

Also, I meant Nikolas Cruz (not Nicholas Cruise), if you don’t know who that is it’s the school shooter of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland.So I need to wrap my brain around something that happened with Kevina.

One day, we were talking about TV shows and Movies.  
My brother suggests to her that she should watch Breaking Bad. She tells him that she doesn't think it would be to her liking, but admits to never have tried it.  
I add that I think she should try the first episode, since even my father, who usually only watches documentaries about WWII thought it was great.  
Her response left me speechless.

"You mean those old Black and White fantasy movies?"

I was so stunned.  
It is only made worse considering we live in a country that was very much involved and puts a lot of effort into educating people about that matter.

She went on complaining that she never even watches those, since they are never in colour, and she thought that was boring.  
It urned out she was very well aware that WWII was real, but all those horrible things that happened, she thought was fiction.  
She was so shocked when we explained it was real and what had actually happened, that she cried a lot that day and we had to comfort her.

I could type out the following conversation, but even thinking about it gived me a migrain.

On the plus side, she got very invested into educating herself and we even plan on visiting a memorial site near us. I still can not comprahend how she managed to not catch anything about this in school...but then again, she missed a lot of content there.Allow me to take you back to a simpler time, the early 2000’s. The Star Wars prequel trilogy was about to end, Halo 2 LAN parties were a regular thing, and John Cena was still working his way to the top of the WWE ladder. Times were good!

I had just moved to a new school for my junior year (grade 11). I knew a few people here and there from sports but other than that, clean slate. Then I met the subject of our story. Enter Caveman Kevin or CK for short. 

I met CK and his older brother, Big Boy, through some shared classes. One thing to know about these two, they both dominated the school weight lifting records, with CK being the only person to get on the record board as a freshman. On top of this, both were on the wrestling team, with CK turning heads as a freshman taking out former State Champs. CK was a true caveman to a tee though, a big ol’ lovable knucklehead. 

Some examples:

1. During a wrestling meet at what could be considered an upscale school he spent $10 on bottles of soda. The reason? The machine was one of those conveyor belt vending machines and he was fascinated with it. He just kept dumping money into it, giggling like a five year old. 
2. Did some work on his crappy little Toyota but forgot to put water in the radiator or put fresh oil back in. As he tried to drive it around the grinding was unbearable, then it caught fire. Again, he giggled like a five year old while having a cigarette. 
3. Tried to argue that Mountain Dew was chemically designed to lower sperm count in Health class. He was adamant in his belief and you couldn’t change his mind.

Anyway those are just a few of the many examples. The next year Edgelord entered the picture. I’d known him from my previous school and he was one of the biggest a**holes I’d ever met. He’d openly brag about “needing to keep his women in line”, insinuating he abused them. 

Edgelord started making his presence known in my new school. He’d gotten into a relationship with a freshman girl. They’d met at a church a lot of the kids at my new school went to. He started hanging out with her during lunch, apparently he’d gotten into a home school program after I’d left and had nothing better to do. 

It was during one of these lunch breaks Edgelord lost it on his GF.  She apparently said “the wrong thing” and he smacked her hard enough to make her fall. He then peppered her with various insults, saying she needed to watch herself. CK, being in the same area for lunch, wasn’t having this and confronted him. Some words were said and they both agreed to fight at the local pond after school. 

When school ended for the day a group of us made our way to the pond, there we found CK warming up by shadowboxing. About 10 minutes later Edgelord rolled up in his crappy Toyota, loaded up with a few of his “followers”. CK kept his eyes on Edgelord, watching him like a Hawk.

As Edgelord got out of his car, he told the others to stay in as he kept his left hand in his pocket. He walked up to CK, right hand extended out, and told him “I want to make peace”. CK though wasn’t there for peace.

CK, in his caveman glory, punched Edgelord hard enough to send him crashing to the ground. As he fell to the ground Edgelord’s hand came out of his pocket and something fell out. Turns out he’d been holding a small thing of pepper spray which was quickly snapped up by someone from the crowd. While Edgelord struggled to get up CK hopped on top of him and began delivering a glorious Ground and Pound on him, with Edgelord crying and begging for his life. CK then picked Edgelord up and slammed him against the back passenger window of his crappy toyota, shattering it. CK picked Edgelord up again and shoved him through the broken window, screaming at the guys inside to get out of our town. CK then giggled like a 5 year old as the Toyota drove off.

Aftermath:
Well CK was arrested for the beat down and Edgelord pressed charges.  Edgelord’s “followers” even corroborated the events and served as witnesses. I’m not sure how but It was eventually thrown out and CK didn’t get into any serious trouble. Edgelord was still however on a lot of folk’s crap lists, including Big Boy’s. 

Big Boy randomly ended up bumping into Edgelord one day at Walmart. While in the parking lot Edgelord backed his car into Big Boy’s. Big Boy confronted him and Edgelord threatened violence. Big Boy laughingly asked him if he planned on suing him when he lost. Edgelord didn’t recognize Big Boy until he mentioned he was CK’s brother and Edgelord ran off. Big Boy said Edgelord left the car behind but I can’t confirm that. 

Edgelord wound up in Florida last I heard, running from some more folks he pissed off. Don’t know if he went back for his car or not. As for CK he ended up running with a rough crowd, becoming a drug dealer for a bit but he cleaned himself up long enough to go straight and start a family.So i didn’t realize one of my friends was a Kevin until recently. 

Me and three of my friends decided to drive to chick-fil-a. Where we live, the nearest chick-fil-a is about an hour away so I drive into the highway. 25 minutes into the drive, ice, that i try to drive about, pops the side of my tire and it’s off the rim. I pull over immediately and text my mom to tell her I am calling AAA. The four of us are talking and Kevin’s says to me, “so are we gonna go to the next exit and turn around?” 

I had never been more speechless in my life. 

“Yes Kevin, I was planing on dragging my front right tire all the way back home... let me know if the sparks from the metal scrapping the ground get too hot for you.”Introducing: Me. 19F, autistic, works in a lab/office. Being autistic i’m the one most people turn to to find misfiled items because I’m like a bloodhound- I get very determined (I’ve also been told I have excellent attention to detail) 

The room I work in has big, long electric filing machines with a small bit of desk at waist height so you can pull the boxes out and lean them on the desk before pushing them back out- this is important. I normally navigate that room by pushing around on a wheely chair. 

I had stomach surgery on a Thursday, and I work Monday-Wednesday so I didn’t tell my supervisor just figured I’d come in and it would be fine. 

I had a terrible time. I felt pain and even slightly feverish, like I was prickly with sweat. But it’s not warm up there, it’s actually cooler than the rest of the building. 

A week goes by and I notice that when I work from home, I don’t feel the same symptoms. I change the dressings on the wounds and head to work. 

Today, I had the brainwave. I can’t believe how stupid it was. I was scooting around the room on the chair, pressing my stomach- where the incisions are- into the desk every time I leaned over to put a file away or retrieve one. 

I am such a huge idiot lol. I feel so much better thoughMoved to the US some years back, ending up in Michigan. Met a girl, who after a bit took me home to meet her family who was celebrating a cousin's graduation. She explained to her Aunt Kevina that I was from Ireland, at which point - having spoken to me already for a few minutes - Kevina raised her voice by about 30 decibels, and tried to speak every word as if it was its own sentence and said unto me:

MY. DAUGHTER. GRADUATED. HIGH. SCHOOL. WE. ARE. EXCITED. DO. YOU. HAVE. SCHOOLS. IN. IRELAND?

I blinked in confusion and said "Um, yes, of course we do."

Kevina wasn't done.

SHE. IS. GOING. TO. COLLEGE. A BIIIIIG. SCHOOL. (making large circular motions with her hands). DO. YOU. UNDERSTAND?

"Er, yes. I have a BFA majoring in graphic design."

I. DON'T. THINK. IT'S. THE. SAME. I. MEAN. A. REAL. COLLEGE?

"Um, I think it is...?"

Went on like this for the rest of the afternoon. After she finally realized I wasn't deaf and could understand English, she followed me around picking my brain. I was 100% convinced I was going through some sort of prank initiation, but nope. Turned out Kevina was dumber than a rock. (Apologies to the rock if any insult is taken.) Other gems included:

* Thought potatoes were invented in Ireland.
* She thought that Ireland isn't really a country, it's part of England. (typo there, thanks to u/AwesomeCake_Abc for catching it!)
* Ireland had airports big enough for actual real planes to land on. ("Not talking about little planes, I mean the big jet ones.")
* Had no clue that we had cars and didn't ride horses.
* When she found out guns were (by and large) illegal in Ireland, she wondered how you could defend yourself if someone with a gun came up to you. When I pointed out that wouldn't really happen SINCE THERE AREN'T REALLY ANY GUNS THERE, she couldn't wrap her head around it, claiming that it was unfair since other people had guns.I was playing a pokemon ripoff on the ds at school when Kevin, who's been held back more than once and openly admits to doing illegal drugs to anyone who will listen, stands behind me and looks at my screen and says "is that pokemon? I've played pokemon on the ps4". Pokemon is a Nintendo exclusive btw.One of my students (actually named Kevin) was working on his research project today. All they had to do was pick an invention off of the list, tell me a few things, and add some pictures. As Kevin was scrolling through the list he goes “Miss, what’s a biscuit cutter??” 

Me: buddy, that’s half the point of the project, look it up. I want ya to learn something. 


Kevin: can you at least tell me what a biscuit is???


Me: what do you mean ‘what’s a biscuit?’?!


Kevin: what, like the meat???????????


Me: .... the meat!?


Then I see that he’s googling it and he goes “ohhhhh, so like McDonald’s. got it”I was born in South Africa from Dutch parents and moved back to study in the Netherlands. One day, while telling a new classmate that I'm from South Africa, she responded by asking me if I was an albino black person. She was seriously asking, totally oblivious to the fact that the Dutch colonised South AfricaAbout ten years ago I had a friend who was very much a Kevin. For example, he once applied to work as a mechanic (he was 14) because he had just learned how to change a car’s oil, and bragged about the job he obviously didn’t get for a month. He also then had to send his car to that same mechanic once because he put coolant where coolant shouldn’t go.

Anyways, now that I’ve given you my Kevin is actually a Kevin explanation, on to the topic at hand. In high school I had no idea what I wanted to do in life, but got good grades and wanted to take AP (advanced placement) and dual credit courses which counted towards college credit. I took a whole slurry of careers, from law to accounting to (the topical one) AP Psychology (and yes, all of these counted towards my bachelors degree from my undergrad school, which is in the totally non-related field of chemistry, go figure).  During AP psychology we were taught about the IQ test and at one point were offered the option of taking one after school one day. I made an off handed comment about it to my friends at lunch and Kevin blurted out that he’d be taking it too. Somehow, he actually showed up and was allowed to take the IQ test despite not being invited or expected. 

About a week passes and my friends and I are all playing hacky sack in front of the school about half an hour before classes start. Kevin walks up to all of us with that big, stupid smile only the blissfully ignorant can make and started saying he was a genius. Apparently, Kevin had gotten word his IQ was 72. For those unfamiliar, the average IQ score is 100, and the lower you go, the less intelligent you are (although there are some problems like cultural differences that impact IQ tests’ validity, but those don’t apply here). I joked about how he was *actually dumber than Forrest Gump* who we learned was supposed to have an IQ score of 75. He got upset and went on a tangent of this and that (it’s been 10 years, I don’t really remember the little things because I was laughing my ass off), but it mostly revolved around his backwards understanding of the scoring system. Then he asked me about my IQ result. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t usually boast about myself, but I told him I was just 2 points shy from doubling his score. He just gave me a “yeah right” and a laugh and walked off. He kept claiming to be a genius for a month and a half. 

TL;DR:  Kevin takes IQ test, scores lower than Forrest Gump, claims to be genius.

Edit: Alright, to those of you who somehow got butthurt because a story about an IQ test implied I’m smart, this isn’t a brag. The story is meant to focus on Kevin. Everything about me is to give context to why and how he took the IQ test, and the conversation that followed is what happened. This is a story I felt I wanted to share that fit the StoriesAboutKevin sub. If I wanted to brag, I wouldn’t do it here, nor would I talk about an IQ test I took in high school. My accomplishments in my field are validation enough for me, I don’t need to seek it out anonymously on Reddit. Either enjoy the story, or don’t. Just don’t be toxic.Me and kevin we're using the microwave, i don't remember what for but i had almost used a metal bowl in the microwave. Kevin then asked: 'why aren't you using that bowl?' i was shocked that he asked me this and i replied: 'uh.. it's metal...' And i kid you not this is what they said. "why not? is it going to get super hot?"

this experience has made me realize how stupid this kevin is, for another example he borrowed my mountain bike to jump off his diy ramp of thin plywood and the ramp was not at all secure.My man enters my humanities class, 40 minutes later he realised he was in the wrong room and he was doing English.

He actually thought the stuff she was talking about was related to English ,  LMAO.

Ye ,  he's one of the dumbest people I've ever met in my life lmaoThis story was told to me by a staff member at my local adult store and it's too funny not to share.

So I was in there the other day and I was chatting with the woman working that day, when out of morbid curiosity I asked her what her weirdest customer experience was. She told me of a few that are far too dirty to repeat on here, but then there was one such... quite literal exchange she had with a woman who was clearly a Kevina. For hygiene reasons they don't except returns, only an exchange for a faulty product. This woman wanted to return a used vibrator because it didn't "get her there" and couldn't understand why the answer was no. Did I mention it was USED? There's nothing wrong with indulging in a bit of self pleasure but really? What a nob.

This is a bit of a tame(ish) r/StoriesAboutKevin post but it gave me a little chuckle so I thought I'd share.

Thanks for reading.This story is about a Kevina that holds a special place in my heart.

Until recently I (25M) lived with my brother (21M).  
In our old flat, we had a huge basement that was divided into different sections for the tennents.  
Ours was the biggest one, located right at the end of the hall.  
At the back wall of that hall, a lot of water pipes ran, with control panels and indicators.

Our dishwasher had broken down, but we already had the new one sitting in the basement, so no big problem. The other one had been really old and we had expected the breakdown for a while.

As the machine was really heavy and we lived on the 2nd floor with no lift, we asked Kevina (My brothers gf) to help us bring it upstairs. She didn't really have to carry it, but open and close doors, help balance and stabalize it if we slipped, and just generally be there for safety.

Big mistake.

As we carried it out of our basement section, Kevina caught sight of the panels, indicaters and other modules.  
She asked me what those were for and I told her they were for the water management.  


K:     "Yeah, but what *exactly*?"  
Me: "I don't really know. Please don't touch it."  
K:    "Okay."

We went on creeping forward inch by inch, me going backwards, when I look up just in time to scream "Nooooo!" as I see her press a big red button on top of a seethrough box filled with water.

With a huge splash, water started gushing out of the connected pipe, spraying the walls and us in the process.

Kevina screamed, but it still took her more than a Moment to let go of the button.  
Luckily the flooding stopped immediately.

Me: "*WHY* did you do that?!"  
K:    "It said 3 seconds!!"  
My brother just fell into despair.

Turns out that on top of the button it said "3 seconds", which somehow made her think nothing would happen if she pressed it for less than that...

Luckily nothing major happened, but the next day, I ran into a repairman who was there to check on the pipes...I'm not sure if that was coincidence...I'm currently at a store where the doors automatically open when you're in front of them. They are clearly labeled with EXIT ONLY and ENTER ONLY signs. Kevin proceeded to go up to the EXIT ONLY door, pull it open, and go in. Sometimes I wonder about the world today.I have a “friend” who wanted to take the day off, and decided to fake being sick... during the pandemic... while he works in a hospital.So my friend is Vietnamese and this girl in my class a few years ago asked him if he was Asian or Chinese so he had to explain that he was Vietnamese and after thirty minutes she said so your SpanishSo today i went to the place that puts the wonder that America is in full view, Walmart, so i go to lock my door via the double horn method, which guarantees its locked and a kevin honks back at my parked car with me out of it with my keys visible in the air, in all my year working food service never have i seen anybody this stupid, and at my work people order plain baked potatoes at a hyper inflated price with a grocery store nearbyFirst, he wasn't a bad kid or anything, but he expected us to believe the most absurd stories he told. Here are some highlights.

He had a gun license out of state when he was ten

Most members of his family had killed someone

He had a cousin who owned a junk yard, and they used some parts to build a Mars rover that NASA sent to mars. 

Several claims to being a god in every sport/video game/competition

He knew how to rob a house

It wasn't the fact that he lied so much, but he never backed down. Every one would call out his garbage and he would keep denying it. He would even get caught denying his lies accidentally but continue to tell his stories. There are several more lies I just can't remember. A few of his stories may have been true but because of his reputation we never believed him.This will be about my mother Kevina. I've written about her before. She's the one that insisted that my car's trunk was bigger than hers despite us owning IDENTICAL cars.

Anyway, on to the story. Kevina came home from Christmas shopping super excited saying she found the most amazing, perfect gift for my cousin (a girl, about 9 years old at the time). She then shows me a pair of toy night vision goggles from Walmart. (Basically, goggles with a lightbulb and a switch on the side) Now, I'm not of the mentality that boy toys cannot be for girls and vice versa but, knowing said cousin, I didn't think this would be something she would like and I was super confused why Kevina thought otherwise.

In our culture, kids open their gifts on Christmas eve. So Xmas Eve rolls around and we gather with my uncle's family. My cousin, predictably, opens her gift from Kevina and barely plays with it for a minute. Just puts the goggles on and briefly turns them on before moving on to playing with other gifts. Kevina is visibly disappointed while I still can't understand why she thought this would go differently. 

On the way home Kevina tells me that she is really disappointed because she thought the goggles would have been my cousin's favorite gift that year but, instead, they turned out to be NOT REAL NIGHT NIGHT VISION GOGGLES, just goggles with a light bulb.

Kevina thought she bought actual night vision technology in the toy aisle at Walmart for $20.Kevin and I went to school together, so we'd sometimes talk about classes. If I stated a simple fact like "Humans are animals," or "Whales are animals," Kevin would sigh, glare at me, and say "No, they're mammals," in a condescending tone. When I'd tell Keven that yes, they are both animals and mammals, Kevin wouldn't speak to me.

Kevin always arrived on time to each class. Kevin always put their stuff in their spot. Kevin always left the class, and came back after the bell rang. Kevin always got in trouble for being late. Kevin never changed their routine.

Kevin thought that every student of the opposite sex was attracted to them. Kevin would follow them around during break time, and then tell me about how they were following Kevin around, even though I saw how every day Kevin would go to where Kevin knew they would be so Kevin could ogle them. Kevin's main crush was Kevin's cousin.

One day, Kevin wasn't speaking to me. I didn't care, but Kevin's glares were getting annoying, so I asked Kevin what was wrong. Apparently I implied that my crush was smarter than Kevin's. This was because I told Kevin that when I was in third grade I had a crush on a classmate who, like me, was in the advanced math program. This was after Kevin frequently tried to get me to talk about who I "had a crush on." Kevin apparently felt like I was bragging about how smart someone I had a crush on in third grade was compared to the person Kevin currently, over eight years later, had a crush on. Also, the person Kevin was talking about was Kevin's cousin.

Kevin couldn't add 70 and 30.

Kevin thought that when they ran 6.5 laps it was more than when I ran 7.2 because when they ran their first lap they counted it as two because they thought starting your first lap meant they'd already completed a lap.

Kevin stopped talking to me because when we'd work together we'd disagree on some answers, Kevin would ask the teacher who was right, and I'd always be right.

Kevin claims to have scratched at their tooth until the enamel was scratched completely off. Kevin did not say why Kevin would do that.This is about an old college roommate of mine.  Kevin knew his stuff when it came to his field of study, but for the remaining 90% of life, he was a lost cause.  I don't know if how he was raised didn't give him the proper life skills (homeschooled in a Quiver Full family), or if he was just that oblivious, or a combo of the the two.

We were both busy mid 20-somethings with our class loads and jobs, so we were those proverbial ships in the night, and its been years since I graduated and moved out, but going through this sub has triggered some memories.  So, here are a some things I remember, in no particular order:

* Would constantly leave his bedroom window open, and his door shut, during the winter, then would wonder why his room was always so cold.  Did the exact same thing in the middle of summer, but complained about the heat and humidity.
* Insisted he could fit his entire hand inside one of my tall drinking glasses.  No reason, and no one said he couldn't.  His hand did fit...after the glass shattered and then he spent the next half hour scouring the kitchen floor and counters for bits of glass.
* Tried reheating some of his leftovers that were stored in one of my Rubbermaid containers...in the oven.  Managed to catch him before he could though.  Also left a spoon in his mug to heat up the water for his instant coffee.  Didn't catch that, but did get informed that I shouldn't put silverware in the microwave.  (Gee thanks, Mr. Wizard.  I didn't know that. /s)
* Went out and bought a pricey microwave because he said the one we had made a rattling noise when he used it that noon.  It had been fine when I used that morning.  I opened the microwave door and nudged the glass platter back into its normal position.  No more rattling noise.
* Insisted whales weren't mammals and laid eggs like sea turtles.
* Wanted to make tacos, and chopped up an onion to toss into the ground meat.  And it was the entire onion - dry onion skin and all.  Didn't bother to wash it either.  Complained about the tacos tasting weird.
* Nearly got maced on campus one evening.  Why?  Kevin had come up with a joke and just HAD to tell somebody, and that somebody was this random co-ed who was heading towards her dorm.  He ran across the street and got in her face and somehow managed avoid a face-full of mace.  He complained to me (I'm female, btw) about it and was irritated this young woman was afraid of him.  (Yes, he did tell me the joke, but, no, I don't remember it.  Apparently, it was so stupid, my brain has permanently banished it)
* Kevin usually had one of his friends, Kevin2, come over to hang out in Kevin's room so they could play video games.  When we were introduced, Kevin2 responded by jumping behind Kevin and yelling "Please don't rape me!"  (Its almost like they attract each other or something...)
* Started to panic because the toilet wouldn't stop flushing.  I went in to look as Kevin went to call our apartment complex's maintenance, and I jiggled the handle.  Problem solved.
* I was gone for a long weekend due to an extended field trip for one of my classes.  Before I had left, I had tossed the garbage from my own room and took out the garbage from the bathroom and kitchen while I was at it.  When I came back, there were FOUR full big garbage bags, not counting the kitchen garbage bin being stuffed full, and the apartment was filled with fruit flies and the place reeked.  Kevin showed up not long after I got back and said he didn't know what the flies were and thought they had come through the window screens.  I made him take out all the garbage bags before he could try and escape to his room.  I made vinegar/dish soap fly traps and it took almost 2 weeks to eliminate the fruit flies.  To this day, I have no idea how Kevin could fill up that many garbage bags that quickly (neither one of us were partiers).
* I do a lot of needlework and fabric-based crafting, and have a special little scissors that keeps its edge and I usually keep it tucked away.  Kevin tried to use these scissors to cut open some heavy plastic packaging.  My knitting needles almost got used for purposes they weren't originally meant for.
* Kevin couldn't draw a line between the dark stains on the bottom of the mugs and him leaving about a gulp's worth of coffee in the mugs and leaving said mugs in his room for days.  Yes, those were my mugs from my dishware set.
* Somehow managed to crack one of my heavy stoneware plates while using it as a cutting board.  Again, no idea how, I only saw the end result.  Thankfully, he didn't use any of my knives.

I'm sure there's more instances of Kevin being Kevin, but this is what I can remember from what I experienced.  Definitely sure there more Kevin-y Kevins on this sub, but damn, did roomy Kevin make me wonder about the survival of the human race.

May all the deities have mercy on the poor woman who's crazy enough to marry him.Our neighbor had her former stripper boyfriend move in four years ago. The damage from multiple other Kevin things like catching our bush on fire as well as his own car another time. We’ve had security cameras for some time and installed a sign saying so. I think he only ever noticed this one out front. Finally noticed the one on the side yard between the houses,, this surveillance camera is two feet from the THIS AREA UNDER VIDEO SURVALANCE sign. He had the girlfriend call the police, he told them we were secretly filming him. They looked at the sign, tried to explain why it wasn’t a secret. The cops came over talked to us and heard some of the other stories about Kevin. This Kevin is almost Fifty years old, god only knows how he’s managed to survive. Also the Cop told the camera is fine, it’s up to us if we move it, however he would keep it recording also to save all the recordings.Like the title suggests, this is sort of a prequel to a post I made on here about a year ago about how a different Kevin and I made a short film that was entered into a multidistrict wide contest in my senior year of high school.  ([This is it if you’re interested](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/buxdcr/kevin_and_i_make_a_movie/)) In that post it explains what type of high school I went to and why I made short films during that time. In this story, I shall tell you the tale of how Kevin 1.0 almost got me arrested. To preface this, this story takes place my junior year of high school, a year before my other story.  Making an extremely long prelude short. Kevin and I went to the same high school the year prior (sophomore year) and had a few classes together so I was already well acquainted with him. Kevin was actually a nice fellow but it was at the point where it was kind of obnoxious at times. Like if you were to punch him in the face for no reason, he would apologize to you. 

In any case, this was the 2nd or 3rd short film we were assigned to make from our teacher.  It was supposed to be a “feel good movie”, which for me felt the opposite while filming. Every other person in the class already had their little niches so they formed teams before starting. Leaving me stuck with Kevin, a cool guy who’ll I call “Jonah” (Relates to this story) and some other guy who doesn’t matter because he didn’t do anything. Kevin already had an idea mapped out in his head and started writing a script. I went along with it because I didn’t have an idea for a “feel good” film. I never read the script but Kevin told me how each scene will play out, as we were filming them… I will break down each idiotic idea that Kevin executed in three sagas leading to my (almost) arrest. 

Part 1: Nice boat. Kevin wanted to film a boat scene inside a small fishing boat. I told him “Hey, I don’t think it’s a good idea to take the school’s 1200$ camera on a boat.” He ignored me and said “If we all put in some money, maybe we can have enough to rent a boat!” Before I could tell him that I wasn't giving him money, he already started calling “The lake?” Idk who he called but I had to essentially tattle tell on him to the teacher to get him to back down on the boat idea. 

Part 2: Would you like some popcorn? This scene, Kevin’s dad drove us to my (my old/Kevin’s current at the time) high school. It was during lunch time and we filmed a scene in the cafeteria with dozens of people around. In the cafeteria, there was a random mom from the PTA selling popcorn for a dollar. Kevin walked up to her and asked for her to be an important character in our film. For some reason she agreed and actually later showed up at random places around the city to film certain scenes. 

Part 3: the finale. For context, there is a small graveyard in front of our school that I NOW know belongs to a family unrelated to the school. In passing conservation, Kevin heard the principal say that she sees kids film AROUND the graveyard all the time. In his head he heard “around” as “in”. Kevin asked me to ask a random medical teacher at my school to be a priest for a funeral scene in the graveyard. I asked Kevin if we were allowed to film in the graveyard. He told me yes he got permission which I assumed was from the school. I reluctantly agreed and asked this teacher. The teacher asked me “Do you have permission to access the graveyard?”  I told him that Kevin said he did. He agreed. A few hours after school I asked my mom to drop me off back at school to do the scene. She drove me and I saw two guys in front of the gate of the graveyard and one of them was shirtless for some reason. They left and after an hour, everyone who needed to get there, got there. Also for some reason, the OG Kevin from my first story was there too for no reason? He was “just hanging out.” We all hopped the short fence to get in the graveyard and filmed the scene with “Jonah”, The PTA mom and the medical teacher with yours truly as the camera man. 

As soon as we finished the shirtless guy came back and started yelling at us “You guys can’t be here! This is private property!” I look at Kevin and tell him, you handle this. Kevin and the shirtless start talking. After I put the camera and tripod back into my mom’s car, the medical teacher came up to me and said in a stern tone “Listen I don’t you ever lie to me again!” Before I could say anything, he stormed off. The shirtless guy had his phone out (ready to call the cops) and a radio in his other hand talking to someone else. Who I assume was the other guy he was with before. Then the shirtless guy said “It’s fine y'all just hurry it up!” I was already in my moms car and told her to start driving away.

 The next day I went into class and my teacher gave the whole “afternoon class, your projects are due blah blah blah… And everyone involved in the graveyard incident, stay here so I can talk to you.” He chewed us out saying we lied to Mr.Med Teacher, he would have been arrested for criminal trespassing and if something like this happens again we are getting dropped from the class. Also just that I needed to go to Mr. Med Teacher and apologize for lying. I immediately interrupted my teacher and told him that I never lied to anyone and that KEVIN is the one who lied and needed to apologize to him. He sent us both anyway. In front of Mr.Med Teacher and Kevin, I told him that the only thing I am apologizing for is not checking if the information I had was correct and that Kevin was the one who lied to me and thus you about the graveyard. Kevin apologized for lying. The medical teacher was ok with me for the misunderstanding. Idk what was the situation between him and Kevin.

 Walking out of class I told Kevin to his face “I am never working with you again and you can finish your stupid movie yourself.” That was it for me. I just messed around the computer lab and looked up on other teams' films while Kevin made his. He finished his film and that was that. I worked with new people and life went on. I won’t talk about what the film was about unless someone is interested in what happened in the short. it’s pretty dumb if I remember right. “Is the film online?” Yes it is but A) I don’t know if it goes against any rules here to share a link to it B) It’s gonna be really hard for me to find. Unless you REALLY want to see it, I'll try to find it.Background: I'm in 7th grade right now this happened when I was in 4th grade.

Story: ok so this might be a little short. I was just rushing in school, I forgot why, but I passed by a 2nd-grade classroom and a bunch of students were outside and I ran passed I covered some kid say, and I quote, "Did you know eating boogers makes you smart?" to one of his friends. I really wished I stopped and correct him lol well that was my kevin story. CYAInsert obligatory am on mobile so please excuse any poor formatting lmao. 
I’ve been working in a petrol station for about two months while between jobs, and 3 weeks ago my new coworker - who we’ll call Kevina - started. 
Now, I try and be patient with her. She’s 36 and this is her first ever job, so it’s understandable that she may take a little bit of getting used to, but my god the seemingly simple things i’ve had to explain to her are ridiculous. 
Some of the simple thing I’ve had to explain include:
- That a meat pie (common petrol station food in my country) was not a Potato Top pie because it didn’t have potato on top of it
- When someone wants to get cash out without a purchase they still have to pay, she tried just handing a dude $20 out the till
- How to use her debit card (she needed cash out and apparently despite seeing other people use theirs constantly she had no idea what to do)
- I have to show her at least twice a day how to do a split payment
- That she can’t go off and make a phone call, leaving the store unattended, while I’m on break (only 2 of us working) 
- How to turn on a computer 
- I also have to show her how to do a gift card every time someone wants oneTwo years ago I finished a specialised highschool that trains you in one specific field of either engineering or sience for me it was chemistry. We had organic chemistry lab and analytic lab and in both I was partners with Kevin for multiple years. 


Now that you know the situation let's get to a bit more personal stuff about Kevin. Kevin is realy good at one thing and one thing only remembering and recalling data he passed through school because he was able to recall anything he learned but he had neither common sense nor the ability to put 2 things he learned together. Compare that to me I learn very little but I am good at using the stuff I know.



So the first instance where he was worse than normal was during the last class of the year in the organic lab. In organic lab you get graded on how many projects you compleat over the year and I was terrible behind and on the verge of failing that class I had to work on two projects at the same time while Kevin was farther ahead and could his feet up. So I was there working my but off while I asked Kevin to turn on the distillery wich he also needed on. Me thinking he is doing exactly that continued working on another project and guess what Kevin didn't do turn on the distillery wich failed me the class and got him a worse grade.


The second story had much lower stakes but was the most annoying. In this case we had to do 5 Analyse and we split the project down the middle and the first one done does the last as this is dip a rod into water and note down what is writhen on the display. So we went our ways and my samples weren't doing so well when Kevin comes into the room done with his samples. So to do small talk I asked him what was writhen on the display his awnser I haven't done it. My reaction than do it. 10 minutes later he entered the room again. This time I was focused and did not aske him about the last sample right away after another 5 minutes I asked him so are you done and he awnsered in his very monotone voice no and I awnsered getting louder and angrier what do you mean no go and do it. I was finally finished and I got out of the space where I had to do the samples and I see Kevin siting there staring into the air absent-minded and I ask again are you done and he awnsered again no so I went and did it.



The last story I have is mostly stupid and less infuriating. We had to work with a very toxic substance that could give you a nickle allergy from just touching it and he in his genius put a liter of it on a hot plate to heat it up the problem with it he used a plastic container wich he melted onto the electric hotplate.


All of those stories weren't so infuriating if he ever got punished for them but since he always seamed like he either was good in normal classes because he could learn everything by heart or good in the lab because I helped him he never got more than a pat on the head and do better next time as punishment while teachers toled me that if it was up to them I would fail the class while he would get an A because I did nothing. And maby a thing I forgot to mention is he seamed slow atleast socialy he spoke very slowly and when it came to social interaction he seamed to repeat what you said espacily when jokeing often telling you the joke you tolled him just an hour later so it never seamed he acted maliciously espacily since I was his only friend.


And sorry for the bad English I am not a native speaker.I briefly worked in what was basically a big recycling/thrift store. Most of my co-workers were relaxed and agreeable enough, but there was the one with some Kevina tendencies. She would instruct me by telling me what I did wrong after the fact. When I quit for wholly unrelated reasons, my actual supervisor asked "It's not because of Kevina, is it?" Turns out nobody even asked her to 'show me the rotes', it was her own iniative. Most of it was minor, and like I said, it was a brief trial period.  


Kevina complaints that really stuck out were:

* Asking me to move a shelf both bigger and heavier than myself. Think full wood 2,5m high bookshelf. For some context, I am as they say "fricking tiny". There were at least 3 employees present dedicated to moving the big inventory items.
* Telling me off for mislabeling some chairs. Turn out I did, because someone else had already mislabeled the chairs I was supposed to. Just have one person doing chairs, it was a quiet hour and that way we don't get misunderstandings over 'brown vs. beige'.
* My personal favourite: not wearing a mask while eating lunch at the staff break room. Just...what?So this was a while ago. At my old job I was literally surrounded by Kevin’s and Kevina’s so I can share quite a few stories but this is the one that always sticks in my mind. 

One day Kevina reveals to me that one time when she was talking with a customer about where he wanted his [product] shipped he was saying he was in Alaska but was going to be driving to California soon.

- Cue Kevina’s confusion -

She apparently thought that Alaska was right next to Hawaii in the middle of the ocean because that is where the maps show it in text books. 

The customer had to tell her to open google earth and showed her that Alaska is attached to Canada.

She also claimed that she knew Hawaii was warm and Alaska was cold at the time, but apparently that wasn’t an issue in her world.  

Let’s talk about a kid from my school, he is a lazy stupid Kevin 

Sorry for language, Spellchecked

He was stupid, here's why

The first ever known stupidness is that he failed 4th grade (I am in Poland btw)

He was so stupid back then everyone hated him, so everyone made fun of him

I am unfortunate to have him in my class :( 

December 2010

Biology, Topic - \*Birth\*

We talked how humans make babies, until we talked about, Where men pee, 

Kevin started talking about P\*neses and s$x, until he got into principal office

Typical

January 2011, Polish lesson:

Before teacher came, we were talking until

Kevin - I am a p$do$fi$le!

Class - intense laughter

There comes principal office!

Late May 2010

English lesson, how much I hated them (at the time), 2 In a row, F\*ck

Kevin - Someone stole my bag!

Evryone didnt care

Then Kevin attacked... Me? for no apparent reason? like what he bit me so hard in my finger it nearly bleaded, Principal office, I go to the nurse 

Early june

So, we played football, Worst of all, (I will explain later) also it was Friday so yey

After the last lesson, I was tired and just clount wait to get the f\*ck out of there

it got even worse, 

Kevin - Our team won, you cheated!

Me- Wat

Others - No, You lost, we won

Kevin punched Other kid - OK, 

Kevin = principal office

End of the year, more about to come  
if this gets popular i will post moreI’m not speaking for everyone but I’ve definitely acted like that before lol I guess the name fits :(This happend in 2019 so before covid and all of that but thats not the story this is.

One day I was out playing with my cousins in my huge garden. (if you want to know why I was forced to.) When we were in the middle of doing a contest of who can jump up the balance beam (my grandmother bought it for me when I was 8) with there 2 feet taped with "imaginary tape" as my cousins called. We had fun until my stupid sister (SS) came and we had a conversation witch went like this:

SS: hey can I play on the balance beam?

Me: sorry but were playing a game now do you mind waiting?

SS: but I wanna plaaaaaaay!

Me: sorry but you have to wait.

Cousin 1: its ok we can split the balance beam.

SS: ok fine.

Me: fair enough.



After that we split the balance beam with a shoe. But after that when I try jumping over the balance beam my SS puts her leg infront of me so I trip over it an hit my head hard on the grass ofcourse if there was no grass I would've been in the hospital.

I ask my SS why she did that and she said AND I QUOTE:


"I was trying to boost you by pushing you up with my leg and hoped that your leg wouldn't break."


I somehow made it out of that well... fine idk how but thank god I'm alright thank you for reading 

Also please excuse errors cuz im on mobile.For background: I work in an industry that is paid by the hour, using handwritten timesheets we send in via email. These timesheets must be signed off on by the client we are contracted by, and usually clients are quite stringent about checking the details (as you would expect, since they are paying for our services) . That being said, our current job is a long-standing one and so some things have become rather routine and taken for granted, such as the clients' attention to detail on the paperwork. 

Kevin used to be in a different position with someone else doing his timesheets, but he has been doing his timesheets on his own now for over 6 months now and - as I was told by them when I recently returned to work after a few months leave - has been told by his fellow coworkers multiple times that:

a) he needs to stop falsifying his timesheets to read 10-15mins after he leaves and

b) how fractions of hours work (15mins is .25 of an hour)


However the client has never been informed of this, nor has our own management appeared to notice the repeated discrepancies. I only just came back over Christmas to be told about all this, and although I am not exactly Kevin's boss I am in a supervisory position so feel kind of responsible for the situation. 

So today Kevin finished work at 4.50pm, came in to spend 5mins finishing his timesheet and then left. He was well and truly gone by 5pm. I checked his timesheet; once again it read "6:45 - 17:10 ; 10.25hrs".... Almost without thinking I quickly changed a 1 to a 0 so his timesheet now reads 17:00 ; took a photo and sent it to him with the caption "fixed it for you 👍"

He then replied "yeah but not the hours so I don't care"

And I just. I wonder... 🤔 
How long has Kevin been trying to commit fraud - albeit on a tiny scale - thinking he's ripping the client/our company off by "giving" himself an extra 10-15 minutes (or maybe more) and then writing it down as up to .60 of an hour? Honestly the only reason I even touched his timesheet was to make sure he knew that I know what he's doing... Or failing to do, since he doesn't understand fractions 😂

Looking forward to seeing how he fills his timesheet in tomorrow.So I barely know this guy but STILL. I'm Irish and live on the West Coast of Ireland. To be clear, I've lived in Ireland my whole life. All my 14 years. I've been all over the place. This guy I met at a wedding who is from Florida is simply DUMB. He tried to convince me that the Ivory Coast flag which is very similar to Irelands flag, WAS Ireland's flag. Like I wouldn't know my own country's flag and he said "I don't need a 14 year old boy to teach me Geography". He is also says stuff like "plandemic" and "scamdemic" and he went on a long Twitter rant the other day about how Corona isn't a threat and we should let old people die because they'll die anyways, and the same to those who are high risk, I'm seriously asmathic and have serious chest issues in the winter due to illnesses when I was a baby. He had a 2007 Subaru Forester which he crashed, on a straight road, into a shop. He was drunk. He tried to tell the police he's sovereign and that crap, he was locked up and got a fine. He was smoking pot at the wedding we attended and tried to beat *MY* dad up. Who is a police officer. That ended well. I heard he was driving from North Carolina back to Florida and somehow drove to Georgia. He tried to break into an old ladies house, he broke into his parents house. There's so much more but I can't remember and i've got online school tomorrow morning. Thanks for reading and have a good day/night whereever you are :DKevin: SO how old are you?

Me: I'll be 21 i about a week

Keven: wait, so you're 10 years younger then me?

Me: Yeah,

Keven: oh man, I must have been 13 when you were born or somethingMy neighbor Kevin is bad about leaving his keys in his door lock when he is home.  Not just his apartment key, but also his car key.  We live in a not so good area.  I don't want to see his car stolen, and good chance anyone who'd take his keys and his car would also help themselves to his apartment.  So being a good neighbor I will knock on his door and point out the key to his deadbolt.  This has been going on for six months now.  SIX months.  The other night I put some stuff in my car, came back, and saw his keys in his deadbolt.  I knocked on his door as I walked to my apartment.  I heard him open the door, bitch about the bastard who knocked and ran away.  When the door closed, I could hear the keys jingle as the door swung shut.  I thought "No, that can't be what I heard."  Sure enough, there was his closed door and his keychain.  My thought was "I'm done at this point."

Last month he got a delivery from Amazon.  It arrived on a Saturday morning.  I heard him walk in and out of his apartment all day Saturday.  It wasn't until his girlfriend arrived that night and told him that his package had arrived.

There was a smell in my apartment that I couldn't pin down one night until I opened my door and found Kevin standing against his door smoking a cigarette.  Our apartment building is L-shaped and our apartments are on the 90-degree bend.  So his smoke was wafting into my apartment.  When I explained this to him, his solution was not to head to the end of the building but to stand in front of the apartment on the other side of his.I work night shifts with Kevin. He is the worst, sleeps on the job and barely does anything worth his pay, but his opinions usually require me to bite my tongue so I don't laugh... or cry.


Today was Biden's inauguration and the moment Biden chose to fire some Trump appointees.

"I know! he fired Pence".

The people fired Pence. Pence was elected as VP for a four-year term.

"No! I swear he fired him!"

I have a Master's degree in political science (for real) on the US elections... the guy kept on saying Pence was fired by Biden and Pence could have kept his job as VP, regardless of the ticket.

* schedules 

Then, speaking of a scheduling change on the job, he says our boss decided to unify the schedules under one time-line (basically, all night shifts would begin at X hour on every unit, making it easier to transfer from one another). 


Even with proof of schedules coming from other units, Kevin kept saying it was all the same schedule on every unit.


It's not. My former unit is 2 hours off the one we're working right now. It hasn't changed since it was created!


The HR scheduling system has all the units available for us to consult the schedules, I'm pulling proof from our employer, Kevin. What more do you want!?i hope rslash reads this) so today my dad went to go get a shot (idk what for)and he drove there and checked in and sat there to wait in (a place lets call cvx)  the waiting room and waited for 20 minuets than looked at the screen it said someone was still in there after 20 MINUETS so he knocked on the door (then the screen updated and said on lunch )the guy opens the door hello lets call this guy Kevin

k: hello

dad: ive been waiting for 20 minuets

k: but i called you tho

dad: thinking what why would you call when im sitting rite there when we could talk 6 feet away

dad:but im siting rite there

k: i don't want to get covid tho

k: just get in here i can squeeze you in what shot do you want  ,i have to take your temp

dad: ok um (shot name) vaccine

k: \*jabs the needle in real quick\*

&#x200B;

i know its short but its funny thoContext: i am a 16 year old female and my dearest friend, our little miss kevina is 11 months younger to me. this was probably in late november or early december 2019 when covid was not a thing and we could walk to our school. i walked with kevina to our school which wasn’t that far away. 

kevina: so you know my birthday was last week so officially i’m older than you 


me: no...


k: but we are born in the same year and my birthday comes before yours! 


me: nope 


k: then???


me: yes, we are born in the same year and no, your birthday doesn’t come before mine, silly. 


k: how is that so? i know november comes before january. 


me: in our academic calendar. 


k: so i’m older then?


me: i’m literally in a grade higher than you 


k: so am i still older? 


i just sigh and explain her how the calendar works. i just casually remembered this because my brother reminded me of it on my birthday lmaoSo this story took place around ten years ago when I was a Senior in high school (sigh). So not to brag, but I was Voted Homecoming King (I know, I know. That makes me automatically better than you). So I was a geeky, but reasonably popular student. I mention this to mainly explain that I was the only non jock in the running (10 out of about 100 guys) so I think the typical "cool vote" got split, and I won. Basically all the jocks were pissed, but dealt with it, but not Kevin... oh no not Kevin". 

Kevin was your stereotypical Jock Douchebag from an 80s Kid's movie. I swear to God, on one day he said to the a sub, "Do you know who my parents are? They own half this town." I replied "Jesus what are you the missing Bully from the Goonies?" That only made him dislike me more.

Fastforward to the end of the year & we're gearing up for Prom. Our Advisor was trying to explain the voting process for Prom King & Queen. Basically me & the girl who won Homecoming Queen were ineligible to be Prom King and Queen because as School tradition was that we'd lead the 10 Nominees for Prom King and Queen onto the Stage and then give the crown/tiara to the winners. Our advisor was a Kevin herself (and a Karen, but that's a story for another day) so she explained this poorly and caused some confusion with it.

Instead of saying "OP and Homecoming Queen are the only ones who can't run". She said "If you won Homecoming in the past, you can't run now". The confusion is that each grade had it's own title for Homecoming. I.e. Seniors: Kings & Queens. Juniors: Prince & Princess. Sophmores: Dukes & Duchess. Freshmen: Lord & Lady. So her phrasing led to people thinking that if they won that in the past, they were also ineligible. So our advisor made it clear by saying "OP and Homecoming Queen are the only ones who can't run", multiple times. People finally got it and we moved on.

Later in the hall Kevin and his friends come up to me and he's like "Hey OP, how does it feel that you can't be Prom King. Ha ha Ha. Loser." His henchmen laughed as well. I just chuckled and shook my head and said "Yeah I can't run because I won Homecoming already. You can only run because you lost to me already. So who is the real loser?" 

He stormed off looking embarrassed. He was nominated yet again, but luckily the Jocks vs the one nerdy cool kid lighting bolt struck again & my best friend won! Suck on that Kevin. You peasant.So these girls are bragging to literally everyone at school that they’re experienced sailors. Why, you ask? Because we are heading on a two-week sailing trip at school.

“Like, oh my God! I’m soooo excited about the sailing trip! I’m going to show everyone how it’s done!” And yeah, they still spoke in Valley Girl maaaany years after it was out of fashion.

Now I was part of the sailing club at school, but by no means an expert. But I had the sense to be humble and admit I basically knew shit. There were folks in the club that had been on boats most of their lives. How the hell do you compete with that?

So the Kevinas are bragging away still as we get on the boat. Remember this is for a two-week trip at sea. It’s important here.

Two hours in, the Kevinas are vomiting their heads off over the sides. We’re talking projectile, land-everywhere possible on the boat vomit. They then admit sheepishly they’d been on a dinghy a couple of times in a harbor. Now, harbors are calm, peaceful places to sail most of the time. Basically, sailing with training wheels on. 

Somehow, after all their bragging, the Kevinas had no idea they might get motion sick on the open ocean. This despite one admitting she gets carsick. So, no pills, motion sickness bands. Nothing.

I would have felt sorry for them if they hadn’t been such bragging idiots.

The best part is that that I 100% don’t get seasick. Moron that I am, I admitted this—a great time to be low woman on the sailing club totem pole.

Suddenly, I was on vomit cleanup duty. We’re talking swabbing all the decks and sides with the godawful smell of puke wafting in the breeze hell.

They jump ship at the next port, which is probably a good thing. I don’t think I could have handled much more cleanup.

Then, when we get back to school, they’re bragging again to anyone that would listen.

“Best trip ever!”

“You really should try sailing if you haven’t.”

And, of course, the requisite “Look at my amaaaazing tan.”

Somehow, they’d completely forgotten there were like twenty other classmates on the trip. Everyone ended up laughing our asses off and sharing the *real* story. It was a nice crew of folks. No one would have said a word about what happened if the Kevinas hadn’t doubled down.

As a side note, I was a bit of a Kevina here, too, for mentioning my lack of motion sickness. Not just for the sickness mop up. I also got solo cooking duty below decks in rough weather, as I was the only one with the stomach for it. It’s great fun, being at a bumpy, 45-degree angle while trying to cook over a *very* temperamental butane stove that did things like shoot up random giant flames. So yeah, maybe I should have called this ‘Two and a Half Kevina’s and a Boat.’Ok, so for the start the Kevina was me and I was 9 at the time.

On new years eve I really wanted to know what burned wood feels like ( I dont remember why I wanted to know it, but I wanted I to know it). So my mom got me sparklers ( are they called that?) and lit them. When it burned down I came on the great idea to touch the hot burned wood. But not just a little with a finger, no I grabbed it with my whole hand and of coursed burned it. Since this I have a fear of sparklers.

Sorry if the english is bad. Its not my first language.So a bit of preface: I’m not originally from the state I currently live in; I moved here during my Freshman year of HS. However, somehow, even though I had told people for months that I was moving, about a month after I left I got a call from my bestie saying that a rumor had started going around my old school

A rumor that I had killed myself

We got a good laugh out of it but after a while I had gotten on with my life at my new school and I thought it was behind me

Keyword: thought

In my senior year I was dating a dude (the Kevin of this story) and things were going... ok. This was only the second time I’d ever dated someone so I was suuuuper timid in the relationship, wouldn’t even hold his hand.

But one day he starts absolutely freaking out. Like COMPLETELY losing his shit. Literally ran out of the library where we’d been “studying” (procrastinating) for finals. 

A couple days later a friend of his gave me a call laughing his ass off; apparently Kevin had been looking me up on my socials, discovered the rumor that I had killed myself... and believed it

He thought I was a ghost

After graduating a couple weeks later he moved to a different state. Haven’t heard from him since

TL;DR dated a Kevin who broke up with me bc im a ghostHello fellow Kevin enthusiasts,   
Today's story is a short blast from the past. Long ago, I went to a grade school that had one of those large calenders in an open area with upcoming events, holidays, and historical fun facts on it. Each month, it was put together by a particular school staff member. 

I recall looking at it one January and noticing she included Ben Franklin's birthday as "January 17th, 1835."

Now, for those of you who aren't Americans, Dr. Franklin was a leading figure during the American Revolution  (which started in 1776) who had a slew of achievements before that. Grade school children learn the starting year of the American Revolution and who Ben Franklin was. There is no way I was the only person who noticed this. 

Being young and optimistic, I brought this up to the Kevina who made the calendar in hopes of getting it corrected. She replied, "Well, it said that on the internet! It stays!"

She didn't fix it, and the glaring error remained for the rest of the month. Luckily, she stopped working there shortly after this event and the school that would allow her to do something like that is now closed. 

I did check, and I have never found any source that suggests Ben even made it to 1835, let alone was born that year.Well I now have a story about Kevin. While listening to rslash youtube channel my boyfriend turned into a Kevin he has been soak metal socket pieces in vinegar to eat the rust of these pieces. He then puts said vinegar and metal into the microwave. Watched it rotate in the microwave for a good two minutes takes it out and realized what he did a good 10 seconds later and laughs. Sorry this is so short but thought it fit and would give yall a good laugh.This dude who I work with at my day job (Kevin) recently needed some extra cash so I agreed to hire him for a few shifts a week at the equestrian company my wife and I run. It’s a boarding center that does training for both horses and riders, but all Kevin does is clean stalls and feed the horses. He really seems to like it and it makes me chuckle every time I catch him having full conversations with the horses.
Kevin has an awful attendance record with both jobs, and it’s getting worse. Everyone is sick of it. Today while I was talking to my boss, Kevin called him 30 mins after he was due to start his shift and said he had a personal emergency so he couldn’t come in. When asked what the emergency was he said “I forgot to swap my laundry over last night and my clothes are still kinda damp”. My boss told him to get his damp ass into work or he was fired. We laughed and a few guys gave Kevin some shit once he arrived, including me.
After work I saw him heading to his car and waved, he waved back and so I figured he was heading to the barn to feed the horses as scheduled. Not 10 minutes later I get a call 

Me: Hey Kevin
Kevin: Hey I can’t come in tonight I have a personal emergency 
Me, feeling struck with de javu: what’s the emergency?
I SHIT YOU NOT
Kevin: I forgot to swap my laundry over and everything is still damp
Me: Kevin, are you joking? You tried this same excuse on (bosses name) this morning WHILE I WAS TALKING TO HIM
Kevin: (silence)
Me:Kevin? 
Kevin: yeah sorry, sometimes I forget you work there too. I’ll be there in 15 minutes.

He showed up in 10. Wtf....Franz Reichelt was an Austro-French tailor in 1912. This Kevin created a parachute suit. His dummy tests for the suit were successful to him at least and he lobbied the Parisian Prefecture of Police to let him do a dummy test off the Eiffel Tower. In the last minute this idiot decided instead of testing the suit on a dummy off the Eiffel Tower, he'd do the test using himself. He jumped off the Eiffel Tower and well, let's just say this Kevin fucking bit the big one and died as his parachute didn’t open. No wonder he didn’t make the jump, his suit was rubberized canvas in a triangle shape with no give whatsoever. It's like making a gliding suit out of IKEA bags with a balsa frame, it just won’t work.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBN3xfGrx\_U](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBN3xfGrx_U)One day, Kevin decided to go to the mall and buy something from some stores he had heard about. Well, at school he had a friend named Spencer who was super kind, so when he saw “Spencers” he only had good intention.... without a clue that its a sex shop. He ended up getting a d*ldo and brought it to school as a surprise. Well, his teacher obviously freaked out and they asked him if he knew what it was and he said...”Its what my Uncle shows me in the bathroom”Heads up I'm on mobile also its late so my English is about out the window. Hopefully sleep will take me soon.

This was almost 4 decades ago before my time so story might not be right but my dad loves telling this story and I thought reddit would like it too. 

Our cast today.  
My dad 
Mr cheese pants himself is Kevin
The drill Sargent who's 100% done with Kevin shit is DS

My dad and Kevin were in the same room together at the one of the bases on the east coast near or in Virginia. I'm a bit fuzzy on which one. Not really important. The one thing that is important is this was a military base in the late 80s. They were strict on when you ate. My dad had a bit of a mouth on him and already the officers didn't like him as he found ways around the rules like when he could eat. 


So my dad being the genius he was had rigged up a iron like the one for clothes upside down with a tinfoil top to make a griddle for some grilled cheesy goodness on demand.  Today they had to get dressed in their dress uniforms, with the seams literally pressed perfectly with a crease down the sides. My dad had his done and was just messing around waiting for his grill cheese to finish. 

Kevin, well let's Talk about him, as I bet you can see where this is going. He was the guy that would show up to roll call late, he was the guy who forget to shave, he was the bane of the Sargent existence. So he knew he was on thin ice. My dad said he was an idiot through and through.  

So of course he was late and running behind.  Like a whirl wind he was in trying to get his shit together last second and rushed into there room in a screaming panic.  Yanking out his dress uniform from his bag,  it all crinkled out of hell. My dad watched in horror as he threw it onto the ironing board grabbed the iron from my dads rig and splat. 

Kevin didn't even stop at the noise, he ran over his right pant leg up to the hip. A long thick streak of yellow on his pants. This shit was like velveta, it had to be shelf stable. 


It was his only dress uniform. 

My dad had to mourn his grilled cheese while Kevin screamed profanities in the background. A guy looked in yelling for them to get dressed.  Kevin had to wiggle into cheesy pants and try not to spread cheesy every where.  My dad had to struggle not to laugh as they stood in front of DS with cheesy dripping on the ground. 

The sight was so stupid DS was left speechless. 

The ending the most fuzzy part for my memory but if memory serves. DS did get his voice back with a vengeance and ripped Kevin a new one and suspiciously this is the only story my dad has told about this guy who deserves to be called A Kevin.OK, so this was inspired by [yesterday's post about Robert Uihlein Jr.](https://www.reddit.com/r/StoriesAboutKevin/comments/kuw1sm/real_life_kevin_robert_uihlein_jr/) I figured I'd write about Milbury in light of him being fired from his position as a studio analyst for NBC's NHL broadcasts yesterday. Here are some of the highlights of things he's done:

* As a player, beat a fan with said fan's own shoe.
* As GM for the New York Islanders, traded away several great players for awful returns (including Zdeno Chara, Chris Osgood, Žigmund Pálffy, and Roberto Luongo, among others) 
* Also drafted Rick DiPietro 1st overall with Marion Gaborik and Danny Heatly available.
* In general damaged the Islanders organization so badly that it's only been able to recover in the past couple of years. Milbury left the Islanders in 2006.
* As an analyst, said many stupid things, including criticizing Tuukka Rask for leaving the 2020 playoff bubble due to a family emergency (namely, Rask's daughter being hospitalized) and praising the bubble for "not even [having] any woman here to disrupt your concentration." The latter comment caused him to be removed from the booth for the rest of the playoffs and eventually fired.

And those are just some of the highlights. I'm kind of iffy about Mike Babcock replacing him in the studio since there have been allegations Babcock was abusive towards players when he was a coach, but I'll withhold judgment until I've actually seen his analysis.

EDIT: Thanks to whoever gave me the wholesome award!Are moments where you were a Kevin allowed? Cause I have quite a few, like the time a drank 5 energy drinks in a row and could not sleep the night.

Well, it all started when my grandmother asked me to get her lotto tickets. My grandma (RIP) had a hankering to scratch some lotto tickets. As usual I didn’t wanna fucking go because well to put it this way, she'd make me go for lotto tickets often 5 times a week. Even when I wasn’t in the mood to go for lotto tickets, she'd make my ass go any way. So, I went. And of all the rotten fucking days to have bad luck, my local 7-11 had no lotto tickets till Monday. So my ass went to the local pharmacy 2 miles north. I was starting to feel like I wanted to just go the fuck home and rest but I couldn’t. I had to slog through this bullcrap first. I did something that I regretted later. I bought Spike energy drink. Why is that an issue? Spike has 350 mg of caffeine. I bought 5 of those motherfuckers to drink in a 2 hour period during this task.

I drank the first one and I felt like I could take on this task with new vigor. I got her her lotto tickets and I decided "What the hell?" and drank the second on the way home. I felt like I could power walk all the way home. Then I decided to sit down and drink number 3 and 4. I felt such vigor and then I drank #5 and I was willing to make the run all the way home.

I got home and gave my grandma her tickets and decided to go lay down. Only problem? I couldn’t sleep. Hell, I couldn’t rest my eyes. It wasn’t until I Googled how much caffeine was in Spike till I realized I was royally fucked. 1750 MGs of caffeine was in 5 cans. I was freaking the fuck out.

I had to wait till all that caffeine got the fuck out of my system. I tried going to bed but even after that caffeine I couldn’t sleep. It took 15 hours for me to fall out sleeping.

When I woke up the next day, I felt like shit. I felt like I ran every marathon in the US in 24 hours without a single bit of rest.

The moral? If you must drink an energy drink, go for something below 300 mg. Sure it won’t make you stiffen up but at least you won’t feel like shit the morning afterWhy is 20th Century Fox a filmmaking Kevin? Well in 1977, 20th Century Fox decided to sign over all product merchandising rights for *any and all Star Wars films* to George Lucas in exchange for a mere $20,000 cut in Lucas' studio paycheck. Ha ha jokes on them, the combined revenue from the merch deal cost 20th Century Fox $3 billion dollars in merchandising. Those morons let merchandise rights go all for that sweet, sweet money. No wonder these guys got bought out by DisneyHeir to the Schiltz beer company and one of the biggest business Kevins of the 70s. This idiot decided to fuck with the formula for Schiltz beer by using cheap ass ingredients. The problem? The dumbass decided to add silica gel to the beer making process to cut costs. If those packets of silica gel say "Do not eat", what makes you think someone would drink that crap? It caused the beer to have little unwanted floaties and be like a giant's fucking boogers after congealing awhile. His ad for the beer in 1978 was rather fucking dumb too as a burly Schlitz drinker threatens an off-screen speaker (visually identified with the viewer) who wants him to switch to a rival beer. Yeah going with the whole, "Buy our product or we'll kill you" approach is really a dumbass thing to do. No wonder Schiltz was relegated to the crappy cheap beer section and bought out by PabstHi its me the guy who doesn't know how to use punctuation marks, but you may also know me from the post i made "kevin the dude who lies too much".
Well in this post another kevin is transfered in my class.

So it was a normal monday the school tried out face to face learning but in different times, i was in morning class with kevin, its starts off normal i got my textbook and my pen teacher was discussing something about well i dont remember, kevin came in late without a mask and dirty af, teacher asks "kevin why don't you have a mask on" kevin replies with so? Obviously teach got upset and gave him a spare mask, recess comes in, i was reading the books my teach gave us (i fell behind lessons because of staring at a bee's nest)
So kevin decides to pick up his sandwich and smack it on me. I have a temper problem i get easily angry but i didnt get angry because i was in school, then he proceeds to stretch my hoodie until i heard a rip noise thats where the temper comes in, my friend lets call him f1, f1 knew i would get angry so he tried to calm me down, kevin says "stay the fuck out of this nibba" (disclaimer hes white) kevin was a big dude and f1 was kinda scrawny, of course he backed away, then kevin punches me....in the face, temper kicks in and i took my textbook and slammed it on his face multiple times, the textbook was thick and causes him to bleed. So i was called in the principal's office and said what happened i was the only one there kevin was absent, so i told here the story, amazingly i got of the hook but not completely i had to say sorry to kevin about the bleeding shit, kevin got suspended for a week.

If there is any questions feel free to ask it i will reply if possible.Forgot this existed this would be the best place to tell you about my “Kevin”
So this is someone I met from parkour training and every training session with him is so annoying coz he just keeps talking so much crap. He’s 16 I’ll list he’s dumb beliefs in order of stupidity. 

His first one is he believes tucking in a flip is harder the doing a layout and makes u move more slowly.

He believes that clouds stop it from being windy. Had to take him out side on THREE SEPARATE occasions when it was both cloudy and windy coz 1 didn’t prove our point.

He believes that being gay is and I quote “disability” and that you have to go to a doctor to be told your gay. We tell him his homophobic because that’s exactly what he’s being. But he finest think he is because he thinks a phobia is being scared of something and he thinks because he’s not scared of gay people he’s not homophobic. I swear to god he said that. 
When we then asked him if gay marriage would affect him in ANYWAY at all, he couldn’t think of an answer. That’s when he said that being gay and transgender is a disability to try change the subjects because and u quote again. “We should try to help them get fixed, coz that’s not how humans were made or to be”.

He also believes that climate change isn’t real. Now while I know there’s a larger amount of people who believe this. His argument was that the world naturally heats up and cools down which is true to a degree. But he thinks humans don’t add to the problem AT ALL. And that we’d be better by going back to “Nuclear energy because it’s better”, and that cars “don’t contribute to co2 emissions because trees take all the co2 there is. 
Edit: to clarify while I know nuclear energy is better he also thinks it’s safer. He doesn’t quite fully grasp the danger of it and also the disposal of the waste that’s the plant would produce once it’s turned on. He doesn’t actually care about disposing the waste and said “it’s not that big of a deal might get someone with super powers from it” while I’m thinking this was a joke I’m not 100% sure with this guy.

There’s also a local river near where I live that runs next to what use to be an industrial area and slaughter house, multiple houses and most of f the crap produced there flowed into the water there. The place was transformed into my cities Olympic Park and it was somewhat cleaned up but still has very bad water quality. There are even signs 3 suburbs away from there that say don’t eat any marine life caught in the river. HE SWAM IN IT and refuses to believe it’s poisonous there were 6 people on the day that told him don’t he don’t believe any of us.

And he also thinks if you’re “really fat you are bullet proof and that a bullet can’t kill you”.

He also climbed a street sign once 50m away from police that were doing road side drink driving tests.

I swear to god all of this is real and some happened just yesterday!!! Hello Reddit. I’m an older guy and pretty new here, but my nephew told me that this story would fit perfectly on this subreddit. Until I talked with him, I didn’t even know what a Kevin was, but from what my nephew told me, this gentleman fits the description personally. Back in the 80’s I joined the army when I turned 18, and this is the story of someone I went through basic training with. Kevin isn’t his real name obviously. 

This isn’t particularly relevant, but let be describe what Kevin looked like. He sounded like he was from Alabama or Mississippi or somewhere down that way. I’m not a great judge of southern accents, but he was definitely from the deep south.  Kevin was about 5’8” and a little chubby. His face was remarkably pale and greasy, with copious acne. His hair was black, and equally greasy along with a hearty sprinkling of dandruff. He wore army issue glasses which sat a little crooked on his nose. Now with that out of the way, let me tell you how he earned the name Kevin. 

Kevin routinely called the drill sergeant “sir”. Now in the army, “sir” or “ma’am” is for officers only, and drill sergeants hate it when you call them “sir”. The proper way to address a drill sergeant just to say “drill sergeant” as in “yes, drill sergeant” “no, drill sergeant”, etc. This was a mistake that wasn’t uncommon for people to make, so the first time it happens your drill sergeant would normally just yell at you and that would be the end of it. Kevin kept saying “sir” a staggering number of times, though. 

I wish I were joking when I said this. Kevin couldn’t figure out how to tie his boots. He said that he had only ever worn cowboy boots so he didn’t know how to tie shoe laces. Kevin looked to be in his early 20’s. I have no idea how he got that far without being able to tie shoes. 

One of the things they make you do in basic training is to march in formation. Basically, you all just stand in rows, face forward, don’t talk, and step at the same time. It really isn’t very difficult. Kevin was unable to step at the same time as everything else, no matter how many times the drill sergeant yelled at him, and how many times we practiced marching in formation. 

In true Pvt. Pyle fashion, Kevin tried on multiple occasions to smuggle food out of the mess hall. I remember on one occasion, I heard a drill sergeant yell “What the hell is that?”, pointing an accusing finger at the food Kevin had stuffed in his pocket. No, he didn’t do a Full Metal Jacket number and make everyone do push ups while Kevin ate a donut. 

Kevin was remarkably incapable of understanding how to use a rifle. Many people have trouble accurately hitting the target the first time they shoot, but Kevin struggled to even load a magazine or enable or disable the safety. He also had trouble holding the rifle properly to shoot it. The proper way to shoot a rifle is to get a stable stance, lean forward a little, place the stock of the rifle firmly against your shoulder, and rest your cheek on the top of the stock to look down the sights. Kevin consistently managed to forget one or more of these things. Now to Kevin's credit, I never saw him do anything that would actually be a danger to anyone else. He never pointed the rifle at people or anything like that. No, the only person Kevin would be able to injure with a rifle was himself it seemed. 

On the topic of a rifle, one other thing we had to learn how to do was disassemble, clean and reassemble our rifles. It really wasn’t a very difficult process, but Kevin was frustratingly unable to grasp the steps required to take his rifle apart and put it back together. 

One of the things we did was learn how to throw a grenade. Basically there was a low concrete bunker which you would stand behind with 2 drill sergeants, one on each side of you. You were supposed to pull the pin on the grenade and throw it over the wall, at which point the 2 drill sergeants would tackle you and hold you on the ground behind the bunker until the grenade went off. A lot of people are pretty nervous during this, both because they’re handling a live grenade, and they’re about to be jumped on by two large angry men. Kevin was one such person. He somehow managed to throw his grenade at such an angle that it landed inside the bunker. I heard, in order, a DS yell “What the fuck!”, the thud as Kevin was tackled, the bang as the grenade went off after the other DS threw it over the wall, and then Kevin yelling as the 1st DS started punching him. Now, drill sergeants aren’t actually allowed to hit you, but keep in mind this was 35 years ago so rules such as that weren’t as strictly enforced. In cases such as that, drill sergeants certainly did hit people and people and the higher ups turned a blind eye to it. 

Ultimately Kevin did manage to complete basic training, and went on to be a cook. I can’t speak for more modern times, but back in the day, army cooks had a reputation for being really dumb, so I suppose it’s fitting. Someone I knew used to say, “If you’re smart and you can shoot you go into special forces. If you’re smart but can’t shoot you become a medic. If you’re dumb but you can shoot you go into the infantry. If you’re dumb and can’t shoot you become a cook.” That’s obviously oversimplifying it a lot, but the point remains valid. In the end though, Kevin and I graduated together and I never saw him again. The memories of the 2 months I spent with Kevin, however, will last forever.I'm watching an American Civil War documentary with my parents. The conversation is between my mother, Kevin, who is a strong supporter of the confederate flag, and me. 

Mom: Who killed them?

Me: . . . the Americans?

Mom: The Americans killed the Americans?

Me: Do you not know what a civil war is?My mother's husband was talking about his nephew. 

"He's a little off, I think he might have fetal alcohol syndrome. His father drank a lot during the pregnancy."


Edit: First timer, had to find the right sub for this story.My classmates (mostly female) are normally just typical teenage girls who go to party's and spread gossip but they still have their kevin moments. One day after class I saw my classmates stand together in a circle and talking with another like people tend to do during break. I went to the group to join the conversation. Once I came closer I heard what they were talking about : Milk addiction. I'm not kidding really, they were talking about there experience with milk I guess? I couldn't believe what I heard. For some background info most of my classmates smoke and drink regularly. The talked about smoking and how they know it isn't healthy but they don't stopping doing it and aren't concerned( they're basically pretty chill about stuff like that) but when it come to milk oh boy. It sounded like they were in on of those support groups for alcoholics or drug users.

Classmate1: sometimes I would wake up in the night    
and couldn't go back to sleep because I had this craving desire for milk...

Classmate2: yeah I was drinking hot chocolate every morning and nothing else. And  guess what's in hot chocolate? Milk!

And on and on...

I told them that milk addiction doesn't exist but they didn't believe me. I asked from where they had that information and if they know any sources or something but they told me that it's "common knowledge". I tried to change the conversation because we were getting no where but they wouldn't stop. They now think I'm stupid. I actually searched for something related to that but couldn't find anything on the topic. 
Welp have a nice day!This Kevina is very sweet but very much a Kevin. 

Today in a conversation, someone mentioned how crazy things in DC were today. 

Her response: DC Comics?Hey all. First post in this sub.

From 2015 to 2018 I dated and lived with an abusive Kevin. 

Here are some short highlights of our time together.

- he claimed to be a mechanic and loved everything about trucks. But he put water in my gas tank to make it “go further”. When I panicked and called my father for help he accused me of “not understanding how cars work.”

- he told me we could live with his aunt when his aunt really told him he could watch the house for a week while they were away for hospital treatments. We then had a very awkward two days of me asking why everyone was so frustrated with us. 

- he adopted a dog who was advertised as “highly aggressive” due to being from a dog fighting ring and tried to sleep in the same bed as it the first night. He got bit in his sleep. (His fault really not the dog’s)

- he once showed me a slapped together obviously satire video of Obama that made him say stuff like “I did 9/11” while his entire background, and appearance would change with each word and claimed it was “proof he was a criminal”

- he thought he could outrun his mother’s greyhound. 
They never seen the dog again after that sadly. 

- he once turned the stove on without clearing it off and went to the bathroom because “it doesn’t heat up *that* fast”
It started a fire. Thankfully I’m the child of two fire fighters so I handled it. He had left cardboard food boxes on the element he had turned on. 

- his bank account got hacked 3 times because he kept falling for phishing emails. He was 22

- and yes. He once looked me right in the eye and asked me “is Canada a third world country?”This was around a year or two ago, I think junior year in HS so he should be somewhat aware of how to put a pizza into an oven.

My mom got some frozen pizza or Papa Murphy's or something like that for us to eat for dinner. She put it on the counter and told my brother to put it in 7 or so because she'd be out with some friends and she wanted us to be able to eat dinner. The one thing she told him was to not put the cardboard in the oven, simple and easy to follow. She even told him twice afterwards so kevin wouldn't forget.

Now to the catastrophe. He put the cardboard in the oven, not a huge deal really but under that was a ceramic plate that was considerably smaller than the pizza and cardboard, he would have had to purposefully have thought to put the plate with the cardboard in the oven. ON TOP OF THAT he put in my mom's new kitchen scale, the electronic ones to weigh ingredients, which the plate was on. Again this was considerably smaller than the plate and I honestly don't know what he was thinking when he was putting it in the oven.

My mom's boyfriend came home when the pizza was cooking and went into the kitchen, realized what kevin did. The scale which was brand new was melted and the oven was just a mess. He got off pretty lightly somehow and I think was just yelled at for being a kevin, but I just don't understand how you can put not only a pizza, the cardboard he was told to not put it in, a plate and a scale that are considerably smaller than the pizza itself into an oven without realizing what's wrong with putting all that shit in the oven with the pizza. He says that he didn't know he put that other stuff into the oven but that's an extra 2 inches to put into the oven and he'd have to grab the scale not the pizza when putting it into the oven.Backstory: I spent quite a large chunk of my life in Serbia, where most of the Kevin's I met were, particularly in school with rubbish education and half the equipment not working.

Disclaimer: I suck at writing

The school did undergo a large number of repairs when we started the 3rd year. One of the things that Kevin **abso fucking lutely** adored was 18+ content (note he was something like 8 or 9). So, one day we were doing something I cannot possibly be bothered to remember on Word (presentation or something idk) on barely working computers.

Keep in mind, Kevin's geeky friend sat between me and him. This will be important later.

Lesson starts and cue everyone working except 3 people: Kevin(who was watching p*rn), his friend (who was half working) and me. Because Serbia is a pretty poor country, there were old keyboards, which is probably the reason why Kevin's friend (as I said before, an IT geek) gave me TWO FULL HANDS OF KEYS and I had to literally put the damn keyboard together while guessing where each button went while pReTeNdInG to work.

Fun fact: Kevin literally sat in the teacher's line of sight, thus hethe teacher saw what he was doing and heard his sniggering. I remember how the teacher screamed at him and told him to go out of the classroom.

Later I heard he was given a punishment of having all his grades lowered by one (the grading system was from 1(awful) to 5 (great) and if he received 2 more of this type of punishment he would be permanently kicked out of the school). He also was on thin ice for calling 2 of the teachers racist names.

I also discovered he actually had a deal with some other members of my class to actually do it and blame it on others.

Anyway, thanks for reading this low quality post. I hope you liked it (if you didn't it doesn't matter to me).

TL:DR : Kevin gets a punishment that could lead him to get expelled should he get it 2 more times since he watched 18+ stuff in the school.

TL:DR 2: The titleOk so i have a friend thats a total kevin he'll do all the things a kevin would do but the trait that annoys me about him is lying too much he'll lie about his parents
His house,having a girlfriend etc.

Here are some of my favorites
1.Yeaaah my parents make like 500k once a week
(His dad is a police officer and his mom is just a house mom)
2.Sorry can't hang today my gf and i are gonna have some fun :)
(He's single and cant find a gf because he's to annoying and has really bad hygiene)
3.Yeah i live in a mansion have a butler and a pool
(Yep you guessed it they live in a apartment)

Ok but this one lie made one of my friends snap

So it was a sunday morning i was inside with my cousin lets call him C1 ok so i was inside with C1
Then suddenly we hear "HEY HEY CAN I COME INSIDE" it was kevin and we had to let him in or he'll break the door fortunately he had one of my friends with him so its not gonna be a that much of a bad day lets call him F1 so it starts out as a normal sunday we play some skywars on mcpe watched a bit of reddit stories and then here is when kevin starts lying "yeah this channel is pretty weak compared to mine" C1 said yo do you even have a channel? YEAH!!! Kevin opens up his youtube and shows us his channel who has 62 subs we watched one of his videos and cringed till our faces looked like we're gonna puke and the most cringe thing is he uses the generic minecraft youtuber slang like "yo this noob thinks he can kill a pro like me(dies)"
So we just ignored it. Then C1 talked about his gf and F1 joined in i have a girlfriend but didn't want to join in and of course kevin had to join in he said "Yeah my girlfriend and i have sex all the time" F1 said bro you dont have a girlfriend "YEAH I DO shes your girlfriend cuz she's cheating on you" and i said to my mind "well im gonna see a dude get shot"
F1 got so tilted that he punched kevin square on the face he went home running and crying.

And thats the last time we saw kevin

Please feel free to correct me on some typos and grammar mistakes.
Edit: when kevin said the lie about the gf i didn't want to add the other stuff he said about F1's gf cuz it might be  inappropriate.Happy New Year, redditors! I entered 2020 unemployed but entered 2021 with a job at last! Yaaaay! :D I'm about two weeks into this job and wouldn't'cha know it, I ALREADY have a story to tell.

I work at a warehouse store as a cashier. I knew the basics since I have prior experience with a register and am steadily learning their system with help from some of the coolest coworkers I've ever had the pleasure of working with.

Anywho, this Kevin comes up with a bunch of items and I put on my unseen smile and start ringing things up, double checking duplicate items so I don't overcharge him by accident, making friendly chitchat to keep things lively, all that good stuff. He goes to get one more item while I scan his items in the meantime and he goes to pay.

Kevin goes to the pin pad to make the purchase and asks if he can have a receipt emailed to him. Since a prompt always came up on the pin pad for customers to enter their emails to get a receipt, I told him it would no problem. I had no reason to believe it wouldn't. Welp, when the transaction finished, a paper copy prints out (it does that no matter what option customers pick) with no prompt for an emailed receipt. Kevin asks what's the deal and I didn't know as this never happened to me before. I go through the options on my screen to see if there was anything I can do, but there wasn't. I check the paper receipt with no avail, so I was confused and asked the manager on duty for help.

At this point Kevin is getting a serious attitude with me, practically calling me a liar for telling him it would let him get an email receipt. I told him repeatedly how I THOUGHT it would because I never had that problem before, so I naturally expected it to work. My word isn't set in stone. Technology will do what it wants whether we like it or not. Anyway, I explained the sitch to the manager, and she pointed out he was a member of a certain credit card holder group to the store (something I didn’t know until now), and that these users always received emailed receipts with every purchase through the store. Kevin wasn't buying that and tried getting in my face for saying it would work when, again, I expected it to since it did before. I was borderline from chucking my nice cheerful persona out the damn door and tell this anal orifice where he can stick it. All I was able to get out was how technology doesn't always do what we want it to. It's like your car working fine one day and the next day it doesn't. Sometimes shit happens, dude. Nothing anyone can do about it except deal with it as it happens (case in point, him).

Luckily, the manager had no problem letting him have it. Told him since he's a whatever-card holder, the receipt was emailed and how no piece of technology, namely our pin pads and registers, is 100% guaranteed to work all the time. He got what he asked for, just not in the way he expected. Still, he wasn't having any of it, saying he would call corporate and complain about employees "lying" to him. Manager shrugged and basically told him, in my own words here, "Go right ahead. You got what you wanted and there's nothing I or OP can do for you. But if you want to b\*tch and moan some more, customer service is right over there. They'll happily tell you the same thing."

Dude gives me an "eff you" glare and goes to customer service. Now, this is a massive store, and customer service is more than halfway across the store from my register. I could see and practically hear Kevin drilling into the lady trying to help him. I felt I owed her an apology for dealing with his crap, but he brought it on himself for thinking I was goddess of technology and could make it obey my will. I wish. Why he didn't even check his email to see if the receipt was there, I'll never know. And I really don't care to know. That is one level of butt holery I refuse to demean myself by leveling down to.

Be nice to customer service workers, people. Unwarranted rudeness only makes your day a whole lot worse than it already is, and we revel in that for the finger-licking good karma that it is.

Have a great day. Tip your waitress/waiter. Don't sully the vibe.

Edit: Talesofretail removed this original post, so I put it here instead since I don't know where else it fits. And to those of you saying this guy wasn't a Kevin, please reread the sentence before this one before posting a comment. Thank you and have a nice day.So my Dr I normally go to had closed and I had to go to the replacement. I go there and talk to one of the doctors and we make a little small talk. 

And my last name comes to mind (it's a latin american name) and he asks if I'm from Spain to with I replied that it's from Costa Rica cus that's where my parents are from. 

And this man in his mid 40's honestly asks me why I'm white and if my parents are alsow so normally white......and I just..... I couldn't believe it.

So I laughed nervously said yes and left. That's it never went there again.I have been debating posting this, because I don't want to re think this. 

But, I have decided too anyways!

Let me set the stage for you!

It was Christmas day, I had just got done working a morning shift at my work. I walked into my house and downed a glass of Irish whiskey in the kitchen as Jeff, my fiance, was telling me about the movie he watched and was wanting me to watch with him. Which is normal, but I knew what was to come for this day and needed to prepare. 

Jeff and Kevin together.

What was to come you may wonder? A series of incidents with my big brother Kevin and fiance Jeff. 

Now, for Christmas this year, my mom, her boyfriend and little brother went to California to see our grandfather. He is dying from tumors and chemo therapy, and grandma flew everybody out. 

So, this left Kevin, Jeff and myself, along with any woman Kevin brings over, left to celebrate together. Typically, my mom got the butt end of this nonsense and I would hear about it over a beer, but she was in California. So, I got to deal with it!

Side note, Kevin lives in the same apartment complex as Jeff and I, so Kevin likes to show up unannounced....at the worse moments.

**Incident 1: the shower.** 

I went to take a shower after downing the whiskey, while I had Jeff start to boil eggs for me to make devil eggs for Christmas dinner and had him start washing potatoes. Too simple tasks. 

I am taking a shower when I heard, "Jeeffffff, where is Billy?!"

Jeff: leave her alone, she had a rough day at work she downed whiskey!

Kevin: WHAT?!! AND SHE IS DRINKING WITHOUT ME?! THAT SLUT

I thought for a moment, "did I lock my bedroom door?!"

No....No I didn't and Kevin busted into my room and yelled, "BILLY WHERE IS THE WHISKEY!"

I, of course, yelled, "KEVIN GET THE FUCK OUT OF MY ROOM", like I was 16 again, but this time I am a 24 year old college student having to yell this at her 29 year old brother while she is taking a damn shower!

Kevin: CAN YOU WRAP THE GIFT I GOT FOR SAVY

So, same girl he has been dating is coming. Got it, I can handle that I think.

Me: GET. OUT.

So, he scurries off into my living room. I got out, I got dressed and put my make up. And, then I went to the kitchen

**Incident 2: The cat**

When I get home from anywhere, our cat Chubs, yes he is a chonk, will run up and say hello to me. It has never failed. When I got home though, he didn't run up and say hi to me. Well, I thought he decided to take a nap that day, it's Christmas after all. 

I walked into the kitchen and I see Jeff and Kevin are talking about the new Harley Quinn show. I thought it was normal, but I didn't realize they had been drinking. Kevin brought over two massive bottles of whiskey.

I go into the kitchen, I see the potatoes have been washed and set aside, eggs are cooling in eye water. However, I noticed Jeff didn't wash enough potatoes, so I went to the pantry and opened the door to grab some more potatoes.

I heard a meow

I looked down and found Chubs. Curled up, he had been sleeping and I had woken him up.

Me: WHY IS THE CAT IN THE PANTRY?!!!

Jeff: oooooooohhh that's where he's been!

Me:........How long has he been missing?!

Jeff: since like 12 or 1, lunch time, I made sandwiches.

The cat had been in the pantry for like 3 hours

Me: Did you not realize he was missing?!

Jeff: well I thought he was napping!!!

Kevin: my cat likes the pantry, sometimes I leave it open for her to sleep in

Jeff: We should do that for chubs!!!

Insert me pointing at our dog who eats everything in sight. 

Jeff: ooohhhhh

Kevin: I still have a bad habit of putting donuts in my bedroom closet because moms cat kept eating my donuts.

Jeff: wouldn't that make your clothes smell like donuts?

Kevin: no it just makes my donuts smell like clothes

Jeff: are they good afterwards?

Kevin: I mean they're donuts

Me:.....what the fuck is wrong with you both of you

**Incident 3: the pizza**

I was cutting up the potatoes minding my own business, I was listening to Christmas music and humming to myself. I was buzzed enough to handle everything else for the night with those two. I thought I was at least.

I had my back turned when I head my freezer open. I thought it was Jeff getting the rolls out for me to let sit before baking. 

I turned around.

Me: oh tha-.....what the fuck are you doing

Kevin: I am making a pizza

Me:.....wh....wha-

He brought over a pizza and put it in my freezer. For Christmas dinner.

Kevin: can I put this in the oven with the ham? 

He says as he is opening my oven to put in with the FUCKING HAM

Me: NO CLOSE MY OVEN WE HAVE A FUCKING TOASTER OVEN!!!

Kevin: no no this will be faster, it's already pre heated!

Me: dinner will be ready in an hour!! Do you really need a pizza!?

Kevin: yes Billy, I need this pizza, it is my life you don't understand!

Jeff: you say that about every girl you bring home!!

Kevin: AYE FUCK YOU

Me: there is no room in the oven! 

Kevin: yu huh! Here!

He put it on the very bottom of the rack. In a 475 degree oven currently cooking a ham. 

Me: if you put that on the bottom wrack, it will char the bottom dude!

Kevin: nu uh! 

Me: it will!

Kevin: I will prove you wrong! 

Kevin walked out and walked  in 10 minutes later and took out his pizza, and the bottom was completely chard, because it was so close to the bottom of the oven. Like I said.

Kevin: MY PIZZA!!

Me: I told you not to put it on the bottom wrack with the ham!

Kevin; you didn't say to not put it on the bottom rack!! 

Me: YES. I. DID.

Kevin: NU UH!! YOU DIDN'T LET ME PUT IT ON THE MIDDLE WRACK WITH THE HAM

Me: THE HAM IS TAKING UP THE ENTIRE MIDDLE WACK

Kevin: WE CAN MAKE ROOM

Me: OUT OF THE KITCHEN NOW!!

I kicked him out with his pizza in hand and he had the audacity to complain about his pizza smelling like fucking ham.

**Incident 4: The random girls.** 

After we had eaten dinner, I had started drinking a little bit more. Something told me, "you will need this", oh boy was I right. 

Jeff and I were on the couch watching a Christmas movie, Kevin disappeared outside. We thought he went back to his apartment real quick.

Out of nowhere, we heard a dog. The dog wasn't ours.

I sat up and as soon as I did, Kevin busted into my apartment with a massive dog and two random girls.

I was staring at him with a blank face.

Kevin: Savy couldn't make it! So, I brought some friends!

Me:.....Kevin.....this is my apartment.

Kevin:...yeah?

Me:...............Why is there an unknown dog in my apartment Kevin

Kevin: well she couldn't keep the dog at my place, I have a cat!

Me: I HAVE TWO CATS AND A DOG KEVIN

Jeff: now now, we will put the cats up for a bit, they're probably hiding, and we will put Diva in the bathroom.

Me: that isn't the prob-

At that moment, the girls started screeching at the sight of Christmas presents. 

Kevin went over and put their presents under the tree 

Since I didn't know these women at all, I pulled Kevin aside.

Me: they need to open their gifts and leave now.

The massive dog started barking the smell of my cats.

Me: PRESENTS. NOW. 

We opened presents quickly to get the girls and the dog out of the apartment.

In the end, the girls stayed for a short while, because they had the dog and understood I had cats. Unknown dog around your cats, that have never seen that dog before, that can be.......horrible. 

The girls were lovely though, I enjoyed them, which is rare because the girls Kevin randomly brings over are some the craziest people I have ever met. 

So much more happened after this.